                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHEN HARRY FIRED SALLY:
                 THE DOUBLE STANDARD IN PUNISHING MISCONDUCT

                                           Mark L. Egan
                                           Gregor Matvos
                                             Amit Seru

                                        Working Paper 23242
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23242


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2017




We thank Jonathan Berk, Marianne Bertrand, Jules van Binsbergen, Kerwin Charles, Darrell Duffie,
Elena Espinoza, Matt Gentzkow, Christopher Hennesey, Laurie Hodrick, Emir Kamenica, Lawrence
Katz, Crystal Lam, Edward Lazear, Sendhil Mullainathan, Paul Oyer, Chris Palmer, Chris Parsons,
Joshua Rauh, Paola Sapienza, Anna Scherbina, Andrei Shleifer, Ken Singleton, Vikrant Vig, Luigi
Zingales, and the seminar participants at the Eller College of Management, London Business School,
NYU Stern, Princeton University, Stanford University, Tepper School of Business, Tuck School of
Business, University of Chicago (economics), University of Chicago Booth School of Business and
participants at the American Association Meetings, Bank of England conference, Berkeley-Stanford
joint seminar, HBS-MIT Financial Economics conference, NBER Summer Institute and RCFS conference.The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mark L. Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Harry Fired Sally: The Double Standard in Punishing Misconduct
Mark L. Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 23242
March 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. D18,G24,G28,J71

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine gender differences in misconduct punishment in the financial advisory industry. We find
evidence of a "gender punishment gap": following an incident of misconduct, female advisers are 20%
more likely to lose their jobs and 30% less likely to find new jobs relative to male advisers. Females
face harsher outcomes despite engaging in misconduct that is 20% less costly and having a substantially
lower propensity towards repeat offenses. The gender punishment gap in hiring and firing dissipates
at firms with a greater percentage of female managers at the firm or local branch level. The gender
punishment gap is not driven by gender differences in occupation (type of job, firm, market, or financial
products handled), productivity, misconduct, or recidivism. We extend our analysis to explore the
differential treatment of ethnic minorities and find similar patterns of "in-group" tolerance. Our evidence
is inconsistent with a simple Bayesian model and suggests instead that managers are more forgiving
of missteps among members of their own gender/ethnic group.


Mark L. Egan                                         Amit Seru
Harvard Business School                              Stanford Graduate School of Business
Baker Library 365                                    Stanford University
Boston, MA 02163                                     655 Knight Way
eganmarkl@gmail.com                                  ¸˛Stanford, CA 94305
                                                       and NBER
Gregor Matvos                                          aseru@stanford.edu
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas, Austin
2110 Speedway, Stop B6600
CBA 6.724
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
Gregor.Matvos@mccombs.utexas.edu
I    Introduction

Labor markets compensate productive activities with higher wages and non-wage compensation such as promo-

tions and perks. Conversely, employees who engage in unproductive or even destructive activities are punished, for

example, through job loss and lack of employment opportunities in the market. The existing research on the dier-

ential treatment of men and women has generally focused on gender dierences in the compensation of productive

activities.   Firms pay female employees less than comparable male employees (Altonji and Blank, 1999).       Firms

are also less likely to hire and promote female employees relative to male counterparts with similar credentials or

output (Goldin and Rouse, 2000). In this paper we explore whether the dierential treatment of men and women

carries over to the punishment of undesirable activities as well.   In other words, are labor markets more forgiv-

ing of missteps by men than women? Gender dierences in punishment may be equally as important as gender

dierences in hiring and compensation; roughly 60% of lawsuits alleging discrimination in the workplace concern

discriminatory rings (Siegelman 2016). This paper documents the gender punishment gap: gender dierences in

the punishment of similar undesirable activities. We study the punishment gap in the context of nancial adviser

misconduct and document that this punishment gap is not driven by gender dierences in occupation (type of job,

rm, market, or nancial products), productivity, misconduct, or recidivism.     We then explore the mechanisms

driving the gap.

    Gender dierences in punishment speak to the broader idea that female employees are given less leniency for

missteps than their male counterparts. This aspect of gender dierences has received little attention in academia

or in policy relative to dierences in hiring and compensation. One possible reason is that a punishment gap is less

likely to draw attention than a wage gap. For instance, when we observe a nancial adviser losing her job following

misconduct, the appeal that the termination was unfair or discriminatory may sound hollow. In fact, the ring

may be justied. It is only after observing that, on average, male advisers were not red for similar transgressions

that one can detect a gender punishment gap. In such cases, gender dierences may be a priori more dicult to

detect, both by the legal system and regulators, and possibly by the employers who themselves may be unaware of

their own biases (Bertrand et al., 2005).

    A gender punishment gap also diers from gaps in hiring and wages in the information that the employer

has about the employee. One view is that the dierential treatment between men and women in the workplace

mostly takes place before the employer has screened potential employees, at the CV evaluation stage. An extensive

literature using correspondence and audit studies has evaluated such dierences (see Bertrand and Duo, 2016),

examining dierences in treatment across groups while reducing the potential employee to a bundle of characteris-

tics, which can be captured in a CV. During the hiring process and employment, the employer learns substantially

more about the employee, reducing the potential for attention discrimination (Bartos et al., 2016). One might

therefore imagine that discrimination disappears conditional on employment. In contrast, we observe the gender

punishment gap among employees with several years of tenure, suggesting a potentially dierent mechanism is at

play. Moreover, methodologically, studying these types of gender dierences does not lend itself toward audit and

correspondence studies, which, by design, reduce an employee to characteristics captured in a CV.

    Ours is the rst study to investigate the gender punishment gap in an important setting, the nancial adviser




                                                         1
industry. Undesirable outcomes are generally dicult to measure, especially across rms. We overcome this obstacle

by exploiting a novel panel data on all nancial advisers (about 1.2 million) registered in the United States from

2005 to 2015, representing approximately 10% of total employment in the nance and insurance sector. Regulators

require that nancial advisers disclose career events such as misconduct, including customer disputes, regulatory,

and criminal oenses.       We also observe detailed information on the nature of misconduct;
                                                                                                              1 the monetary cost

of misconduct with settlements averaging several hundred thousand dollars; actions taken by the rm and the

regulator consequent to the misconduct; and employee movement across rms in the industry.
                                                                                                                 2 This is a highly

regulated industry with comprehensive licensing requirements, which determine adviser's job tasks. These features

of the data allow us to account for dierences across advisers in terms of job role, productivity, and misconduct,

and study gender dierences in punishment at both the rm and industry level.

   Researching gender dierences in nancial sector is also interesting per se. Finance is a large and highly com-

pensated industry, which consistently ranks among the bottom industries in terms of gender equality.                        Personal

nancial advisers, for example, have among the largest gender earning gaps across occupations (Census, 2008).

Recent survey evidence found that nearly 88% of female nancial service professionals believe that gender dis-

crimination exists within the nancial services industry (Tuttle, 2013). Consequently, concerns about the lack of

diversity and discrimination in the nancial industry have become an important policy issue.                      Our work speaks

to this issue since it suggests that harsher punishment of women, such as termination, for similar missteps, might

inherently contribute to the glass ceiling they face.
                                                            3

   This paper has two goals. First, we document key dierences in the punishment of similar misconduct across

male and female nancial advisers at both the rm and industry level: the gender punishment gap.                            We show

that the gap is not driven by gender dierences in occupation (type of job, rm, market, or nancial products),

productivity, misconduct, or recidivism. This punishment gap is strongly correlated with the gender composition

of the managerial team. Female managers and executives help alleviate the gender punishment gap. Moreover, we

nd evidence of a similar punishment gap and mitigating factors for ethnic minority men.                      Second, we examine

the rationale behind the gender punishment gap. We begin with a benchmark that the gap is simply a product of

rms' Bayesian prot maximizing behavior, i.e. statistical discrimination (Phelps, 1972; Arrow, 1973). This model

has a dicult time reconciling the evidence we document. We then explore the alternative that the punishment

gap is driven by managers' biased (incorrect) beliefs about the probability of repeat oenses about the members

of their own group.        Such bias can be either taste-based (Becker, 1957) or because market participants hold

miscalibrated/incorrect beliefs about misconduct across the two groups (Bordalo et al., 2016; Arnold et al, 2017;

Sarsons 2017). This simple model is consistent with the facts we document.

   We rst document gender dierences in the nancial advisory industry. Male nancial advisers make up 75%

of the nancial advisory industry and are responsible for a disproportionately large amount of the misconduct

in the industry.     Moreover, male advisers engage in more severe misconduct both in terms of allegations, and

  1 Common    misconduct allegations include activities such as unauthorized trading, churning accounts to generate excess commissions,
misrepresenting the risks associated with a nancial product, and committing outright fraud
  2 Roughly   7% of nancial advisers have a past record of misconduct and the average settlement is in excess of several hundred
thousand dollars.
  3 Consulting   rm Oliver Wyman (2016) lists the glass ceiling it as the number one cause for concern for women in the industry.
Former FDIC chairwomen Sheila Bair (2016) writes that the glass ceiling in nance is barely cracked for women.




                                                                  2
eventual monetary damages to the rm. These dierences are partially a result of somewhat dierent allocations

to jobs and tasksmales are more likely to be managers with longer industry tenures, and hold more qualications.

Nevertheless, they persist after comparing male and female advisers working at the same rm, in the same location,

at same point of time, and in the same job role, and even after accounting for a rich set of adviser characteristics

and productivity measures.
                               4 The higher propensity of men to commit more nefarious activities has been found in

other contexts and is universal across violent and nonviolent criminal activity (Steensmeier and Allen, 1996).
                                                                                                                                        5

   Next, we turn to our rst main result. We nd that, despite having a lower incidence of misconduct and engaging

in less severe misconduct, female advisers face more severe punishment in the labor market. Female advisers are

20% more likely to experience a job separation following misconduct relative to male advisers with similar oenses.

Conditional on separation, female advisers face longer unemployment spells, and are 30% less likely to nd a new

position in the industry within one year, with very similar eects for longer horizons. The dierence is particularly

striking because we nd no gender dierences in job turnover rates for advisers without misconduct. Our results

suggest that rms, and the industry as a whole, discipline female advisers more severely relative to male advisers

following misconduct. We term these dierences in labor market outcomes the gender punishment gap.

   The central concern is that the gender punishment gap is driven by is gender occupational segregation across

rms, markets, or job roles.       Several pieces of evidence in the data suggest that this is not the case.                   First, we

compare the career outcomes of male and female advisers who are working at the same rm, in the same location,

and at the same point in time (rm           Ö   year   Ö   county xed eect).     These xed eects allow us to control for

dierences across rms and branches such as whether they deal with institutional investors, retail investors, and/or

investment banking activities.       Second, because the market for nancial advice is highly regulated, advisers are

legally required to hold a particular set of licenses to sell certain classes of products, and perform certain job

tasks.   For example, a Series 6 License authorizes nancial advisers to sell mutual funds and variable annuities.

Registered Sales Assistant License (Series 11) allows an individual to work as a sales assistant in the industry,

and Series 24 as a manager who oversees other associates. We account for 61 dierent professional licenses, and

include rm   Ö year Ö county x license xed eects.          We eectively compare the career outcomes of male and female

advisers who are working for the same rm, in the same branch, at the same time, and in the same role.                           Finally,

we also measure an individual advisers' assets under management (AUM), adviser's productivity, and nature of

the misconduct allegations (e.g., related to mutual funds, variable annuities, bonds, options etc.). Accounting for

these dimensions also helps condition on other aspects of the job function of the adviser.                        After controlling for

these dierences, the gender punishment gap remains virtually unchanged.

   Our second main set of results nds dramatic dierences in the gender punishment gap across rms. At rms

with no female representation at the executive/ownership level, the gender punishment gap is 32pp. There is no

gap in rms with an equal representation of male and female executives/owners.                         We nd similar results when

exploiting within-rm variation in the share of female branch-level managers. Overall, our results suggest that the

gender punishment gap is related to the gender composition of executives and managers at nancial advisory rms.

  4 In the specications we include, Firm Ö year Ö county Ö license xed eect.
  5 With the exception of prostitution, men are more likely to be arrested for all FBI   oense categories, including violent, non-violent,
and small crimes (Steensmeier and Allen, 1996). Steensmeier and Allen (1996) write Criminologists agree that the gender gap in
crime is universal: Women are always and everywhere less likely than men to commit criminal acts.




                                                                  3
Male executives and managers seem to be more forgiving of misconduct by men relative to women.

   We extend our analysis to minority men and show that the punishment gap, and patterns of in-group tolerance

are not limited to gender. Males with names from traditionally discriminated minorities face a punishment gap

relative to non-minority men. The punishment gap is lower in rms with a larger share of managers from their

ethnic group. These results also suggest that the in-group tolerance we observe is not driven solely by gender

specic factors. In addition, we nd no evidence that male minority managers decrease the gender punishment gap.

In other words, managers only alleviate the punishment gap within their gender and ethnic group. This evidence

is important because it rules out several potential alternatives, under which rms with female or minority male

executives attract a pool of individuals with selected misconduct propensities.

   In the second half we examine the potential mechanisms generating the gender punishment gap. We explore

two potential mechanisms which we nest within the scope of a simple model. Under the rst mechanism, rms

maximize prots and punish female advisers more severely because misconduct by female advisers is predictive of

more frequent misconduct or adviser skill. Moreover, rms have the correct beliefs about the propensity to engage

in misconduct across genders, and use Bayesian updating when forecasting misconduct. The second mechanism we

nest generates the punishment gap as a result of rm biases. The bias could be the result of either an inherent rm

prejudice against women or favoritism towards men (i.e. taste-based discrimination; Becker 1957) and/or could be

due to miscalibrated beliefs held by rms (i.e. stereotyping; Bordalo et al. 2016). We then contrast the model

predictions with the data.

   We present several results, which are dicult to reconcile with a Bayesian updating by prot maximizing rms.

Under this benchmark, rms may nd it optimal to discipline women more severely if women engage in more

costly misconduct or have higher rates of recidivism.   The evidence we nd suggests the exact opposite.       Male

advisers engage in misconduct that is 20% more costly to settle for rms.         We also experiment with a variety

of misconduct measures, and nd robust results across those alternative measures.         These results suggest that

the gender punishment gap does not arise because female advisers engage in dierent types, or more egregious

misconduct. Another alternative would be that female advisers are more likely to be repeat oenders conditional

on misconduct. Again, the opposite is true. Male advisers are more than twice as likely to be repeat oenders

in the future. These results suggest that, under this benchmark model, all else equal, rms should punish male

advisers more severely than female advisers. In other words, even if job separation rates following misconduct were

identical, these results would still suggest that punishment of misconduct is biased against women.

   A more subtle prediction of this model concerns the joint distribution of ability and misconduct across genders

and rms' Bayesian updating from observed misconduct across genders. The argument is as follows: female advisers

are on average less likely to engage in misconduct. Firms are therefore willing to hire less productive female than

comparable male advisers.    Moreover, because female advisers have on average lower rates of misconduct, after

observing misconduct a Bayesian rm updates its beliefs about future misconduct more dramatically for female

advisers than for male advisers  and consequently punishes women more harshly.          In other words, the gender

punishment gap could result from Bayesian updating of the rm. Two observations suggest this is not the case.

   First, one advantage of the nancial adviser setting is that the productivity of nancial advisers can be broadly

encapsulated as the amount of assets they attract (i.e., assets under management, AUM). We observe AUM in




                                                         4
conjunction with other productivity measures for a subset of advisers. Controlling for AUM dierences, as well as

other measures of productivity, has no eect on the gender punishment gap. We also control for other measures,

which may reveal expected productivity.     For example, we nd that the gender punishment gap persists across

dierent levels of experience. The gender punishment gap exists even for advisers whose abilities are well known to

the market (15+ years experience). Career interruptions, which explain a large part of the earnings gap in nance

(Bertrand et al, 2010) correlate with turnover, but not with the punishment gap. Lastly, if female advisers who

engage in misconduct have less desirable characteristics, we would expect these characteristics to also lead to higher

turnover prior to misconduct. We nd no signs of elevated turnover for female advisers who engage in misconduct,

prior to their initial misconduct oense.

   Second, Bayesian updating has important implications for the ethnic minority punishment gap we document.

The existence of the minority punishment gap and the fact that it diminishes in the presence of minority male

managers, suggests that it is driven by the same mechanism as the gender punishment gap.            A key distinction

in the minority setting is that male minority advisers are more likely to engage in misconduct relative to male

non-minority advisers.   Thus, following the Bayesian logic, the benchmark mechanism would suggest that rms

should hire more productive male minority advisers, and update less upon observing misconduct. In other words,

we should nd the reverse punishment gap. The existence of male minority punishment gap suggests that updating

from low average misconduct rates is not driving the gender punishment gap.

   Lastly, the model in which Bayesian rms maximize prots has a dicult time explaining why the gender

punishment gap is larger in branches with more male managers. If male and female managers update from observed

behavior following Bayes rule, then the statistical discrimination model would require a very specic type of

sorting across genders into rms. Moreover, a similar sorting would have to take place among male advisers along

dimensions of ethnic minorities. Finally, since we nd that male minority managers do not alleviate the gender

punishment gap, the sorting would have to be multi-dimensional. In sum, our benchmark model in which Bayesian

rms maximize prots has a dicult time explaining a wide range of facts about the gender punishment gap.

   A simple model in which managers have biased (incorrect) beliefs about the probability of repeat oenses about

the members of their own group is consistent with the facts we document. It generates a gender punishment gap,

even if misconduct is not indicative of a gender gap in ability or recidivism. It also explains why female managers

decrease the gender punishment gap; why minority male managers decrease the minority male punishment gap;

and why male minority managers do not decrease the gender punishment gap.            More broadly, we nd in-group

favoritism in punishment of misconduct, both at the rm at which the misconduct took place, as well as at other

rms in the labor market. These ndings contribute to the extensive literature on gender dierences in the labor

market. One prominent dierence with the literature is that we focus on gender dierences in punishments, rather

than rewards. Since the literature is extensive, we discuss the specic connection and contribution to this literature,

as well as to literature on nancial advisers, misconduct and fraud in greater detail in Section IV.E.

   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the data, describes how we measure mis-

conduct, and presents the basic facts about gender dierences among nancial advisers. Section III documents the

gender punishment gap in the labor market for nancial advisers. Section IV explores the economic mechanisms

underlying the gap and discusses our results in context of the prior literature. Section V concludes.




                                                          5
II     Gender and Financial Advisers

II.A      Data Set
Our data set contains the universe of nancial services employees registered with the Financial Industry Regulatory

Authority (FINRA) from 2005 to 2015. The data comes from FINRA's BrokerCheck database. Additional details

describing the data set are in Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2017) (also available at http://eganmatvosseru.com/).

Throughout the paper, we refer to a nancial adviser as any individual who is registered with FINRA, but are

careful to make distinctions about additional registrations or qualications a nancial adviser may hold, such as

being a registered investment adviser or a general securities principal. A broker (or stockbroker) is registered with

FINRA and the SEC and is dened in the Securities and Exchange Act 1934 as any person engaged in the business

of eecting transactions in securities for the account of others. An investment adviser provides nancial advice

rather than transaction services. Although both are often considered nancial advisers, brokers and investment

advisers dier in terms of their registration, duties, and legal requirements.   Throughout the paper, we will use

terminology consistent with FINRA and refer to both investment advisers and brokers as nancial advisers. This

includes all brokers and the vast majority of investment advisers. The data set also contains additional information

on the universe of currently active nancial rms.

     Our sample contains a monthly panel of all registered advisers from 2005 to 2015. For each of the roughly 1.2

million advisers in the data set, we observe the adviser's registrations, licenses, employment history, and whether or

not she has any disclosures on her record. We observe each adviser's complete employment history in the industry

which often dates back substantially further than 2005.

     We observe detailed data on the adviser's complete employment history in the nancial advisory industry

including the employer, location and tenure. We also observe information on each adviser's role and job function

within their rm. Relative to many other industries, the nancial advisory industry is highly regulated. Financial

advisers are legally required to hold regulatory licenses (i.e., pass specic exams called series exams) in order to

engage in particular activities and to hold certain positions within a rm. For example, the Investment Company

Products/Variable Life Contracts Representative License (Series 6 exam), authorizes an individual to sell mutual

funds and variable annuities.   The National Commodities Futures Exam (Series 3) is required to sell managed

futures funds.   The licenses also provide detail on the adviser's specic job role.    An Assistant Representative

(Series 11) License allows an individual to work as an assistant, while a General Securities Representative (Series

24) License is required to work as a manger. In Appendix A2 we list the 61 dierent types of licenses we observe

in the data. These detailed, specic, and granular occupational licensing requirements allow us to compare female

and male advisers with the same qualications and engaged in the same job roles within a rm.



Measuring Misconduct          The regulatory data also provides details on whether an adviser has ever engaged

in misconduct and the specic details of each oense.    The regulator FINRA requires that nancial advisers dis-

close customer complaints and arbitrations, regulatory actions, employment terminations, bankruptcy lings, and

criminal or judicial proceedings. We observe the full set of such disclosures for each nancial adviser in our data.

A disclosure indicates any sort of dispute, disciplinary action, or other nancial matters concerning the adviser.




                                                          6
Because not all disclosures are indicative of misconduct (i.e. personal bankruptcy), we classify only the disclosures

that are indicative of fraud or wrongdoing as misconduct. Specically, following Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2017), we

restrict our classication of disclosures indicating misconduct to include only six of the twenty-three disclosure cate-

gories reported by FINRA: Customer Dispute-Settled, Regulatory-Final, Employment Separation After Allegations,

Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment, Criminal - Final Disposition, Civil-Final.          To summarize, misconduct in-

cludes customer disputes, internal investigations, and regulatory/criminal events where that were resolved against

the adviser.   Roughly 7% of the nancial advisers in our dataset have a past record of misconduct.

   An advantage of our data set is that we observe granular data of each misconduct disclosure, including the

specic allegations, products involved, and costs.     Table 1b displays the most commonly reported allegations

reported against nancial advisers broken down by gender.        The allegations vary in terms of their severity and

potential opacity/ambiguity. Several of the common allegations are relatively clear-cut in terms determining guilt

such as unauthorized trading, churning, misrepresentation, and outright fraud. Unauthorized trading, for instance,

involves trading in a client's account without their consent. This type of activity is easily veriable because account

activity, client activity, and legal consent are tracked and well documented. Other allegations are more vague. For

example, a common allegation is that the adviser made unsuitable investments.         This is not surprising. By law,

brokers are required to only sell suitable investments to their clients. However, the exact dimension on which a

given product might be unsuitable for a given client is less clear. In our analysis we explicitly account for these

dierences in the type and extent of misconduct.

   Misconduct is costly for the advisory rm. Our dataset provides details on the dollar awards/settlements advisers

are forced to pay out to clients as a result of misconduct. The median settlement is $40,000, and the mean settlement

is approximately $550,000, suggesting substantial damages to the household.           We use data on the associated

awards/settlements to examine the severity of misconduct by male and female advisers.



Gender Data        The BrokerCheck data set does not provide information on the gender of the nancial adviser.

We use data from GenderChecker to match the gender of each adviser based on the rst name of the adviser.

GenderChecker uses data from the UK Census in conjunction with other proprietary data sources to match the

rst names of individuals to gender. GenderChecker takes a conservative approach to assigning genders from names.

If a name appears in the census (or one of GenderChecker's other data sources) as both male and female even once,

the name is classied as being unisex. We assign a specic gender to 82% of the advisers in our database: 62% of

the advisers in our data set are classied as male, 20% are classied as female. The remaining 15% are classied as

unisex leaving remaining 3% as unmatched in the GenderChecker database. In our main analysis, we restrict our

data set to those advisers we classify as either male or female, dropping all unisex and unmatched observations.

Females therefore comprise approximately     25%   in the matched data. As an additional robustness check, we use

name/gender data from Meridian IQ's database on nancial advisers and nd similar results as with the former

classication. We report these robustness tests in the Appendix (Table A2). Summary statistics for the complete

data set are reported in Table 1. Central to our purposes, 15% of male advisers and 8% of female advisers in our

data set have disclosures on their records. These statistics are in line with previous work (Egan, Matvos, Seru 2017

and cites therein).




                                                           7
II.B     Gender Composition of Advisers and Misconduct Across Genders
II.B.1 Gender Composition
The advisers in our data account for roughly 10% of employment in the Finance and Insurance sector (NAICS

52).   25%    of nancial advisers are female. Simple cuts of the data suggest that male nancial advisers have more

experience, more extensive qualications, and are more likely to be in managerial and supervisory positions than

their female counterparts.        Figure 1 and Table 1 display some important dierences between male and female

advisers.     Male advisers are, on average, more experienced, with three additional years of experience relative to

female advisers.      Similarly, male advisers have passed a somewhat larger number of qualication exams.                         Male

and female advisers also dier in the types of qualication exams they have passed. Figure 1 reports the share

of advisers who have passed any of the six most popular qualication exams taken by investment professionals.
                                                                                                                                       6

Female advisers are more likely to have completed the Series 6 qualication exam, which allows an adviser to sell

open-end mutual funds and variable annuities, while male advisers are more likely to hold a Series 65 qualication,

which allows them to act in an investment adviser capacity. 54% of currently registered male advisers and 45% of

currently registered female advisers are also registered as investment advisers.

   In addition to having more seniority, male advisers are more likely to be in managerial and supervisory positions

than their female counterparts. The Series 24 exam qualies an individual to operate in a supervisory capacity.

Male advisers are 7pp more likely to have completed the Series 24 exam.                     Similarly, female advisers are under-

represented among executives/owners of the nancial advisory rms. Figure 2 displays the distribution of female

owner/executives across active nancial advisory rms. Female advisers represent 16% of the owners and executives

and 17% of managers, even though they account for 25% of all nancial advisers. To summarize: male and female

nancial advisers dier on observables, which might be related to job tasks or nancial products and rms, which

employ them. It is therefore important to account for these dierences when comparing advisers across genders.



II.B.2 Gender Dierences in Misconduct Propensity
Approximately        7%   of nancial advisers have records of past misconduct (Egan, Matvos, and Seru, 2017). Here, we

examine how misconduct varies across male and female advisers. Similar to the literature on white collar crime,

and crime in general, we nd that men are signicantly more likely to engage in misconduct relative to women

(Daly 1989; Steensmeier and Allen 1996; Holtfreter 2005; Steensmeier et al.                       2013).    Table 1b, columns (3)

and (4) display the share of advisers with at least one record of past misconduct at a given point in time. The

results indicate that 9% of male and 3% of female nancial advisers have at least one misconduct on their record.
                                                                                                                                       7

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1b show that the probability that an adviser engages in new misconduct during a year

is 0.72% for males and 0.29% for females. The incidence of misconduct among male advisers is more than twice

the rate among female advisers. Conditional on receiving a misconduct disclosure, the distribution of the types

of misconduct are comparable across male and female advisers, but there are some subtle dierences. Customer

  6 Details     of   each    qualication   exam     are    available   in   the    Appendix     A2     and    from    FINRA      online:
http://www.nra.org/industry/qualication-exams?bc=1
  7 Because   many nancial advisers have multiple disclosures pertaining to misconduct, the subcategories of disclosure that we classify
as misconduct in Table 1a add up to more than 9% and 3%.




                                                                    8
initiated misconduct, i.e., customer disputes, accounts for roughly half of all misconduct (57% for men and 48%

for women). Regulatory and criminal oenses account for 20% and 17% of misconduct disclosures received by men

and women. Lastly, rm initiated misconduct, accounts for 28% of misconduct disclosures received by men and

41% received by women.
                               8

    Beyond the type of disclosure, we also observe details on the nature of the misconduct. Tables 1c and 1d display

the most commonly reported types of allegations and nancial products in the misconduct disclosures. In general,

the distribution of the type of complaints received by male and female advisers is comparable, although there is

more variation in the complaints received by female advisers. These simple summary statistics suggest that male

and female advisers engage in similar types of misconduct even though the incidence of misconduct is higher among

male advisers.

    One potential explanation for the dierences in misconduct among the two genders is that the job functions of

male advisers are, on average, dierent from those of female advisers. For example, men may be more likely to work

in a client-facing role, where they give explicit investment and nancial planning advice to consumers. Conversely,

women may be more likely to work in non-client facing positions, such as compliance or risk management. Customer

disputes account for about one-half of all misconduct (Table 1b), so occupational segregation along these lines could

well explain dierences in misconduct across genders. To account for these concerns, we examine gender dierences

in misconduct more systematically using the following linear probability model:



                                      M isconductiqjlt = αF emalei + βXit + µqjlt + εiqjlt .                                            (1)



Observations are at the adviser-by-year level;          i   indexes an adviser with qualications/occupational licenses            q    who

worked for rm      j , at time t, and in county l.   The dependent variable   M isconductiqjlt is a dummy variable indicating
that adviser    i received a misconduct disclosure at time t.       The independent variable of interest is the dummy variable

F emalei ,   which indicates the gender of the adviser. Our full specication includes rm             ×   year   ×   county   ×   license

xed eects     µqjlt .   In other words, we include a xed eect for each set of possible licenses an adviser potentially

holds within a rm, location, and time. These sets of controls allow us to compare male and female advisers who

work for the same rm, in the same branch, at the same time, and in the same job role. The xed eects also

account for aggregate shocks such as the nancial crisis, variation in regulatory conditions (subsuming any state-

or county-level regulatory variation), and any dierences in rm business models or types of clients serviced across

locations. We also account for other adviser level observables such as their experience in the industry in the vector

Xit .
    Table 2a displays the results.        In each specication, we estimate a negative and statistically signicant rela-

tionship between the adviser's gender and the probability that the adviser engages in misconduct at time                           t.   The

estimates in column (3) indicate that the probability a female adviser engages in misconduct in a given year is

0.32pp lower than that of a male adviser.             Therefore, relative to male advisers (0.72pp from Table 1b), female

   8 Firms   must report whether or not adviser experienced an Employment Separation after Allegations. For these cases where the
rms report an Employment Separation after Allegations, rms report whether or not the adviser was red/discharged, permitted to
resign, or if it was a voluntary separation. Among male advisers with this type of disclosure, 75% were discharged, 13% were permitted
to resign, and 11% left voluntarily. Among female advisers with this type of disclosure, 83% were discharged, 7% were permitted to
resign, and 9% left voluntarily.




                                                                    9
advisers within the same rm at the same time in the same county (column 3) are roughly half as likely to engage

in misconduct.      Most importantly, in the most stringent specication with the full set of xed eects (column

4), we nd that women are 27bps less likely to engage in misconduct. Overall, these results suggest that gender

dierences in misconduct can be partially, but not fully explained by occupational segregation across genders in

terms an adviser's job role and nancial products, rm and market dierences.



II.B.3 Gender Dierences in Misconduct Severity
Female advisers engage in less misconduct than male advisers. However, it is possible that conditional on miscon-

duct, female advisers engage in more costly misconduct. We examine the settlements and awards rms paid to

investors as a result of misconduct. Figure 3 displays the distribution of settlements paid out as a result of miscon-

duct among male and female advisers. The distribution of settlements from male adviser misconduct stochastically

dominates the distribution of settlements resulting from female adviser misconduct. The median settlement is $40k

for male advisers and $31k for female advisers. Furthermore, the average settlement of male advisers is more than

double that of female advisers ($832k versus $320k).

   We examine the dierences in the settlements paid out on behalf of male and female advisers using the following

regression specication:



                               ln(Settlement)ijlt = αF emalei + βXit + µj + φl + ψt + εijlt .                                (2)



The sample is restricted to instances of misconduct in which settlements were paid to the customer. The dependent

variable is   ln(Settlement)ijlt ,   which measures the settlements paid out on behalf of advisers following an incident

of misconduct. The key independent variable of interest is the dummy variable           F emalei .   We control for adviser

characteristics in   Xit   and rm (original rm at time    t),   year, and county xed eects   µj , φl , ψt .   The results in

Table 2c conrm that misconduct committed by male advisers is more costly than misconduct committed by female

advisers. On average, settlements associated with female adviser misconduct are         11 − 20%     lower than settlements

associated with male adviser misconduct.          Thus, male advisers engage in more misconduct, and, conditional on

engaging in misconduct, misconduct by male advisers is costlier for the rm.




III     Labor Market Consequences of Misconduct: The Gender Punish-

        ment Gap

Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2017) show that the nancial industry punishes misconduct, both through employment

separations at the rm level and through worse employment opportunities at the industry level. Here we document

gender dierences in the labor market consequences of misconduct  the gender punishment gap  at the rm and

industry level. We also establish that this gender punishment gap is not driven by gender dierences in job role or

in types of rms, markets, or nancial products handled by the adviser.




                                                              10
III.A Gender Dierences in Job Separation Following Misconduct
We rst document that, relative to male advisers, female advisers face worse job separation prospects following

misconduct.      We start with a simple cut of the data in Table 3a.                           Both male and female advisers are likely

to experience job separations following misconduct, but female advisers face harsher consequences. While 46% of

male advisers experience job separations following misconduct, 55% of female advisers do so. In other words, female

advisers are 20% more likely to lose their jobs following misconduct than male advisers. For ease of terminology, we

call gender dierences in job separation rates the gender punishment gap. The gap does not arise because female

advisers, on average, face larger job turnover.                      Turnover rates among male and female advisers are remarkably

similar.    On average, 19% of male and 19% of female advisers leave their rm in a given year.                                   Figure 4 plots

the average job turnover rates for male and female nancial advisers over the past ten years. The turnover rates

among male and female advisers are nearly identical over the period 2005-2015, with a correlation of 0.98. However,

following misconduct, female advisers are substantially more likely to lose their jobs.

   The nearly identical turnover rates among male and female advisers without misconduct suggests that the

gender punishment gap is not driven by the sorting of male and female advisers across dierent rms or locations.

Nevertheless, it may be possible that female advisers are matched with rms that punish misconduct more severely

or provide services in markets in which consumers or regulators are particularly sensitive to misconduct. To evaluate

this alternative, we compare female and male advisers working at the same rm, at the same location, and at the

same point in time, with the same qualications, experience, and other observable characteristics, by estimating

the following linear probability model:




            Separationiqjlt+1 = β1 F emalei + β2 M isc.iqjlt + β3 M isc.iqjlt × F emalei + β4 Xit + µqjlt + εiqjlt .                           (3)



Observations are at the adviser-by-year level;                   i   indexes an adviser with qualications/occupational licenses           q   who

worked for rm      j   at time   t   in county l. The dependent variable                Separationiqjlt+1      is a dummy variable indicating

that the adviser is not employed at rm                  j   in year    t + 1.     The independent variable       M isconductiqjlt ,   is a dummy

variable indicating that the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in year                            t.    The independent variable of in-

terest is   M isconductiqjlt × F emalei ,        which measures the gender punishment gap. We control for other advisers'

characteristics such as experience in            Xit .       These capture the type of advising the adviser engages in. As before,

our full specication includes rm           ×   year        ×   county   ×   license xed eects    µqjlt ,   i.e. a xed eect for each set of

possible qualications an adviser potentially holds within a rm, location, and time. These sets of controls allow

us to compare male and female advisers who work for the same rm, in the same branch, at the same time, and

in the same job role. Thus the eects we identify are not driven by rms' product characteristics or its attitudes

towards misconduct or dierent turnover rates, demographics dierences, local labor market conditions, types of

clients serviced across locations, or dierences in job roles.

   We present the estimates in Table 3b. In each specication we estimate a positive and statistically signicant

relationship between misconduct in year              t   and job separation in year          t+1.   The coecient on misconduct measures

the probability that a male adviser experiences a job separation following misconduct.                                   In the most stringent

specication with full set of xed eects, male advisers are 26pp more likely to experience an employment separation




                                                                              11
following misconduct relative to male advisers without recent misconduct (column 4). More importantly, we nd

evidence of a gender punishment gap.                  In each specication, we estimate a positive and statistically signicant

coecient on    M isconductiqjlt × F emalei             between 8pp and 10pp. The estimated gender punishment gap changes

little as we include the rm       ×     year   ×   county xed eects   µjlt   or rm   ×   year   ×   county   ×   license xed eects       µqjlt .
In other words, the estimates in column (1) indicate that, following misconduct, male advisers have a 28pp higher

chance of a job separation, while female advisers have a 28pp+8pp=36pp higher chance of a job separation. Relative

to male advisers, female advisers are 20% more likely to lose their jobs following a misconduct disclosure. These

results suggest that rms are more tolerant of misconduct among male advisers.
                                                                                                         9 In addition to the alternatives

ruled out in this section, we additionally show that this result is robust to dierent measures of misconduct as well

as possible omitted adviser characteristics, including productivity that we measure quite precisely, in Section IV.B.




III.B Gender Dierences in Reemployment Following Misconduct
In this section we document that the punishment gap extends to rms' hiring decisions.                                  In addition to being

more tolerant towards misconduct by their own male employees, rms are more tolerant of misconduct by males

committed at other rms. The is a distinction between the hiring and separation punishment gap. One reason why

the punishment gap may arise is because of dierences in favoritism towards current employees, because they know

them from daily interactions. This is not the case with advisers from other rms. Therefore, the existence of the

punishment gap at reemployment suggests that favoritism towards existing employees is unlikely the sole driver of

the phenomenon.

   Simple cuts of the data displayed in Table 3a indicate that women face worse reemployment prospects following

misconduct. Almost one half (47%) of male advisers who lose their jobs following misconduct nd new jobs in the

industry within a year. Only one third (33%) of female advisers are reemployed in the same period. This dierence

in reemployment partially arises because female advisers are less likely to be reemployed, even if job separations are

not preceded by misconduct. To account for this dierence, we compute the decrease in reemployment probabilities

due to misconduct across genders. For female advisers, the reemployment rate declines from                              48%   to   33%    following

misconduct, or    15pp.     For male advisers, the decline is substantially smaller, from                  54%   to   47%,    or   7pp.   Taking a

dierence in dierences approach, the turnover rates in Table 3a indicate female advisers are                           8pp   less likely to nd

new employment following misconduct relative to male advisers                     (−8% = (33 − 48%) − (47% − 54%)).
   To ensure that the gender dierences in reemployment following misconduct are not confounded by dierences

in regulation and demographics across markets, in previous employment, or in activities advisers engaged in, we

estimate the following linear probability model:



   N ew_Employmentiqjlt+1 = β1 F emalei + β2 M isc.iqjlt + β3 M isc.iqjlt × F emalei + β4 Xit + µqjlt + εiqjlt .                                  (4)



We restrict the sample to nancial advisers who were separated from their jobs in the previous year.                          N ew_Employmentiqjlt+1
is equal to one if the adviser       i   with qualications/occupational licenses            q   who had been employed at rm              j   in lo-

  9 As an extension,   in Table A3 in the Appendix, we show that female advisers are also less likely to be promoted following misconduct.
The economic magnitudes in the table suggest that a female adviser with a past record of misconduct is 25bps (40%) less likely to be
promoted in a given year relative to a male adviser with a past record of misconduct (column 1).




                                                                     12
cation     l   has found new employment in the industry between time               t   and   t + 1.   The independent variable of interest

is   M isconductiqjlt × F emalei ,          which measures the dierential reemployment prospects of male and female advisers

following misconduct.             As before, our full specication includes rm (original rm at time                t) ×   year   ×   county

×     license xed eects        µqjlt ,   i.e. a xed eect for each set of possible qualications an adviser potentially holds

within a rm (original rm at time               t)   , location, and time. In eect, we compare the outcomes of male and female

nancial advisers who had been previously employed at the same rm, at the same time, in the same county, who

are licensed to engage in same activities, and examine how their reemployment depends on whether they engaged

in misconduct.

       The corresponding results are reported in Table 3c. We estimate a negative and signicant relationship between

misconduct and new employment.                     The negative coecient on the interaction term             M isconductiqjlt × F emalei
indicates that female advisers face more severe punishment at the industry level; they are                           3.5 − 7pp     less likely

to nd a new job than a male nancial adviser who engaged in misconduct.                               Given that male advisers who are

disciplined at time         t   are   7.5 − 12pp   less likely to nd a new job in the next year, this magnitude is substantial.

Relative to male advisers', the decline in reemployment opportunities following misconduct is 30% larger for female

advisers.

       Another way to measure dierences in reemployment prospects across genders is through the time duration

they spend out of the industry. In the Appendix, we estimate a Cox proportional hazards model. As results in

Table A4 reveal, a female adviser's chances of nding reemployment are 8pp smaller than that of comparable male

advisers following misconduct (26pp-16pp). The results from this section suggest that rms are more tolerant of

misconduct by male nancial advisers in their hiring decisions.




III.C Gender Punishment Gap Across and Within Firms
We now delve deeper into the source of the gender punishment gap by examining its relationship with the gender

composition of decision makers in rms.                      Recent survey evidence suggests that a large majority of women in

the nancial sector believe that gender discrimination persists within their rms.
                                                                                                           10 If the source of the gender

punishment gap is indeed the rm, then it is plausible that there is heterogeneity in how rms treat male and

female advisers following misconduct. We rst document that such rm dierences exist. Then we illustrate that

the dierences between rms, such as the gender composition of management, can explain dierences in the gender

punishment gap across rms, and across branches within rms.

       We rst compute dierences in the gender punishment gap across rms using the following specication:



                    Separationit+1 = βj0 + βj1 F emalei + βj2 M isc.it + βj3 M isc.it × F emalei + β4 Xit + εit .                         (5)



The rm-specic coecients of interest                 βj3   measure the dierence between the probability a female adviser experi-

ences an employment separation following misconduct relative to male advisers in a given rm. Note that we also

allow the turnover rates for male advisers, female advisers, and advisers with misconduct to vary across rms by

     10 Nearly   88% of female nancial service professionals in a recent survey said that they believe that gender discrimination exists
within the nancial services industry, 46% believe gender discrimination exists in their rm, and 31% said they have personally been
discriminated against based on gender (Tuttle, 2013).




                                                                         13
including rm specic coecients             βj1 , βj2,   and   βj3 .   Figure 5a displays the dispersion in the gender punishment gap

(βj3 )   across rms, and Figure 5b the rms with the highest gap.
                                                                                           11 To improve statistical power, we restrict our

analysis to rms in which at least twenty female advisers receive misconduct disclosures. The estimated distribu-

tion of rm coecients        (β3 )     are jointly signicantly dierent from each other, conrming dierences in the gender

punishment gap across rms. In terms of magnitudes, for example, the gender gap at Wells Fargo Advisers
                                                                                                                                         12 is   18pp
higher than the average gap.
                                         13 Overall, the results suggest that the gender punishment gap varies substantially

across rms.



III.C.1 Female Managers Alleviate the Gender Punishment Gap at Job Separation
If the gender punishment gap arises because of employer bias, it is probably driven by the bias of the decision

makers in the rm. One proposal to limit discrimination in rms is to increase the share of women in positions

of power. The idea is that decision makers in organizations can directly aect policies leading to discrimination.

The members from the discriminated group, i.e., women, are more likely to recognize discrimination and less likely

to support discriminatory practices. Figure 2a illustrates the substantial dierences in gender composition of rm

executives in our sample as of 2015.               We rst show that the dierences in the gender composition of executive

teams across rms can explain across-rm dierences in the gender punishment gap. We then look within rms

and illustrate that the gender composition of branch managers can also explain dierences in the punishment gap

across branches, within the same rm.

    We start by examining whether the gender punishment gap is smaller in rms with more female executives

using the following linear probability model:



           Separationiqjlt+1           = β1 M isc.iqjlt + β2 F emalei + β3 P ct F emale Execj + β4 M isc.iqjlt × F emalei

                                           +β5 M isc.iqjlt × P ct F emale Execj + β6 F emalei × P ct F emale Execj

                                           +β7 M isc.iqjlt × F emalei × P ct F emale Execj

                                           +β8 Xit + µqjlt + εiqjlt .                                                                             (6)



Observations are at the adviser-by-year level;                i   indexes an adviser with qualications/occupational licenses                q   who

worked for rm       j   at time   t   in county l. The dependent variable               Separationiqjlt+1       is a dummy variable indicating

that the adviser is not employed at rm              j    in year   t + 1.     The variable   P ct F emale Execj      measures the percentage of

females in executive management as of 2015; the level eect                         (β3 ) is absorbed by the xed eect µqjlt .      The indepen-

dent variable of interest is       M isconductiqjlt × F emalei × P ct F emale Execj ,                      which measures how the dierences in

punishment across genders depends on the share of female executives. As before, our most stringent specication

  11 The   distribution of gender dierences (βj3 ) reported in Figure 5a includes measurement error. To account for measurement error,

we construct an empirical Bayes estimate of rm gender dierences by shrinking                   β
                                                                                                 dj3   .   Under the assumption that the variance of
the estimation error is homoskedastic (Cassella, 1992) the estimated scaling factor suggests that underlying dierences across rms
accounts for 78% of the variation in the distribution of the OLS estimated coecients               β
                                                                                                    dj3 .
  12 Firms   are dened by the corresponding CRD identication number. Firms with distinct CRD numbers can share a same parent
company. For instance, Wells Fargo, operates several nancial services businesses under separate numbers. In particular, Wells Fargo
has several operations such as Wells Fargo Advisors Financial Network (CRD# 11025), Wells Fargo Advisors (CRD# 19616), and Wells
Fargo Securities (CRD# 126292).
  13 The   results Table 3a nd a gender gap of     9pp,   which is     27pp   at Wells Fargo Advisers.




                                                                               14
accounts for dierences in rms' attitudes towards misconduct or turnover rates, demographics dierences, local

labor market conditions as well as activities advisers engage in by including rm                     ×     year   ×   county   ×   license xed

eects     µqjlt .   We also control for advisers' characteristics such as experience in           Xit .
    Table 4a displays the corresponding estimates. Firms with a greater share of female executives exhibit a smaller

gender punishment gap. In rms in which females comprise one-third of the executive team, there is almost no

dierential punishment for misconduct between genders.
                                                                          14 In rms without any female executives, on the other

hand, female advisers are 17pp more likely to experience employment separations relative to their male counterparts

following misconduct (Table 4a, column 3).

    We next exploit within-rm variation, by focusing on female representation in branch-level management. Female

executives at the branch level may also be able to attenuate the gender punishment gap. We examine the eects

of female representation in management at the branch level by constructing the variable                                P ct F emale M gmtjlt ,
which measures the percentage of managers that are female at the rm                       ×   county   ×    year level.
                                                                                                                           15 We also examine

the eects of female representation at the branch level more generally by constructing the variable                             P ct F emalejlt ,
which reects the percentage of advisers (weighted by experience) that are female at the rm                           × county × year level.
Figures 2b and 2c display the variation in the variables                  P ct F emale M gmtjlt   and      P ct F emalejlt .    We re-estimate

specication eq. (6), and separately include and interact the branch-level characteristics                         P ct F emale M gmtjlt    and

P ct F emalejlt.
    Tables 4b and 4c display the estimation results corresponding to eq. (6). The results indicate that female advisers

are more likely to experience employment separations after receiving misconduct disclosures relative to male advisers

at branches with more male management. At branches with no female representation at the management level,

female advisers are 10-13pp more likely to experience an employment separation following misconduct relative to

their male counterparts. In addition, female advisers also experience less dierential treatment following misconduct

at branches with more female advisers. The results displayed in column (2) of Table 4c indicate that female and

male advisers experience similar outcomes following misconduct when male and female advisers are roughly equally

represented at the rm branch.
                                        16



III.C.2 Female Advisers Alleviate the Punishment Gap at Reemployment
Female managers reduce the gender punishment gap for misconduct committed at their own rm. A part of the

reason could be personal attachment or favoritism to those specic nancial advisers.                               We now illustrate that

female managers are also more tolerant of misconduct by female advisers from other rms. Recall that, on average,

misconduct dierentially decreases female advisers' chances of reemployment relative to male counterparts'.                                  To

assess how the reemployment prospects change based on share of women in positions of power in hiring rms, we

  14 The    results in column (2) of Table 4a indicate that estimated coecient on the interaction term          M isconduct × F emale ×
P ct_F emale_Exec         is -41.4 and estimated coecient on the term       M isconduct × F emale is 14.0. There is no dierential in job
                                                                                                          14.0
separation probabilities for male and female advisers following        misconduct if P ct_F emale_Exec =       = 0.34.
                                                                                                          41.4
  15 We    classify those advisers holding a Series 24 License as managers. A Series 24 License is required to act in a supervisory role in
nancial advisory rm.
  16 The    coecient on the interaction term    M isconduct × F emale × P ct F emale       is -16.3 and estimated coecient on the term
M isconduct × P ct F emale      is 10.3 (column (2), Table 4c).    Thus, there is no dierential in job separation probabilities for male
                                                                10.3
and female advisers following misconduct if    P ct F emale =   16.3
                                                                       = 0.63.




                                                                         15
estimate the following specication:



     F emale Hires Disciplinedjt+1             = β1 F emale M gmtjt + β2 Xjt + β3 F emale Hiresjt+1 + µs + µt + εjt .            (7)



Observations are at the rm           ×   year level. The dependent variable reects the share of new employees that were

hired by rm      j   at time   t+1   that are female and have a past record of misconduct.            The independent variable

of interest is again the percentage of executives/owners in the rm that are female.                    We also control for rm

characteristics such as the formation type, size, business, etc., and include state and year xed eects, as well as

the share of female advisers hired by the rm

   The estimation results are reported in Table 4d. Firms with a greater percentage of female executives hire a

larger share of female advisers at time         t+1   who were disciplined for misconduct at time     t.   The estimate in column

(3) indicates that a 10pp increase in the percentage of female executives is associated with a 9.3bp increase in the

share of new employees that are both female and have a record of misconduct. To put these numbers in perspective,

moving from the 50th to the 75th percentile in terms of female executives (28%) is correlated with an 50% higher

share of new employees that are female and have a record of misconduct. These results suggest that rms with

a greater percentage of male executives are less willing to hire female advisers with past oenses.                   Moreover, it

illustrates that the tolerance of female managers extends to female advisers who engaged in misconduct at other

rms, and is not limited to their existing employees.




III.D Is Punishment Gap Gender Specic? Punishment Gap for Minority Men
In this section we show that the punishment gap extends to minority men, who have also have traditionally faced

discrimination in the labor market.            Several theories explaining gender dierences in labor outcomes are gender

specic. For example, genders exhibit dierences in the value of home production, and risk aversion, which can

explain several important phenomena that might look like discrimination across gender (Bertrand et al. 2010).
                                                                                                                                  17

Gender identity norms (Bertrand and Kamenica, 2015) could also drive this behavior. The results of this section

reveal that the punishment gap extends beyond gender. Consequently, it is unlikely that the mechanism behind it

is gender specic. Instead, the results in the section are more consistent with a pattern of in-group tolerance or

favoritism towards the members of one's own group.

   We examine the labor market consequences following misconduct for male advisers of African or Hispanic ethic

origin. To ensure that our results are not driven by gender dierences, we limit our sample to men. We determine

the ethnicity of each adviser using the name-ethnicity classier developed in Ambekar et al. (2009) and used in

the literature (Dimmock et al. 2015; Pool et al 2014).
                                                                 18 We are able to classify the ethnicity of 99% of the male

advisers in our sample. Roughly 4% of male advisers are classied as having Hispanic ethnic origins and 2% are

classied as having African ethnic origins.

   We measure the punishment gap of minority men by reestimating eq. (3) but replacing female advisers with

minority men. We include additional controls for the adviser's ethnicity (African or Hispanic) and the interaction

 17 See   Croson and Gneezy (2009) for a review on the literature documenting dierences in risk tolerance among males and females.
Croson and Gneezy nd robust dierences in risk preference among men and women, with women being more risk averse than men.
 18 The   name-ethnicity classier developed by Ambekar et al. (2009) is available online at http://www.textmap.org/ethnicity.




                                                                  16
of misconduct and the adviser's ethnicity. We report the corresponding estimates in the columns (1)-(4) of Table

5b.    In each specication, the estimated coecients on the interaction terms     M isconduct × Af rican Origins
and   M isconduct × Hispanic Origins   are positive and signicant, suggesting African origin and Hispanic advisers

are more likely to experience job separations following misconduct.    In other words, minority men experience a

punishment gap similar to female advisers. We nd similar results for reemployment following misconduct (Table

5b, columns 5-8). These results suggest that Hispanic advisers face relatively worse employment prospects following

misconduct relative to non-African and non-Hispanic advisers. We do not nd any evidence suggesting that African

advisers face worse reemployment prospects following misconduct relative to non-African origin and -Hispanic

advisers. Overall, the results suggest that following misconduct, African advisers face more severe punishment at

the rm level but not at the industry level while Hispanic advisers face more severe punishment at both the rm

and industry level.

      The existence of a punishment gap for minority men suggests a similar mechanism generates the gender and

minority (male) punishment gap.      There is one dierence between the groups, which speaks to the potential

mechanism. Female and minority male advisers dier in the average rate of misconduct. Female advisers engage in

substantially less misconduct than their male counterparts. African and Hispanic advisers, on the other hand, are

9bp more likely to receive misconduct disclosures in a given year relative to other male advisers (Table 5a). One

potential reason why female advisers could be treated more harshly following misconduct is precisely because of

their low average rates of misconduct: rms would either trade-o lower average misconduct for lower productivity,

or update more severely about specic female misconduct propensities after observing misconduct.          If such a

mechanism were at play for minority men, it would suggest milder punishment, because their average rates of

misconduct are higher than non-minority men.       In other words, the existence of male minority punishment gap

suggests that updating from low average misconduct rates is not driving the gender punishment gap. We discuss

this mechanism in more detail in Section IV,



III.D.1 Minority Male Managers Alleviate the Minority Punishment Gap
We nd that rms with a larger share of female managers have a smaller gender punishment gap.              Here, we

document that minority male managers mitigate the minority punishment gap among male advisers.

      Specically, we re-estimate the analog of eq.   (6) where we separately control for the branch level com-

position of manager ethnicity (P ct Af rican M gmt and    P ct Hispanic M gmt).   The variable   P ct Af rican M gmt
(P ct Hispanic_ M gmt)    measures the percentage of managers that are African (Hispanic) origin at the rm in a

county in a given year. In each specication, we estimate a negative and signicant coecient on the minority triple

interaction terms. The results in column (1) of Table 6a suggest that minority advisers working at a branch with no

African origin branch managers are   10pp   more likely to experience employment separations following misconduct.

However, the estimates also imply that there would be no punishment gap in branches where 50% (=10.2/20.3) of

the branch managers are of the same minority as the adviser (Table 6a, column 1). Overall, our results are most

consistent with in-group tolerance of executives of nancial advisory rms. Male executives seem to be more forgiv-

ing of misconduct by men rather than by women, and minority (male) managers are more forgiving of misconduct

from (male) members in their own minority group.



                                                         17
III.D.2 Minority Male Managers do not Alleviate the Gender Punishment Gap
Given that female managers alleviate the gender punishment gap and ethnic minority male managers alleviate

the minority punishment gap, we now ask whether managers from disadvantaged groups lower the punishment

gap in general. This test allows us to distinguish between two alternative reasons for why minority managers 

gender or ethnic  matter. One alternative is that minority managers better understand that there is a punishment

gap and seek to avoid it. If so, we would expect minority male managers to reduce the gender punishment gap.

Alternatively, the mechanism may be related to more specic group membership. For example, managers of a group

only understand that the stereotypes about their own group are incorrect but share stereotypes about other groups,

or because of simple in-group favoritism. Under this alternative, we would nd that minority male managers do not

alleviate gender gap. More formally, we examine how the gender punishment gap varies with the ethnic composition

of branch management using the following specication:



        Separationijlt+1    = β1 M isc.ijlt + β2 F emalei + β3 P ct Af rican M gmtjlt + β4 M isc.it × F emalei

                                   +β5 M isc.ijlt × P ct Af rican M gmtjlt + β6 F emalei × P ct Af rican M gmtjlt

                                   +β7 M isc.ijlt × F emalei × P ct Af rican M gmtjlt

                                   +β8 Xit + µjlt + εijlt .                                                              (8)



The estimates in Table 6c indicate that female advisers with recent misconduct are 8-10pp more likely to expe-

rience employment separations relative to male advisers with recent misconduct. The estimates suggest that the

gender punishment gap does not vary with the ethnic composition of the rm's branch management.                    The esti-

mated coecient on the triple interaction term       M isc.ijlt × F emalei × P ct Af rican M gmtjlt   is insignicant in each

specication, and is positive and small when we include the xed eects. We nd similar inferences when we use

P ct Hispanic M gmt   instead of   P ct Af rican M gmt    (Table 6d). Thus, minority male managers do not alleviate the

gender punishment gap. These results suggest that while managers in power can potentially alleviate punishment

gap among any group, they do so only within their gender or ethnic group. Group membership seems to play an

important role in understanding the punishment gap of advisers across dierent genders and ethnicities.




IV     What explains the Punishment Gap?

We nd a punishment gap for female and minority male advisers. This gap is smaller in rms with a larger share

of managers from the specic minority group. We now model two alternative explanations of why this gap exists

to more formally map their predictions into our empirical results. Broadly, the benchmark is that the punishment

gap is an outcome of rms' using Bayesian updating following misconduct and making prot maximizing decisions:

rms punish female advisers more severely because misconduct by female advisers is predictive of worse outcomes or

more frequent misconduct. In other words, the punishment gap is a function of statistical discrimination (Phelps,

1972; Arrow, 1973).     The other alternative we explore is that the punishment gap is due to biases of market

participants.   Managers either systematically over-estimate the rate of recidivism among female advisers due to




                                                              18
miscalibrated beliefs (i.e. stereotyping; Bordalo et al. 2016) or due to inherent prejudice against female managers

(Becker 1957).




IV.A         Framework
We consider a simple model of a nancial advisory rm's hiring and ring decisions to help understand the features

of the data.      Advisers, indexed by           i,   dier along three dimensions:             gender, productivity              η,   and propensity to

engage in misconduct          ν.    Managers, who dier in gender, wish to employ advisers who are productive but have

low propensities to engage in misconduct. Whether or not a manager hires an adviser                                        i   depends on expectations

about the net productivity of the adviser               hi = ηi − νi .    For convenience, we also assume that adviser productivity

ηi   is perfectly observable by managers but misconduct propensity                        νi   is not. Managers only observe the gender of

an individual and know the distributions                νF ∼ FF (·)      and   νM ∼ FM (·).      Each period,          t = 1, 2, ...,   the rm observes

whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure                        dit   in period     t,   and then elects to re or retain the

adviser.

     We next consider a manager's decision to re an adviser following his/her rst misconduct disclosure. We model

a misconduct disclosure as a noisy signal about an adviser's true propensity to engage in misconduct. At the end

of the each period, a rm observes a noisy signal                dit :


                                                                  dit = νi + it ,


where   νi   reects an adviser's misconduct propensity and                it   is some idiosyncratic misconduct shock. Managers only

observe disclosure signals          dit   if misconduct was suciently large and is detected, such that                           dit > D∗ .      Managers

use this information to update their beliefs regarding an adviser's propensity to engage in misconduct, which we

denote   ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi ), where d~it   is a vector of the adviser's disclosure history and                 gm   indicates gender of the manager

(M or F), and      ga   the gender of the adviser (M or F). A manager's beliefs over an adviser's propensity to engage

in misconduct could be unbiased (derived using Bayesian updating and consistent with the actual distribution of

misconduct and ability) such that              ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi ) = E[ν|d~it , ga,i , ηi ], or systematically biased such that the bias could
vary across genders of managers or advisers.

     Consider an adviser who received a misconduct disclosure at time                           t.   A manager elects to re the employee if

the rm believes his/her net productivity is below some threshold                         Sgm ga     where      ga   and   gm   indicates the manager's

and adviser's gender. An adviser with disclosure history                   d~it   and productivity          η   is red if:



                                                          Sgm ga > ηi − ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi )                                                             (9)



where   Sgm ga   is the threshold which potentially varies across gender of the adviser and manager,                                    ηi   is the adviser's

productivity and        ν̃gm ga   is the updated belief of manager of gender              gm   about the propensity of adviser of gender                  ga
to engage in misconduct.




                                                                          19
IV.B         Alternative 1: Bayesian Updating and Prot Maximization
We rst consider the case in managers hold male and female advisers are held to the same standard                              (Sgm M = Sgm F =
S ∗ ),   and managers' have unbiased beliefs about future misconduct across genders                       ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi ) = E[ν|d~it , ga,i , ηi ]).
This implies that male and female managers hold the same beliefs about misconduct for a given adviser with

observable characteristics      d~it , ga,i   and   ηi .   In other words, since managers are fully Bayesian and have the same

information set, male and female managers update about misconduct in the same way. The rm ring condition

can be rewritten more simply as

                                                            S ∗ > ηi − E[ν|d~it , ga,i , ηi ]

     We next discuss the implications of this alternative for misconduct propensity, productivity and manager's

gender composition. We then discuss how these implications square with our empirical ndings.



Misconduct Propensity/Recidivism/Type of Misconduct                                        We document a gender gap: conditional on all

observable adviser characteristics, female advisers are more likely to experience an employment separation following

misconduct. If rms are prot maximizing, and have unbiased beliefs generated through Bayesian updating, there

are two potential reasons for this nding. First, it could be the case that past misconduct is more predictive of

future misconduct for female advisers with a recent disclosure,                     dit = 1,    than it is for male advisers.



                                    E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi , dit = 1] > E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi , dit = 1]


This implies that women would have higher rates of recidivism and/or engage in more costly misconduct. Relatedly,

it could be the case that the disclosure events observed for male and female advisers dier in a way such that

the types of misconduct female advisers engage in are relatively more predictive of future misconduct or just

fundamentally dierent from the misconduct that the average male adviser engages in.



Productivity           A second potential reason for the gender punishment gap under this alternative is that males

have higher unobserved (to the econometrician) productivity relative to female advisers. Suppose an adviser's true

productivity    ηi   is a function of observable characteristics            Xi β   plus some unobservable (to the econometrician) term

εi . Then, conditional on other observable characteristics, female advisers would have lower unobserved productivity,


                                              E[εi |Xi , d~it , F emale] < E[εi |Xi , d~it , M ale].


Under the benchmark, there may be several potential reasons why female advisers could have lower unobserved

productivity than comparable male advisers.                     Firms wish to employ advisers who are productive but also less

likely to engage in misconduct. Thus, even though productivity                         η   and propensity to engage in misconduct                ν   are

potentially uncorrelated in the population, we would expect them to be potentially negatively correlated among the

population of advisers employed in the industry. Given that female advisers are less likely to engage in misconduct

on average, a prot maximizing rm would potentially nd it optimal to hire women that are less productive on

average relative to male advisers. In this simple framework, it is then possible that the unobserved productivity of




                                                                           20
female advisers is lower than that of comparable male advisers.



Managers' Gender Composition                 This simple statistical discrimination alternative also predicts how the gender

punishment gap changes with the gender of the manager:


                                                                                              
              = ν̃M F (d~it , ηi ) − ν̃M M (d~it , ηi ) − ν̃F F (d~it , ηi ) − ν̃F M (d~it , ηi )
                                                                                                                    
              = E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ] − E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi ] − E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ] − E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi , ]

              =0


   Since a manager's gender does not play a role in how they update on advisers' misconduct, the gender pun-

ishment gap generated by the model does not dier across the managers' gender. In other words, the benchmark

model has a dicult time explaining why the gender punishment gap changes with the gender of the manager. We

next turn to the data to explore the predictions of the benchmark model.



IV.B.1 Gender Does Not Proxy for Misconduct
The rst implication of the benchmark model is that gender de-facto proxies for the severity of current or future

misconduct of female advisers conditional on observing misconduct in our data.                     In this subsection we present

several tests that are inconsistent with this alternative.



Recidivism       We nd that men unconditionally have higher rates of misconduct.                      However, it is possible that

female advisers with misconduct records are more likely to re-engage in misconduct than their male counterparts.

If so, it would be optimal for rms to re female advisers with a higher probability. In this section, we show that

instead, male advisers are more likely to re-oend.

   Figure 6a displays the share of male and female repeat oenders.                 41%     of men with misconduct records are

repeat oenders. Conversely, only 22% of female advisers are repeat oenders. Male advisers are therefore roughly

twice as likely to be repeat oenders than female advisers. To ensure that these gender dierences in recidivism

are not driven by dierent possibilities to re-oend, dierences in rms, regulators, or job role, we more formally

examine recidivism using a linear probability model:




     M isc.iqjlt = β1 F emalei + β2 P riorM isc.iqjlt + β3 P riorM isc.iqjlt × F emalei + βXit + µqjlt + ηiqjlt .                 (10)



The dependent variable      M isconductiqjlt    is a dummy variable indicating that the adviser was disciplined for mis-

conduct at time t. The variable      P riorM isconductiqjlt     is a dummy variable indicating whether the adviser was ever

reprimanded for misconduct prior to time          t.   The main independent variable of interest is        P riorM isconductiqjlt ×
F emalei .   The interaction measures the dierence in propensity of male and female advisers to engage in repeat

oenses. We also control for the adviser's gender to account for any dierences in the baseline misconduct rate

across the two genders. Our most stringent specication controls for rm                ×   year   ×   county   ×license   xed eects




                                                                 21
µqjlt .   We also control for the adviser's characteristics, such as experience in the industry in             Xit .
    Similar to Egan et al. (2017), the         P riorM isconductiqjlt     coecient of    2.4pp   suggests that a male adviser who

has a past record of misconduct is         2.4pp   more likely to receive a new misconduct disclosure in the upcoming year

(Table 7, column 1). More importantly, the negative coecient of                   −0.7pp   on    P riorM isconductiqjlt × F emalei ,
suggests that women are signicantly less likely to be repeat oenders. The nancial advisory industry may nd it

optimal to punish female advisers more severely if they engage in more repeated misconduct. However, the evidence

presented in Figure 6a and Table 7 indicates the exact opposite; male advisers are substantially more likely to be

repeat oenders than female advisers.

    We next show that men have higher recidivism rates relative to females, both in the sample of advisers whose

previous misconduct was punished with a job separation, and in the sample of advisers who were allowed to keep

their job following misconduct. In other words, dierential separation rates across genders following misconduct

are not driving the dierent recidivism rates. We extend our previous regression specication (10) by including

the dummy variable         P riorDisciplineiqjlt ,   which indicates that an adviser previously lost his/her job following

misconduct, and the interaction term            F emalei × P riorDisciplineiqjlt .       Columns (5)-(8) in Table 7 display the

corresponding estimates. The results suggest that rms are shedding advisers that are more likely to engage in

misconduct in the future (coecient on             P riorDiscipine    is positive). Among those who suered a job separation

following misconduct, male advisers are            2.5pp (≈ 0.56 + 1.70 + 0.27)        more likely to engage in misconduct in a

given year than female advisers (column 5). Similarly, among advisers who kept their job following misconduct,

male advisers are roughly         1pp (≈ 0.5 + 0.27)     more likely to engage in misconduct than female advisers (column

5). Overall, these results suggest that past misconduct is actually more predictive of future misconduct for male

advisers than for female advisers. Thus, observed dierences in recidivism run contrary to the predictions of our

simple model in which rms use Bayesian updating from misconduct, and take prots maximizing actions.
                                                                                                                                19



Type of Misconduct              Another reason why rms would want to punish female advisers harsher is if they engaged

in costlier misconduct. In Section II.B.3 we show the opposite is the case: male advisers' misconduct is 11-20%

more costly to the rm. While monetary costs should be a sucient statistic for rms' cost, we additionally show

here that our results are robust to dierent measures of misconduct, and that the punishment gap persist even

within specic types of misconduct.

    The summary statistics displayed in Table 1c suggest that the types of misconduct men and women engage in are

roughly comparable in terms of the associated allegations, with men's misconduct allegations more likely related to

unsuitable investments, misrepresentation, and/or omission of key facts. We show that the gender punishment gap

is robust to dierent types of misconduct by reexamining the probability an adviser experiences an employment

separation in (3) while controlling for the allegations.             Columns (1)-(4) in Table 8a displays the corresponding

estimates.      We estimate a positive and signicant coecient on the interaction term                   M isconduct × F emale       in

each specication. The results in column (4) indicate that female advisers are 8pp more likely to experience an

  19 Note   that in these tests we separately compare recidivism of advisers who did and did not face job separation after misconduct. We
observe recidivism among advisers who remained in the industry following their rst misconduct oense. In the Appendix we address
this selection issue using a semi-parametric control function approach similar to the original parametric approach in Heckman (1979).
Accounting for selection, we continue to nd that male advisers are roughly 0.5-1pp more likely to be repeat oenders in a given year
relative to female advisers.




                                                                    22
employment separation following misconduct. We also reexamine an adviser's reemployment prospects in eq. (4)

and present results in columns (5)-(8) of Table 8a. Again, we nd that female advisers are less likely to be nd

reemployment in the industry following misconduct.

    In addition to controlling for additional characteristics of misconduct, we also separately focus on one specic

type of misconduct, unauthorized activity, and show our results within that narrowly dened setting. We exam-

ine unauthorized activity because it is a relatively common oense, accounting for roughly 15% of misconduct

disclosures. Moreover, unauthorized activity generally represents unauthorized trading and/or forgery, making its

denition and measurement relatively precise. We re-estimate gender dierences in job separation and reemploy-

ment following unauthorized activity similar in eq. (3) and report the corresponding estimates in Table 8b. Columns

(1)-(4) indicate a positive and signicant coecient on the interaction term                   U nauthorized Activity × F emale                 in

each specication suggesting that, relative to their male counterparts, female advisers experience signicantly higher

job separation rates following misconduct.
                                                    20 In columns (5)-(8) we also examine advisers' reemployment prospects

conditional on receiving unauthorized activity related misconduct disclosures. We nd that female advisers are less

likely to nd new employment relative to their male counterparts following such a disclosure. These results suggest

that the gender punishment gap is not driven by dierences in the type of misconduct across genders.



IV.B.2 Gender Does Not Proxy for Productivity
Under our benchmark model, the gender punishment gap can arise because rms trade o lower average female

rates of misconduct with lower productivity, all else equal. Once misconduct is detected, this lower productivity

results in more termination among female advisers. We now present several tests, which suggest that the gender

punishment gap does not proxy for productivity dierences.



Selection on Unobservables                  In our earlier analysis we account for much of the dierences among nancial

advisers by controlling for each adviser's qualications, experience, the rm and location at which they work, and

other characteristics. We start by bounding our main estimates by accounting for the impact of unobservables (such

as unobserved productivity) following Oster (2016) and Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005a, 2005b, 2008). Following

Oster (2016) we bound the gender punishment gap between 10pp and 11.2pp.
                                                                                                  21 Intuitively, as we increase the

                                                                                                  2
number of additional controls, the amount of explained variation in turnover (R                       )   increases substantially in Table

3b; the gender gap does not change much, increasing slightly.

    In addition, there are two other reasons why it is unlikely that productivity dierences are driving the punishment

gap. First, the benchmark model would predict this result only if the unobserved productivity of female advisers is

substantially lower than that of men  i.e. productivity is poorly measured by the researcher. Below we show that

including high quality measures of productivity does not explain the punishment gap. Moreover, the punishment

gap exists even for experienced advisers for whom productivity is well known.

    Second, under the benchmark model, suppose the lower average misconduct rate of female advisers implies their

  20 The    results in column (3) indicate that, conditional on receiving unauthorized activity related misconduct disclosures, female
advisers are 14pp more likely to experience job separation relative to their male counterparts, a 52% increase.
  21 In   particular, following Oster (2016), we calculate the lower bound using    2
                                                                                   Rmax = 1.3 × R˜2   and   δ = 1,   where   R˜2 = 0.46   (Table 3b
column 4).




                                                                    23
lower productivity and generates a gender punishment gap. Then a higher average misconduct rate of minority men

would lead to minority men facing less turnover than non-minority men following misconduct. Despite that, we nd

that minority males, just like females, face a punishment gap, suggesting that updating from average misconduct

rates does nor drive the punishment gap in the data.



Observable Productivity Dierences                   For a large subset of active advisers, we observe detailed productivity

data: productivity (revenues brought to a rm), assets under management (AUM), and quality rating from the

Meridian IQ database as of 2016. One advantage of our setting is that the productivity of nancial advisers can be

broadly encapsulated as the amount of assets they manage (AUM). We report the productivity summary statistics

for male and female advisers in the bottom panel of Table 1a. The summary statistics suggest that male advisers

are marginally more productive, and manage more assets. However, the economic magnitudes of the dierences in

AUM and productivity are quite small. On average, male advisers are 6% more productive than female advisers.

    We now show that observable productivity dierences across genders cannot explain the gender punishment

gap. Because we observe productivity data for a subset of advisers, we rst reestimate the punishment gap using

this data (eq.       3), and then compare the estimates once we control for adviser productivity.                       We report the

corresponding estimates in column (3)-(5) of Table 9.
                                                                 22 Controlling for productivity dierences, the punishment

gap remains statistically signicant, and even slightly increases. This does not imply that productivity has no eect

on job separation rates. Advisers that are more productive, manage more assets, and have high quality ratings are

less likely to experience employment separations. This validates the view that productivity does oset turnover.

Similarly, the results in column (5) suggests that rms are more tolerant of misconduct advisers that manage more

assets and have high quality ratings. However, as is clear, the observed dierences in productivity do not explain,

and slightly increase, the gender punishment gap.



Career Interruptions             Bertrand et al.     (2010) nd that career interruptions, which can impact productivity,

explain about one-third of the gender wage gap in young professionals in the nancial and corporate sectors. We

show that the gender punishment gap is not explained by career interruptions. Following Bertrand et al. (2010),

we dene a career interruption as an out of the industry spell lasting six months or longer. Roughly 19% of the

advisers in our data set have experienced career interruptions.                 After controlling for observable characteristics,

female advisers are 1.26pp more likely to experience a career interruption.                  In columns (1)-(4) of Table 10 , we

re-estimate the gender punishment gap in separation and reemployment using eq. (3) and (4). Career interruptions

do little to explain gender punishment gap. This does not imply that career interruptions have no eect on labor

market outcomes. An interruption is correlated with a               4pp   increase in job separation rate and a        2pp   decrease in

reemployment rates, which is consistent with observations in Bertrand et al. (2010).

  22 We   also reexamine the probability that male and female advisers engage in misconduct. We re-estimate the linear probability model
discussed in Section II.B (eq. 1), controlling for adviser productivity. The results in column (2) of Table 9 suggest that female advisers
are 46% less likely to receive misconduct disclosures in a given year.    The results in column (2) also suggest that more productive
advisers are more likely to receive misconduct disclosures, but the economic magnitude of this eect is very small. A 100% increase in
assets under management is associated with a very small, 3bp increase in the probability of receiving a misconduct disclosure in a given
year. Thus, controlling for productivity leaves the estimates comparable to those corresponding to our baseline specication displayed
in column (1) of Table 2a.




                                                                   24
Pre-misconduct Turnover           To further illustrate that the punishment gap is unlikely driven by gender dierences

in unobserved characteristics (including unobserved productivity), we focus on job separation rates of nancial

advisers before they engage in misconduct. That is, we focus on advisers who eventually engage in misconduct. If

the punishment gap arises because female advisers who eventually engage in misconduct have worse unobservable

characteristics than male advisers (such as productivity), one would expect these characteristics to result in higher

turnover rates even before misconduct appears. We present the results in the Appendix (Table A5), and nd no

evidence of dierential turnover rates in the periods before misconduct appears.



Human Capital Accumulation and Expected Productivity                             The career paths of male and female advisers

may evolve dierently over time. For example, male and female advisers may acquire human capital and develop

career networks on the job at dierent rates, or female advisers may be more likely than male advisers to experience

career interruptions.    Here, we show that the punishment gap exists across adviser experience levels.                  Previous

research suggests that gender dierences in pre-market human capital among men and women are negligible (Blau

and Kahn 1997; Altonji and Blank 1999).          If we nd that the gender punishment gap exists for advisers with

little experience, this suggests that our results are not due to dierences in human capital acquisition over time.

Similarly, after 15 years in the industry, the dierence between realized and future productivity should be small. If

we nd that the same gender punishment gap for more experienced advisers, this suggests that dierences in future

productivity growth are not likely to be a source.

   The corresponding estimates are displayed in Tables 11a and 11b. The results in Table 11a indicate that the

gender punishment gap exists for less experienced advisers: relative to male advisers, female advisers are              9pp   more

likely to experience employment separations following misconduct, and                  2pp   less likely to nd new jobs following

misconduct relative to male advisers (On average, 24% of male advisers with ve or fewer years of experience

experience an employment separation in a year) . We nd similar patterns for more experienced advisers: female

advisers are   4pp   more likely to experience employment separations following misconduct.                  In both sub-samples

we nd weaker evidence suggesting that female advisers face worse reemployment prospects following misconduct

relative to male advisers. However, this is likely due to a statistical power given the smaller sample sizes. Our

conclusion from this analysis is that gender punishment gap documented in Section III is persistent regardless of

the female adviser's level of experience.




IV.C      Alternative 2: Firm Bias Taste-Based and Miscalibrated Beliefs
As noted earlier, rm biases could also drive the observed dierences in the treatment of male and female advisers.

We extend our simple framework to allow for managerial bias, and show that this model is consistent with the facts

we document.     The bias may be the result of favoritism towards male advisers or an inherent prejudice against

female advisers (taste-based discrimination) and/or may be the result of miscalibrated rm beliefs.

   Recall that a manager of gender    gm   decides to re an adviser of gender          ga   following misconduct if the manager's

estimate of the advisers expected net productivity,      ηi − ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi )   is below some threshold   Sgm ga


                                               Sgm ga > ηi − ν̃gm ga (d~it , ηi ))


                                                               25
There are two potential mechanisms for why a biased manager would be more likely to re female adviser over a

comparable male adviser. First, managers engaging in taste-based discrimination could be holding male advisers to

a lower standard than female advisers such that                  Sgm M > Sgm F .        Second, advisers could have miscalibrated beliefs

about future misconduct among women relative to men.                          In other words, even though we nd in the data that

women are less likely to be repeat oenders,               E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ] < E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi ],   it is possible that rms have

incorrect beliefs such that          ν̃gm F (d~it = 1, ηi ) > ν̃gm M (d~it = 1, ηi ).   For example, managers engaging in stereotyping

may overreact to observing misconduct by female advisers, given that female advisers are generally perceived to be

clean.

    A key prediction of the model with managerial bias, either taste-based or miscalibrated beliefs, is that the rate

of recidivism should be higher for comparable male advisers at the margin of being red. To see this rst consider

the extended model with taste-based discrimination. For male and female advisers at the margin of being red:



 Sgm F = ηi − E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ] > Sgm M = ηi − E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi ] =⇒ E[ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ] < E[ν|d~it , M ale, ηi ]


Intuitively, since rms exhibit more tolerance towards male managers  hold them to a lower standard  the resulting

pool of men is worse on the margin of recidivism. The same idea applies to a model with miscalibrated beliefs. By

denition, in the miscalibrated beliefs model managers systematically overestimate the rate of recidivism among

female advisers relative to male advisers, leading to a gender punishment gap. It is worth noting that the prediction

regarding higher recidivism of men in the model with rm bias  whether due to taste or due to miscalibrated

beliefs  is in sharp contrast to the prediction of the benchmark statistical discrimination model. The ndings on

recidivism, discussed in Section IV.B.1, support the model with rm biases.

    Moreover, managerial biases may also vary across rms depending on the gender composition of management.

For example, male managers may hold men to a lower standard such that                               SM F > SM M .      Similarly, male man-

agers may systematically overestimate the probability that women are repeat oenders such that                                ν̃M F (d~it , ηi ) >
ν̃F F (d~it , ηi ) = [ν|d~it , F emale, ηi ]   or underestimate the probability that men are repeat oenders                 ν̃M M (d~it , ηi ) <
ν̃F M (d~it , ηi ) = [ν|d~it , M ale, ηi ].   In other words, the biased manager model naturally generates a larger punishment

gap when managers are from the same group as the adviser, consistent with our ndings in Section ).




IV.D         Summary and Discussion
Our empirical evidence suggests that the gender punishment gap is inconsistent with our simple benchmark model,

in which managers update after observing misconduct using Bayes rule, and impose dierential punishment as a

consequence of prot maximization. The model is inconsistent with the data on the following broad dimensions:


   1. The model suggests that female misconduct is either costlier for the rm or, conditional on misconduct, female

         advisers are more likely to re-oend. The data suggest the opposite.


   2. The model suggests that female advisers may be less productive.                           While productivity measures  that we

         can reasonably capture  are related to turnover, they do not aect the punishment gap.                              Moreover, the

         punishment gap exists even for experienced advisers for whom productivity is well known.                               Finally, pre-




                                                                         26
     misconduct turnover does not dier across genders.


  3. The model suggests that the gender of the manager is not related to the punishment gap.             In the data,

     the punishment gap, both at job separation and reemployment is lower when managers are members of the

     minority group (but not members of other minority groups).


  4. The model suggests that female advisers could be treated more harshly following misconduct because upon

     observing misconduct, the market updates its beliefs more dramatically about female advisers given that

     female advisers have lower baseline rates of misconduct. Such a mechanism would suggest milder punishment

     for minority men, whose baseline rates of misconduct are higher; we observe the opposite.



To summarize, we would need a substantially more complex model with Bayesian managers and prot maximizing

behavior to rationalize the patterns in the data. This model would need to account for the joint distribution of

adviser minority status, manager minority status, adviser productivity, and adviser misconduct propensity. Our

simple benchmark statistical model does not have such features and is rejected by the data.

   A relatively simple model in which managers from the same group as the adviser have more favorable beliefs

about the probability of re-oending  either due to taste or miscalibration  can explain the patterns in the data

in an intuitive and straightforward way. Such a model would generate a punishment gap with managers being more

forgiving of missteps among members of their own gender/ethnic group.




IV.E     Connection to the Literature
Our ndings contribute to the large literature on gender discrimination. We document a new type of gender gap

in a large industry: gender dierences in job separation and reemployment for similar missteps. More broadly, our

analysis indicates that the absence of a gender gap in compensation or hiring rate at the entry level does not imply

the absence of dierential treatment across gender  such dierences can emerge long after employees are working

inside a rm. In establishing this novel mechanism, we connect to the vast literature on discrimination dating back

to the theoretical work of Becker (1957; rev. 1971), Phelps (1972), Arrow (1973), and Aigner and Cain (1977).

   Our paper also contributes to empirical literature documenting gender dierences in the workplace. A large

literature nds gender dierences in hiring decisions, such as such as Neumark (1996), Goldin and Rouse (2000),

Booth and Leigh (2010), Carlsson (2011), and Moss-Racusin et al.        (2012), and gender discrimination more in

promotions and compensation (Altonji and Blank, 1999, Blackaby et al. (2005), Blau and Kahn (1997), Ginther

and Kahn (2004). For extensive surveys, see Altonji (1999), Bertrand (2011), Bertrand and Duo (2016), Blau and

Kahn (2017). While the existing research on gender has generally focused on gender dierences in the compensation

of productive activities, we explore whether such gender dierences carry over to punishment of undesirable activities

as well. In the criminal system, females are frequently punished less severely for similar crimes (Goulette et al.

2015). This contrasts with our nding of a gender punishment gap in the labor market. In the gender punishment

gap that we establish, the employer knows the employee, thus reducing the potential for attention discrimination

(Bartos et al., 2016). Sarsons (2017) documents similar patterns in the medical industry. She nds that female

surgeons experience a larger drop in patient referrals relative to male surgeons following a patient death.      The




                                                         27
main dierence in our analysis (and discussion) is that we focus on dierences in punishment (job separations and

re-hiring) rather than rewards referrals by other physicians. We also document dierences at the rm at which

the issue occurred (current employer) and other rms in the labor market (re-hiring).

    We also contribute to the growing literature documenting that signicant male/female participation and wage

gaps exist in competitive, high paying jobs (Bertrand and Hallock, 2001; Bell, 2005; Wolfers, 2006; Niederle and

Vesterlund, 2007; Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010).       We complement this literature by focusing on a large

market of nancial advisers, who are perhaps more representative of the part of the labor population with high

compensation, rather than the tail of the population represented by CEOs or directors of corporate boards.

    Our work also relates to the literature on the eect of females in management and evaluation positions. The

evidence in the literature is mixed, nding no eect (Hamermesh and Abrevaya, 2013; Bertrand et al., 2014;

Jayasinghe et al., 2003); nding that female evaluators are harsher towards females (Broder, 1993); and that the

consequences are not always straightforward (Zinovyeva and Bagues, 2011).        For example, Bagues et al (2017)

nd that female evaluators are not signicantly more favorable towards female candidates but male evaluators

are discriminant against female candidates upon female evaluators joining. Our ndings suggest that that female

evaluators and leaders undo gender punishment gap, consistent with the ndings of Beaman et al. (2012), De Paola

and Scoppa (2015), and Cardoso and Winter-Ebmer (2007).

    After documenting gender punishment gap in the nancial advisory industry, we empirically examine whether

the observed pattern is consistent with a simple statistical discrimination model or with a model with rm biases

driven due to taste or miscalibrated beliefs (Bordalo et al., 2016). In doing so we closely relate to work of Altonji

and Pierret (2001), Barres (2006), Knowles et al. (2001), Charles and Guryan (2008), Arnold et al. (2017), and

Sarsons (2017). Our paper is also related to Lavy (2008) and Beaman et al. (2009) who provide evidence of the

importance of stereotypes in driving discrimination but focus on compensation as the labor outcome rather than

job separations and hiring.

    Finally, our work also relates to a literature on nancial misconduct and punishment. The framework of our

analysis relates closely to the work of Becker on crime and punishment (1968). Our paper relates to the recent

literature on fraud and misconduct among nancial advisers (Egan, Matvos, and Seru, 2017; Dimmock et al.,

2015; Qureshi and Sokobin, 2015) and in the mortgage industry (Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin, 2013; Grin and

Maturana, 2014). The paper also relates to the literature on corporate fraud, including: Povel et al. (2007), Dyck

et al. (2010; 2014), Wang et al. (2010), Khanna et al. (2015), and Parsons et al. (2015).




V     Conclusion

We nd evidence of a gender punishment gap following an incident of misconduct.           Female advisers are 20%

more likely to lose their jobs relative to comparable male advisers. Females are also punished more severely for

misconduct committed at other rms, and are 30% less likely to nd new jobs following misconduct.           Females

face harsher outcomes despite engaging in misconduct that is 20% less costly and having a substantially lower

propensity towards repeat oenses. A plethora of tests suggest that the gender punishment gap is not likely to be

driven by gender dierences in occupation (type of job, rm, market, or nancial products handled), productivity,




                                                         28
misconduct, or recidivism.    The punishment gap is not limited to gender, but also extends to minority men,

suggesting a non-gender specic mechanism is driving the gap.

   We nd evidence that the punishment gap is driven by in-group favoritism. The gap decreases when a larger

share of managers are from the specic disadvantaged group: the gender punishment gap decreases with a larger

share of female managers, and the punishment gap for minority men decreases with a larger share of minority

male managers.   Minority male managers, on the other hand, do not alleviate the gender punishment gap.          In

other words, specic group membership seems to play an important role in understanding the punishment gap of

advisers across dierent genders and ethnicities.   We provide a simple model, in which such in-group favoritism

arises because managers have miscalibrated beliefs about future misconduct among members of their own group.

   Our ndings provide new insight into the gender gap in the workplace.         We examine an inconspicuous and

potentially costly channel:   punishment following cause.     This aspect has received little attention in academia,

despite generating approximately 60% of lawsuits alleging discrimination in the workplace (Siegelman 2016). We

do not explore the long term consequences of the gender punishment gap. Since females face a narrower margin for

error, the gender punishment gap may be partially responsible for the glass ceiling observed in the industry, which

remains an area of future research.




                                                         29
References

   Aigner, Dennis J. and Glenn G. Cain. 1977. Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor Markets.
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(1): 175-187.

   Altonji, Joseph. 1999. Race and Gender in the Labor Market, In Orley and Ashenfelter and Daid
      Card, eds. Handbook of labor economics, Vol. 30. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

   Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005a. "An evaluation of instrumental
      variable strategies for estimating the eects of catholic schooling." Journal of Human Resources,
      40(4): 791-821.

   Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber.      2005b.   "Selection on observed and
      unobserved variables: Assessing the eectiveness of Catholic schools." Journal of Political Economy,
      113(1): 151-184.

   Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2008. "Using selection on observed vari-
      ables to assess bias from unobservables when evaluating swan-ganz catheterization." The American
      Economic Review, 98(2): 345-350.

   Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. "Employer learning and statistical discrimination."
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 313-350.

   Anrold, David, Will Dobbie and Crystal S. Yang. 2017. Racial Bias in Bail Decisions. Working Paper.

   Arrow, Kenneth, J. 1973. The Theory of Discrimination, in Orley Ashenfelter and Albert Rees eds.,
      Discrimination in labor markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

   Ayres, Ian, and Peter Siegelman. 1995. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car.
      The American Economic Review 304321.

   Bair, Sheila.   2016.   BankThink The Glass Ceiling in Finance: Barely Cracked.   American Banker,
      https://www.americanbanker.com/opinion/the-glass-ceiling-in-nance-barely-cracked.      Accessed 6
      March 2017.

   Bagues, Manuel F, and Berta Esteve-Volart. 2010. Can gender parity break the glass ceiling? Evidence
      from a repeated randomized experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4): 13011328.

   Bagues, Manuel, Mauro Sylos-Labini, and Natalia Zinovyeva. 2017. Does the gender composition of
      scientic committees matter? The American Economic Review, 107(4): 1207 1238.

   Barres, Ben A. 2006. Does gender matter? Nature, 442(7099): 133136.

   Barto², Vojt¥ch, Michal Bauer, Julie Chytilová, and Filip Mat¥jka. 2016. "Attention Discrimination:
      Theory and Field Experiments with Monitoring Information Acquisition." The American Economic
      Review, 106(6): 1437-1475.

   Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova. 2009.
      Powerful women: does exposure reduce bias? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 14971540.

   Beaman, Lori, Esther Duo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova.         2012.   Female leadership raises
      aspirations and educational attainment for girls: A policy experiment in India. Science, 335(6068):
      582586.

   Becker, Gary S. 1968. Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach. Journal of Political Economy,
      76: 169-217

   Becker, Gary S. 2010. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.

   Bell, Linda A. 2005. Women-led rms and the gender gap in top executive jobs.

   Bertrand, Marianne. 2011. New Perspectives on Gender, in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card eds, Handbook
      of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, 1543-1590.

   Bertrand, Marianne, and Esther Duo. Forthcoming. Field Experiments on Discrimination, in Abhijit
      Banerjee and Esther Duo eds., Handbook of Field Experiments.

   Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. Dynamics of the Gender Gap for
      Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors. American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 2(3): 228-255.




                                                      30
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock. 2001. The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs. Industrial
   and Labor Relations Review, 55(1): 321.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra E Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. Breaking the
   glass ceiling?   The eect of board quotas on female labor market outcomes in Norway.Technical
   report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blackaby, David, Alison L Booth, and Je Frank.        2005.   Outside oers and the gender pay gap:
   Empirical evidence from the UK academic labour market. The Economic Journal, 115(501): F81-
   F107.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn.       1997.    Swimming upstream:   trens in the gender wage
   dierential in the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics 15(1):1-42.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn.       2017.    "The Gender Wage Gap:      Extent, Trends, and
   Explanations," Journal of Economic Literature, vol 55(3), pages 789-865

Bohnet, Iris, Alexandra Van Geen, and Max Bazerman. 2015. When performance trumps gender bias:
   Joint vs. separate evaluation. Management Science, 62(5): 12251234.

Booth, Alison, and Andrew Leigh. 2010. Do employers discriminate by gender? A eld experiment in
   female-dominated occupations. Economics Letters, 107(2): 236238.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2016. Stereotypes. Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 131(4): 1753-1794.

Boschini, Anne, and Anna Sjögren. 2007. Is team formation gender neutral? Evidence from coauthor-
   ship patterns. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2): 325365.

Broder, Ivy E. 1993.    Review of NSF economics proposals: Gender and institutional patterns. The
   American Economic Review, 83(4): 964970.

Cardoso, Ana Rute, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2007. Mentoring and segregation: femaleled rms and
   gender wage policies.

Carlsson, Magnus. 2011. Does Hiring Discrimination Casue Gender Segregation in the Swedish Labor
   Market? Feminist Economics, 17(3): 71-102.

Charles, Kerwin Ko and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
   Becker's the Economics of Discrimination. Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 773-809.

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. Gender Dierences in Preferences. Journal of Economic Literature,
   47(2): 448-474.

Daly, Kathleen. 1989. Gender and Varieties of White-Colar Crime. Criminology, 27: 769-794.

De Paola, Maria, and Vincenzo Scoppa. 2015. Gender discrimination and evaluators' gender: evidence
   from Italian academia. Economica, 82(325): 162188.

Dimmock, Stephen G., William C. Gerken and Nathaniel P. Grahm.           2015.   Is Fraud Contagious?
   Career Networks and Fraud by Financial advisers. Working Paper

Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse and Luigi Zingales. 2010. Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud.
   Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2213-2253

Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse and Luigi Zingales. 2014. How Pervasive is Corporate Fraud? Rotman
   School of Managment Working Paper No. 2222608

Egan, Mark, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. 2017. The Market for Financial Adviser Misconduct.
   Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Esteve-Volart, Berta, and Manuel Bagues. 2012. Are women pawns in the political game? Evidence
   from elections to the Spanish Senate. Journal of Public Economics, 96(3): 387399.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. What Comes to Mind. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   125(4): 1399-1433.

Ginther, Donna K, and Shulamit Kahn.      2004.   Women in economics: moving up or falling o the
   academic career ladder? The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3): 193214.

Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse. 2000. Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of Blind Auditions
   on Female Musicians. American Economic Review, 90(4): 715-741.



                                                  31
Gompers, Paul A., Vladimir Mukharlyamov, Emily Weisburst, and Yuhai Xuan. 2014. "Gender eects
   in venture capital." Working Paper.

Goulette, Natalie, John Wooldredge, James Frank, and Lawrence Travis III. 2015. "From Initial Appear-
   ance to Sentencing: Do Female Defendants Experience Disparate Treatment?" Journal of Criminal
   Justice, 43 (5): 406-417.

Grin, John M. and Gonzalo Maturana. 2014. Who Facilitated Misreporting in Securitized Loans?
   Forthcoming in Review of Financial Studies.

Hamermesh, Daniel S, and Jason Abrevaya.           2013.   Beauty is the promise of happiness? European
   Economic Review, 64 351368.

Heckman, James. 1979. Sample selection bias as a specication error. Econometrica 47(1): 153-161.

Heckman, James, Sergio Urzua, and Edward Vytlacil. 2006. Understanding Instrumental Variables in
   Models with Essential Heterogeneity. Review of Economics and Statistic s, 88(3):389-432.

Holtfreter, Kristy.   2005.   Is Occupational Fraud 'Typical' White-Collar Crime?      A Comparison of
   Individual and Organizational Characteristics. Journal of Criminal Justice, 33: 353-365.

Jayasinghe, Upali W, Herbert W Marsh, and Nigel Bond. 2003. A multilevel crossclassied modeling
   approach to peer review of grant proposals:        the eects of assessor and researcher attributes on
   assessor ratings. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 166(3):
   279300.

Khanna, Vikramaditya S., E. Han Kim and Yao Lu. 2015. CEO Connectedness and Corporate Fraud.
   Journal of Finance, 70(3): 1203-1252.

Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. 2001. Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory
   and Evidence. Journal of Political Economy, 109(1): 203-232.

Lavy, Victor. 2008. Do gender stereotypes reduce girls' or boys' human capital outcomes? Evidence
   from a natural experiment. Journal of public Economics, 92(10): 20832105.

Moss-Racusin, Corinne A, John F Dovidio, Victoria L Brescoll, Mark J Graham, and Jo Handelsman.
   2012.   Science faculty's subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences, 109(41): 1647416479.

Neumark, David. 1996. Sex Discrimniation in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study. Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 111(3): 915-942.

Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund.     2007.    Do Women Shy Away from Competition?         Do Men
   Compete too Much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 10671101.

Oliver Wyman. 2016. Women in Financial Services. http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-
   wyman/global/en/2016/june/WiFS/WomenInFinancialServices_2016.pdf. Accessed 6 March 2017.

Oster, Emily. 2016. Unobservable Selection and Coecient Stability. Journal of Business Economics
   and Statistics, Forthcoming.

Parsons, Christopher A., Johan Sulaeman and Sheridan Titman. 2014. The Geography of Financial
   Misconduct. NBER Working Paper No. w20347.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. The statistical theory of racism and sexism. American Economic Review,
   62(4): 659-661.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru and James Witkin. 2015. Asset Quality Misrepresentation by Financial
   Intermediaries: Evidence from the RMBS Market. Forthcoming in the Journal of Finance

Povel, Paul, Rajdeep Sign and Andrew Winton. 2007. Booms, Busts, and Fraud. Review of Financial
   Studies, 20(4): 1219-1254.

Price, Joseph, and Justin Wolfers.     2010.   Racial Discrimination Among NBA Referees. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 125(4): 18591887.

Qureshi, Hammad and Jonathan Sokobin.           2015.      Do Investors Have Valuable Information About
   Brokers? FINRA Oce of the Chief Economist Working Paper.

Sarsons, Heather. 2017. Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical Referrals.
   Working paper.




                                                      32
Steensmeier, Darrell, and Emilie Allan. 1996. "Gender and crime: Toward a gendered theory of female
   oending." Annual Review of Sociology, 22(1): 459-487.

Steensmeier, Darrel J., Jennifer Schwartz, and Michael Roche.     2013.   Gender and Twenty-First-
   Century Corporate Crime:     Female Involvement and the Gender Gap in Enron-Era Corporate
   Frauds. American Sociological Review, 78(3):448-476.

Tuttle, Beecher. 2014. How female bankers react to gender bias today. eFinancialCareers, http://news.
   enancialcareers.com/us-en/184541/female-bankers-recommend-gender-biased-rm-women-colleagues/.
   Accessed 6 March 2017.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning: the Conjunction
   Fallacy in Probability Judgment." Psychological Review, 90(4): 293-315.

Wang, Tracy Yu, Andrew Winton and Xiaoyun Yu. 2010. Coporate Fraud and Business Conditions:
   Evidence from IPOs. Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2255-2291.

Wolfers, Justin. 2006. Diagnosing Discrimination: Stock Returns and CEO Gender. Journal of the
   European Economic Association, 4(23): 53141.

Zinovyeva, Natalia, and Manuel Bagues. 2011. Does Gender Matter for Academic Promotion? Evi-
   dence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.




                                                  33
                    Figure 1: Qualications Held by of Male and Female Financial Advisers




Figure 1 displays the percentage of female and male advisers that hold a particular license. We examine the six
most popular licenses. Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015.




                                                       34
                            Figure 2: Female Representation at Financial Advisory Firms


                                                (a) Firm Executives/Ownership




                                                   (b) Branch Management




                                                      (c) Branch Adviser




Note: Figure 2a displays the percentage of owners/executives that are female. Figure 2b displays the percentage of managers
that are female at the branch level, i.e., at the rm by county by year level. Figure 2c displays the percentage of advisers
(weighted by experience) that are female at the branch level, i.e., at the rm by county by year level. Observations in 2a are
at the adviser-by-year level as of 2015. Observations in Figures 2b and 2c are at the adviser-by-year level over the period
2005-2015.



                                                             35
                         Figure 3: Miscondut Severity: Distribution of Settlements/Damages




Note: Figure 3 displays the distribution of settlements/damages for male and female advisers that were granted
over the period 2005-2015. In the BrokerCheck database, we observe the settlements/damages details for 45.80%
of misconduct-related disclosures and 0.55% of the other types of disclosures.   Observations are at the nancial
adviser by year level.




                                 Figure 4: Job Turnover - Male vs. Female Advisers




    Note: Figure 4 plots the annual job turnover among male and female advisers over the period 2005-2014.




                                                        36
                                 Figure 5: Firm Dierences in the Gender Punishment Gap


                                            (a) Distribution of Gender Punishment Gap




                                          (b) Firms with the Largest Gender Punishment Gap




Note: Figures 5a and 5b display the distribution of the gender punishment gap across rms. The gures plot the distribution
of the coecient   βj3   from eq. (5), which captures the dierential probability that female advisers experience employment
separations following misconduct relative to male advisers' (i.e., the dierence in dierences for female and male advisers with
and without misconduct). Figure 5b displays the rms with the ten highest coecient estimates. For power considerations,
we restrict our analysis to 44 rms with at least twenty observations of female advisers receiving misconduct disclosures.




                                                               37
                                                Figure 6: Recidivism


                                    (a) Distribution of Misconduct




                           (b) Distribution of Misconduct - Repeat Oenders




Note: Figures 6a and 6b display the percentage of male and female advisers who have misconduct disclosures and
the number of misconduct disclosures. Figure 6a displays the unconditional distribution of misconduct disclosures
and 6b displays the distribution of misconduct among those advisers with at least one misconduct disclosure.
Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015.




                                                           38
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                             (a) Adviser Summary Statistics

               Variable                                            Male                    Female
                                                             Obs          Mean       Obs        Mean
               Experience (years)                         4,932,478       12.31    1,615,496        9.37
               Registration:
                  Currently Registered                    4,932,478        0.72    1,615,496   0.66***
                  Registered as an IA                     3,529,429        0.54    1,067,656   0.45***
               Disclosures:
                  Disclosure (in a year)                  4,932,478       1.83%    1,615,496   1.08%***
                  Misconduct (in a year)                  4,932,478       0.72%    1,615,496   0.29%***
                  Disclosure (ever)                       4,932,478       14.89%   1,615,496   7.61%***
                  Misconduct (ever)                       4,932,478       9.08%    1,615,496   3.00%***
               Exams and Qualications (Series):
                  No. Qualications                       4,932,478        2.88    1,615,496   2.51***
                  Uniform Sec. Agent St. Law (63)         4,932,478        77%     1,615,496   71%***
                  General Sec. Rep. (7)                   4,932,478       0.68%    1,615,496   61%***
                  Inv. Co. Products Rep. (6)              4,932,478        37%     1,615,496   46%***
                  Uniform Combined St. Law (66)           4,932,478        19%     1,615,496        19%
                  Uniform Inv. Adviser Law (65)           4,932,478        21%     1,615,496   13%***
                  General Sec. Principal (24)             4,932,478        16%     1,615,496   10%***
               Productivity:
                  Assets Under Management ($mm)            988,217         54.7    169,641     53.2***
                  Productivity ($100k)                     560,519         532      90,572      503***
                  High Quality Indicator                  2,272,975        0.45    559,589     0.32***




Note: Table 1a displays the summary statistics corresponding to our panel of male and female nancial advisers.
Observations are at the adviser by year level over the period 2005-2015. We denote statistically signicant dierences
across male and female characteristics, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                          39
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics (contd.)


                                          (b) Financial Adviser Disclosures and Misconduct

                                    Disclosure                                     Disclosure/Misconduct
                                                                               Current         Current and Past
                                                                            Male     Female       Male      Female
               Misconduct Related Disclosures
                  Customer Dispute - Settled                               0.39%       0.13%     4.74%       1.35%
                  Employment Separation After Allegations                  0.20%       0.12%     1.21%       0.43%
                  Regulatory - Final                                       0.12%       0.04%     1.62%       0.35%
                  Criminal - Final Disposition                             0.03%       0.01%     2.46%       0.98%
                  Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment                        0.02%       0.01%     0.75%       0.15%
                  Civil - Final                                            0.00%       0.00%     0.04%       0.01%
                 Any Misconduct Related Disclosure                        0.72% 0.29% 9.08%                 3.01%
               Other Disclosures:
                  Financial - Final                                        0.33%       0.39%     1.95%       2.47%
                  Customer Dispute - Denied                                0.38%       0.15%     3.92%       1.49%
                  Judgment/Lien                                            0.24%       0.15%     1.10%       0.76%
                  Customer Dispute - Closed-No Action                      0.09%       0.03%     1.20%       0.38%
                  Financial - Pending                                      0.05%       0.07%     0.18%       0.24%
                  Customer Dispute - Pending                               0.07%       0.02%     0.36%       0.10%
                  Customer Dispute - Withdrawn                             0.02%       0.01%     0.20%       0.06%
                  Criminal - Pending Charge                                0.01%       0.00%     0.02%       0.01%
                  Investigation                                            0.01%       0.00%     0.03%       0.01%
                  Regulatory - Pending                                     0.01%       0.00%     0.02%       0.00%
                  Civil - Pending                                          0.00%       0.00%     0.02%       0.01%
                  Customer Dispute - Final                                 0.00%       0.00%     0.02%       0.01%
                  Customer Dispute - Dismissed                             0.00%       0.00%     0.02%       0.00%
                  Civil Bond                                               0.00%       0.00%     0.03%       0.01%
                  Regulatory - On Appeal                                   0.00%       0.00%     0.00%       0.00%
                  Criminal - On Appeal                                     0.00%       0.00%     0.00%       0.00%
                  Civil - On Appeal                                        0.00%       0.00%     0.00%       0.00%
               Total                                                       1.83%       1.08%   14.89%        7.61%


                       (c) Reasons for Misconduct Disclosure              (d) Products Involved in Misconduct Disclosure

                                                         Gender                                           Gender
                                                     Male      Female                                Male      Female
              Unsuitable                            22.8%      18.3%      Products
              Misrepresentation                     18.3%      14.6%          Insurance              13.2%      14.4%
              Unauthorized Activity                 14.9%      14.1%          Annuity                 8.7%       9.7%
              Omission of Key Facts                 11.6%       8.1%          Stocks                  6.1%      3.98%
              Fee/Commission Related                 8.1%       6.0%          Mutual Funds            4.7%       5.0%
              Fraud                                  7.8%       5.2%          Bonds                   2.1%       1.6%
              Fiduciary Duty                         7.1%       4.9%          Options                 1.3%       0.8%
              Negligence                             6.4%       4.6%          Other/Not Listed       69.9%      70.3%
              Risky Investments                      3.9%       3.0%
              Churning/ Excessive Trading            2.9%       1.0%
              Other                                 41.7%      50.9%


Note: Table 1b displays the incidence of disclosures/misconduct among male and female nancial advisers. Observations
are at the year by nancial adviser level over the period 2005-2015. We classify the six categories listed at the top of the
table as indicative of adviser misconduct.     The column "Current" displays the share of observations (year by adviser) in
which the adviser received one or more of a given type of disclosure that particular year. The column "Current and Past"
displays the share of observations (year by adviser) in which the adviser received a given type of disclosure in that particular
year and/or previously. Tables 1b and 1c display the most frequently reported allegations and products corresponding to
misconduct disclosures that occurred over the period 2005-2015.         We observe allegations for 91.89% of the misconduct-
related disclosures. The allegation and product categories are not mutually exclusive. The "Other" category includes all
other allegations/classications that were reported with a frequency of less than 2%.


                                                                40
                                             Table 2: Gender and Misconduct


                                                 (a) Incidence of Misconduct

                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                    Female                                  -0.43***     -0.33***     -0.32***     -0.27***
                                                             (0.025)     (0.022)      (0.027)      (0.030)
                    Adviser Controls                                           X         X            X
                    Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                X
                    Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                     X
                    Observations                            6,547,974 6,547,974 6,221,173 4,465,068
                    R-squared                                 0.001       0.002        0.098        0.206
                    Mean of Dependent Variable               0.61%        0.61%        0.61%        0.51%


                                                  (b) Settlements/Damages

                                  Variable                    Obs        Mean         Std. Dev.      Median
                 Male Advisers:
                     Settlements/Damages Granted            27,469       549,791       9,199,107      40,000
                     Settlements/Damages Requested          21,749      1,719,226     69,458,640     100,000
                 Female Advisers:
                     Settlements/Damages Granted              2,749      262,530       2,281,979      32,500
                     Settlements/Damages Requested            2,119      449,282       3,107,101      60,000


                                          (c) Settlements/Damages Granted by Gender

                                                                  (1)       (2)         (3)
                                 Female                     -0.20***     -0.11**      -0.14***
                                                             (0.052)      (0.047)     (0.038)
                                 Other Adviser Controls                        X         X
                                 Year F.E.                                               X
                                 County F.E.                                             X
                                 Firm F.E.                                               X
                                 Observations                21,537       21,537      20,485
                                 R-squared                    0.001       0.041        0.249




Table 2a displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq. 3). The dependent variable is a dummy
variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure year t. Coecients are in percentage
points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser
holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.).   Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015.        Standard
errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 2b displays the settlements/damages (in $) that were granted and requested over the period 2005-2015. We
observe the settlements/damages details for 45.80% of misconduct related disclosures. Table 2c displays the results
for linear regression model (eq. 2). The dependent variable is the log settlements paid out on behalf of a nancial
adviser as the result of a misconduct settlement/arbitration. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience
and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.).           Observations are at the nancial
adviser by year level over the period 2005-2015. We restrict the data set to only those observations in which the
adviser received a misconduct disclosure and paid out a settlement/damages. Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             41
               Table 3: Gender Punishment Gap: Labor Market Outcomes Following Misconduct


                                               (a) Industry and Firm Separation

                                                           No Misconduct               Misconduct
                                                           Male         Female        Male     Female
                              Remain with the Firm          81%          81%          54%       45%
                              Leave the Firm                19%          19%          46%       55%
                                 Leave the Industry         46%          52%          53%       67%
                                 Join a Dierent Firm       54%          48%          47%       33%


                                       (b) Firm Level Analysis: Employment Separation

                                                                (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
                   Misconduct                                27.6***       29.0***          22.3***     25.7***
                                                              (1.47)        (1.37)           (1.52)      (2.22)
                   Misconduct     ×   Female                 8.32***       8.07***          10.2***     9.99***
                                                              (2.05)        (1.93)           (1.90)      (1.91)
                   Female                                      0.14         -0.54        -0.54***       -0.50***
                                                              (0.29)        (0.34)           (0.15)      (0.16)


                   Adviser Controls                                             X              X           X
                   Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                       X
                   Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                           X
                   Observations                             6,002,088 6,002,088 5,698,577 4,093,438
                   R-squared                                  0.004         0.014            0.332       0.403
                   Mean of Dependent Variable                 18.8%         18.8%            18.8%       19.2%


                                        (c) Industry Level Analysis: New Employment

                                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)
                     Misconduct                              -7.66***      -12.2***         -9.15***    -8.94***
                                                               (2.13)       (1.41)           (1.09)      (1.46)
                     Misconduct   ×   Female                 -7.22***      -5.40***         -3.44***    -3.54***
                                                               (1.80)       (1.31)           (1.22)      (1.27)
                     Female                                  -6.22***      -2.42***         -4.04***    -3.83***
                                                               (0.65)       (0.61)           (0.26)      (0.29)


                     Adviser Controls                                            X             X           X
                     Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                     X
                     Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                         X
                     Observations                            1,125,715 1,125,715 1,006,760              660,127
                     R-squared                                 0.003           0.101         0.365       0.464
                     Mean of Dependent Variable               52.8%         52.8%            54.0%       51.4%


Note: Table 3a displays the average annual job turnover among nancial advisers over the period 2005-2015. Leave
the Industry is dened as an adviser not being employed as a nancial adviser for at least one year; Join a Dierent
Firm is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the adviser is employed at a dierent nancial advisory
rm within a year.    The job transitions are broken down by whether or not the adviser received a misconduct
disclosure in the previous year. Tables 3b and 3c display the regression results corresponding to linear probability
models (eq.   3 and 4).   The dependent variable in Table 3b is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a
nancial adviser left his rm (either leaving the industry or switching rms). The dependent variable in Table 3c
is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser joined a new rm within one year. In Table 3c,
we restrict the sample to those advisers who left their rms in a given year. Other adviser controls include the
adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.). Coecients are
in percentage points. Observations are at the nancial adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard
errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             42
                  Table 4: Female Managers and the Gender Punishment Gap


                 (a) Executive Gender Composition, Firm Separation and Punishment Gap

                                                             (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)
  Misconduct                                             53.5***        54.1***       51.4***       57.8***
                                                            (4.86)       (4.40)        (5.30)       (5.97)
  Misconduct     ×   Female                              14.7***        14.0***       16.5***       13.0***
                                                            (3.03)       (2.97)        (3.53)       (3.81)
  Misconduct     ×   (Pct Female Exec)                      -24.5        -23.5*        -25.4        -32.1*
                                                            (15.6)       (14.2)        (16.8)       (18.7)
  Misconduct     ×   Female   ×   (Pct Female Exec)     -40.7***        -41.4***      -44.4***      -39.1*
                                                            (14.3)       (14.2)        (16.2)       (20.7)


  Adviser Controls                                                            X             X         X
  Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                     X
  Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                                       X
  Observations                                           564,905        564,905       541,137       389,112
  R-squared                                                 0.010          0.021       0.145         0.238
  Mean of Dependent Variable                                13.3%        13.3%         13.3%        13.4%


             (b) Branch Manager Gender Composition, Firm Separation and Punishment Gap

                                                            (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)
Misconduct                                             25.2***          26.8***        20.1***        22.9***
                                                        (1.31)          (1.20)         (1.35)         (2.06)
Misconduct   ×   Female                                10.9***          10.4***        13.4***        11.6***
                                                        (2.68)          (2.53)         (2.29)         (2.23)
Misconduct   ×   (Pct Female Mgmt)                     10.6***          10.3***        11.6***        13.6***
                                                        (2.34)          (2.20)         (2.12)         (3.09)
Misconduct   ×   Female   ×   (Pct Female Mgmt)        -13.7***        -12.8***       -18.5***        -10.5**
                                                        (4.47)          (4.28)         (3.36)         (4.18)


Adviser Controls                                                             X              X               X
Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                       X
Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                                               X
Observations                                           4,839,243       4,839,243      4,722,832      3,480,225
R-squared                                               0.003            0.014          0.315          0.393
Mean of Dependent Variable                              19.6%           19.6%          19.6%          20.1%


                  (c) Branch Gender Composition, Firm Separation and Punishment Gap

                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)
   Misconduct                                     24.3***            25.7***       16.7***        17.0***
                                                  (1.11)             (1.06)         (1.29)         (2.00)
   Misconduct    ×   Female                       10.4***            10.3***       11.8***         8.40**
                                                  (3.23)             (3.04)         (3.10)         (3.61)
   Misconduct    ×   (Pct Female)                 19.8**             19.3**        29.9***        42.5***
                                                  (8.27)             (7.55)         (8.80)         (13.1)
   Misconduct    ×   Female   ×   (Pct Female)    -15.9*             -16.3**        -16.2**         -6.31
                                                  (8.16)             (7.51)         (6.76)         (9.63)


   Adviser Controls                                                    X              X              X
   Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                              X
   Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                                     X
   Observations                                  5,990,929          5,990,929      5,695,544      4,091,147
   R-squared                                       0.004              0.014         0.332          0.403
   Mean of Dependent Variable                     18.8%              18.8%          18.8%          19.2%




                                                  43
                       Table 4: Female Managers and the Gender Punishment Gap (contd.)


                                                    (d) Firm Hiring

                                                       (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)
                  Pct Female Exec                  0.0079***     0.0079***    0.0087***   0.0059**
                                                    (0.0028)      (0.0028)    (0.0029)     (0.0026)
                  Pct Female New Hires                                                      0.037*
                                                                                           (0.0060)


                  Firm Controls                        X               X          X           X
                  Year F.E.                                            X          X           X
                  State F.E.                                                      X           X
                  Observations                        1,982           1,982     1,982       1,982
                  R-squared                           0.012           0.012     0.049       0.079
                  Mean of Dependent Variable         0.56%            0.56%    0.56%        0.56%


Note: Table 4a displays the results for a linear probability model (eq. 6). The dependent variable is a dummy
variable indicating whether or not the adviser experienced a job separation between time        t   and   t + 1.   The key
independent variables of interest are Pct Female Exec, Pct Female Mgmt, and Pct Female, and their interaction with
the variables Misconduct and Female. The variable Pct Female Exec measures the percentage of executives/owners
that are female as of May 2015. The variable Pct Female Mgmt measures the percentage of managers working for
a rm in a given county and year that are female. The variable Pct Female measures the percentage of advisers
(weighted by experience) working for a rm in a given county and year that are female. Coecients are in percentage
points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser
holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.). Observations in Table 4a are at the adviser level in 2015. Observations in Tables 4b and
4c are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered
by rm. Table 4d displays the estimation results corresponding to a rm's hiring patterns. The dependent variable
is the percentage of new hires made by a rm who are female and have a history of misconduct. For comparability
we restrict our attention to those new hires who previously worked in the industry. If the rm did not hire any new
employees with prior adviser experience in a given year, the observation is treated as missing. The key independent
variable of interest is Pct Female Mgmt. In column (4) we also control for the percentage of new hires made by a
rm that are female. We control for the rm's formation type (corporation, limited liability, etc.) and rm age, as
well as whether or not it has a referral arrangement with other advisory rms. Observations are at the rm level
as of 2014. Each observation is weighted by the square root of the number of advisers the rm hired in a given
year. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                           44
                                     Table 5: Punishment Gap for Minority Males


                                                        (a) Misconduct

                                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
                      African                                 0.088**     0.16***     0.096***     0.079**
                                                              (0.043)      (0.043)     (0.032)     (0.032)
                      Hispanic                                0.16***     0.28***     0.096*** 0.093***
                                                              (0.048)      (0.047)     (0.026)     (0.025)


                      Adviser Controls                                         X          X              X
                      Year×Firm×County F.E.                                               X
                      Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                                      X
                      Observations                           4,904,653 4,904,653 4,598,081 3,114,361
                      R-squared                                0.000       0.002        0.111       0.222
                      Mean of Dep. Var.                        0.72%       0.72%        0.71%       0.59%


                                                   (b) Punishment Gap

    Dependent Variable                          Job Separation                                  New Employment
                                       (1)       (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
    Misconduct                       27.1***   28.6***     21.8***       24.8***     -7.22*** -12.1*** -9.07*** -8.58***
                                     (1.37)    (1.27)       (1.39)       (2.04)       (1.95)     (1.28)       (1.07)    (1.37)
    Misc.   ×   African              8.98***   8.95***     7.58***       8.96***       2.08       2.91         3.36      -2.16
                                     (2.00)    (1.91)       (2.17)       (2.55)       (3.51)     (3.08)       (2.96)    (3.37)
    Misc.   ×   Hispanic             6.02**    5.67**       6.53**       9.07***     -8.43*** -6.31*** -5.84*** -6.66***
                                     (2.50)    (2.39)       (2.74)       (3.27)       (2.79)     (2.10)       (1.49)    (1.97)
    African                          2.41***   1.45***     0.44***       0.38**      -2.93***     -1.14      -1.13***    -0.80
                                     (0.32)    (0.27)       (0.15)       (0.17)       (0.75)     (0.72)       (0.38)    (0.52)
    Hispanic                         2.79***   1.57***      0.40**        0.094       -0.62      2.74**      1.70***    1.99***
                                     (0.62)    (0.51)       (0.19)       (0.21)       (1.22)     (1.23)       (0.27)    (0.32)


    Adviser Controls                             X            X            X                       X            X         X
    Yr×Firm×Cnty F.E.                                         X                                                 X
    Yr×Firm×Cnty×Lic. F.E.                                                 X                                              X
    Observations                  4,494,607 4,494,607 4,210,431 2,853,942 842,622                842,622     735,946    454,715
    R-squared                         0.001     0.101        0.365        0.464
    Mean of Dep. Var                 18.7%     18.7%        18.9%        19.4%        54.3%      54.3%        55.7%      53.1


Tables 5a and 5b display the regression results corresponding to linear probability models (eq. 1, 3, and 4 ) where
we examine the relationship between misconduct and ethnicity among male advisers. The dependent variable in
Table 5a is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in a given year.
The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) of Table 5b is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial
adviser left his rm (either leaving the industry or switching rms). The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) of
Table 5b is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser joined a new rm within one year. In
columns (5)-(8) of Table 5b, we restrict the sample to those advisers who left their rms in a given year. Other
adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6,
7, 24, etc.). Coecients are in percentage points. Observations are at the nancial adviser by year level over the
period 2005-2015 and are restricted to the set of male nancial advisers. Standard errors are in parentheses and
are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             45
                 Table 6: Minority Male Managers, and Female Advisers


                        (a) Male Advisers and African Male Managers

                                                          (1)             (2)          (3)
 Misconduct                                             26.4***        28.1***       21.6***
                                                        (1.41)          (1.29)       (1.43)
 Misconduct    ×   African                              10.2***        10.0***       8.60***
                                                        (2.37)          (2.26)       (2.43)
 Misconduct    ×   (Pct African Mgmt)                   13.9**          13.1**       13.2**
                                                        (5.55)          (5.38)       (6.08)
 Misconduct    ×   African   ×   (Pct African Mgmt)     -20.3**         -20.5**     -38.7***
                                                        (10.1)          (9.80)       (10.1)


 Adviser Controls                                                         X            X
 Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                 X
 Observations                                          3,613,837    3,613,837       3,508,932
 R-squared                                               0.004          0.016         0.321
 Mean of Dependent Variable                             19.6%           19.6%        19.7%




                        (b) Male Advisers and Hispanic Male Managers

                                                           (1)             (2)          (3)
Misconduct                                               26.2***         27.9***      21.3***
                                                          (1.32)         (1.20)        (1.31)
Misconduct   ×   Hispanic                                7.71***         7.13***      7.76**
                                                          (2.95)         (2.77)        (3.12)
Misconduct   ×   (Pct Hispanic Mgmt)                      11.0*           10.5*        11.2*
                                                          (5.75)         (5.44)        (5.95)
Misconduct   ×   Hispanic    ×   (Pct Hispanic Mgmt)     -24.1**        -23.3***      -20.0**
                                                          (9.56)         (8.94)        (9.90)


Adviser Controls                                                           X             X
Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                    X
Observations                                            3,613,837       3,613,837    3,508,932
R-squared                                                 0.004           0.016        0.321
Mean of Dependent Variable                               19.6%           19.6%        19.7%


                        (c) Female Advisers and African Male Managers

                                                          (1)            (2)           (3)
 Misconduct                                            26.6***        28.2***       21.8***
                                                        (1.45)          (1.33)       (1.46)
 Misconduct    ×   Female                              8.32***        8.07***       9.81***
                                                        (2.02)          (1.88)       (1.91)
 Misconduct    ×   (Pct African Mgmt)                   10.7**          10.4**        8.22
                                                        (4.86)          (4.73)       (5.54)
 Misconduct    ×   Female    ×   (Pct African Mgmt)      15.2            14.0         9.71
                                                        (14.3)          (13.9)       (13.6)


 Adviser Controls                                                         X            X
 Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                 X
 Observations                                          4,839,243    4,839,243       4,722,832
 R-squared                                              0.003           0.014        0.315
 Mean of Dependent Variable                             19.6%           19.6%        19.6%




                                             46
                        Table 6: Minority Male Managers, and Female Advisers(contd.)


                                    (d) Female Advisers and Hispanic Male Managers

                                                                       (1)              (2)         (3)
               Misconduct                                           26.6***           28.2***     21.6***
                                                                     (1.40)            (1.27)     (1.40)
               Misconduct   ×   Female                              8.71***           8.48***     10.4***
                                                                     (2.05)            (1.92)     (1.91)
               Misconduct   ×   (Pct Hispanic Mgmt)                   5.89             5.60        7.95*
                                                                     (4.40)            (4.20)     (4.51)
               Misconduct   ×   Female   ×   (Pct Hispanic Mgmt)      -5.23            -5.62      -11.6*
                                                                     (7.83)            (7.63)     (6.89)


               Adviser Controls                                                          X          X
               Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                                X
               Observations                                        4,839,243         4,839,243   4,722,832
               R-squared                                             0.003             0.014       0.315
               Mean of Dependent Variable                            19.6%             19.6%      19.6%


Note: Table 6 displays the results for a linear probability model (eq.        6).    The dependent variable is a dummy
variable indicating whether or not the adviser experienced a job separation between time            t   and   t + 1.   The key
independent variables of interest are Pct African Mgmt and Pct Hispanic Mgmt, and the corresponding interaction
terms. The variable Pct African Mgmt (Pct Hispanic) measures the percentage of managers working for a rm in
a given county and year that are African (Hispanic). Coecients are in percentage points. Other adviser controls
include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.).
Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015.            In panels (a) and (b), we restrict the
data set to male advisers. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.




                                                          47
                                         Table 7: Gender and Repeat Oenses


                                         (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
     Prior Misconduct                 2.42***    2.29***    1.91***    1.72***    2.09***      1.96***    1.64***    1.49***
                                       (0.10)    (0.098)    (0.076)    (0.088)    (0.089)      (0.084)    (0.067)    (0.082)
     Prior Misconduct   ×    Female   -0.69***   -0.69***   -0.58***   -0.56***   -0.56***     -0.55***   -0.50***   -0.46***
                                       (0.099)   (0.098)    (0.090)     (0.11)    (0.095)      (0.095)    (0.086)     (0.10)
     Prior Discipline                                                             3.94***      3.89***    3.49***    3.34***
                                                                                   (0.28)       (0.28)     (0.25)     (0.35)
     Prior Discipline   ×   Female                                                -1.70***     -1.70***   -1.17***   -1.32**
                                                                                   (0.43)       (0.43)     (0.45)     (0.63)
     Female                           -0.27***   -0.22***   -0.23***   -0.20***   -0.27***     -0.22***   -0.24***   -0.20***
                                       (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.024)    (0.026)    (0.017)      (0.017)    (0.023)    (0.026)


     Adviser Controls                               X          X          X                       X          X          X
     Year×Firm×County F.E.                                     X                                             X
     Year×Firm×County×Lic. F.E.                                           X                                             X
     Observations                     6,547,974 6,547,974 6,221,173 4,465,068 6,547,974 6,547,974 6,221,173 4,465,068
     R-squared                          0.007     0.007      0.101      0.208      0.008        0.009      0.102      0.209
     Mean of Dependent Variable        0.61%      0.61%      0.61%      0.51%      0.61%        0.61%      0.61%      0.51%


Note: Table 7 displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq. 10). The dependent variable is
whether or not a nancial adviser received a misconduct disclosure at time                t.   The independent variable Prior
Discipline is a dummy variable indicating whether an adviser previously experienced an employment separation
following misconduct. Coecient units are percentage points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experi-
ence, tests (series 6, 7, 63, 24, and investment adviser exams), and number of other qualications. Observations are
at the adviser-by-year level. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.10.




                                                             48
                                     Table 8: Conditioning on Type of Misconduct


                        (a) Labor Market Outcomes Conditional on the Reported Misconduct Complaint

  Dependent Variable                            Job Separation                               New Employment
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
  Misconduct                        34.0***    34.9***    28.7***     32.2***    -9.17***    -12.1***     -9.10***    -10.3***
                                    (1.99)      (1.90)     (2.11)      (2.84)     (2.45)      (1.69)       (1.45)      (1.83)
  Misconduct    ×   Female          6.64***    6.51***    8.42***     7.90***    -6.36***    -5.16***     -3.29***    -2.71**
                                    (1.69)      (1.61)     (1.56)      (1.58)     (1.54)      (1.17)       (1.14)      (1.23)
  Female                             0.14       -0.53     -0.54***   -0.50***    -6.22***    -2.43***     -4.04***    -3.83***
                                    (0.29)      (0.34)     (0.15)      (0.16)     (0.65)      (0.61)       (0.26)      (0.29)
  Allegations
    Unauthorized Activity           9.06***    8.84***    7.09***     6.53***    -5.60***    -5.18***     -3.73***     -2.45
                                    (1.12)      (1.08)     (1.07)      (1.36)     (1.29)      (1.08)       (1.34)      (1.97)
    Omission of Key Facts           6.89***    7.10***    5.19***     5.39***    -9.60***    -9.83***     -5.92***     -4.02*
                                    (1.47)      (1.39)     (1.32)      (1.92)     (2.00)      (1.61)       (1.55)      (2.30)
    Fee/Commission Related          -3.80**    -3.55**    -5.67***   -7.78***      -0.78      -1.82        -2.09       4.31*
                                    (1.69)      (1.67)     (1.33)      (1.57)     (1.81)      (1.81)       (1.75)      (2.30)
    Unsuitable                     -21.5***   -20.1***    -19.1***   -22.0***    18.7***     12.3***      8.93***     12.4***
                                    (1.93)      (1.69)     (1.62)      (2.21)     (2.07)      (1.50)       (1.29)      (1.63)
    Misrepresentation              -15.5***   -14.9***    -15.5***   -17.1***    13.9***     8.51***      5.44***     6.46***
                                    (2.23)      (2.12)     (1.43)      (1.99)     (3.21)      (2.48)       (1.87)      (1.95)
    Fraud                            0.63        0.87       -1.73      -0.36     -17.6***    -16.1***     -14.3***    -10.8***
                                    (1.70)      (1.63)     (1.36)      (1.88)     (2.15)      (1.92)       (2.05)      (3.04)


  Adviser Controls                                X          X           X                      X            X           X
  Yr×Firm×Cnty F.E.                                          X                                               X
  Yr×Firm×Cnty×Lic. F.E.                                                 X                                               X
  Observations                     6,002,088 6,002,088 5,698,577 4,093,438 1,125,715 1,125,715 1,006,760 660,127
  R-squared                          0.004      0.014      0.333       0.403      0.004       0.101        0.365       0.465
  Mean of Dependent Variable        18.8%       18.8%      18.8%      19.2%       54.0%       54.0%        54.0%       51.4%


                        (b) Labor Market Outcomes following Misconduct related to Unauthorized Activity

  Dependent Variable                             Job Separation                               New Employment
                                      (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
  Unauthorized Activity             35.6***    36.7***     27.9***     30.5***    -11.3***    -15.5***     -11.5***    -9.99***
                                     (1.57)     (1.45)      (1.86)      (2.63)     (2.47)      (1.71)       (1.26)       (1.71)
  Unauthorized Act.× Female         10.3***    9.99***     14.5***     14.3***    -13.4***    -11.7***      -7.20**      -5.96
                                     (3.21)     (3.03)      (3.21)      (3.47)     (2.48)      (2.66)       (3.66)       (4.90)
  Female                             0.057      -0.60*    -0.58***    -0.54***    -6.21***    -2.38***     -4.01***    -3.80***
                                     (0.29)     (0.34)      (0.15)      (0.16)     (0.65)      (0.61)       (0.26)       (0.29)


  Adviser Controls                                X           X           X                      X            X              X
  Yr×Firm×Cnty F.E.                                           X                                               X
  Yr×Firm×Cnty×Lic. F.E.                                                  X                                                  X
  Observations                     6,002,088 6,002,088 5,698,577 4,093,438 1,125,715 1,125,715 1,006,760                660,127
  R-squared                          0.001       0.011      0.330       0.401       0.003      0.100         0.364       0.464
  Mean of Dependent Variable         18.8%      18.8%       18.8%      19.2%       54.0%       54.0%        54.0%       51.4%


Tables 8a and 8b display the regression results corresponding to linear probability models (eq. 3 and 4). The dependent
variable in columns (1)-(4) of Tables in Tables 8a and 8b is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser
left his rm (either leaving the industry or switching rms). The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) of Tables 8a and 8b
is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser joined a new rm within one year. In columns (5)-(8) of
Tables 8a and 8b, we restrict the sample to those advisers who left their rm in a given year. Other adviser controls include
the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.). Coecients are in
percentage points. Observations are at the nancial adviser by year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard errors are in
parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             49
                                    Table 9: Conditioning on Observed Productivity


                     Dependent Variable                Misconduct                   Job Separation
                                                      (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)
                     Female                         -0.36*** -0.33*** -0.38*** -0.65*** -0.65***
                                                    (0.057)       (0.056)   (0.10)      (0.11)    (0.11)
                     Misconduct                                             8.81***    8.93***   28.2***
                                                                            (0.89)      (0.88)    (10.5)
                     Misconduct    ×   Female                               4.26***    4.36***   4.44***
                                                                            (1.58)      (1.58)    (1.62)
                     High Rating                                  -0.0068              -4.05*** -3.91***
                                                                  (0.059)               (0.64)    (0.64)
                     ln(AUM)                                      0.033**              -0.43*** -0.43***
                                                                  (0.016)              (0.073)   (0.073)
                     ln(Production)                               0.18***              -0.24*** -0.24***
                                                                  (0.022)              (0.072)   (0.072)
                     High Rating×Misconduct                                                      -12.5***
                                                                                                  (1.89)
                     ln(AUM)×Misconduct                                                           -0.77*
                                                                                                  (0.44)
                     ln(Production)×Misconduct                                                       0.34
                                                                                                  (0.60)


                     Adviser Controls                  X            X         X           X           X
                     Year×Firm×County F.E.             X            X         X           X           X
                     Observations                   487,159       487,159   442,159    442,159   442,159
                     R-squared                       0.181         0.181     0.624      0.627     0.627
                     Mean of Dependent Variable      1.0%          1.0%     10.1%       10.1%     10.1%


Note:   Table 9 displays the regression results for two linear probability models (eq.           1 and 3).   The dependent
variable in columns (1) and (2) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct
disclosure in year   t.   The dependent variable in column (3)-(5) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a
nancial adviser left his rm (either leaving the industry or switching rms).            We observe the adviser's quality
rating (as per Meridian IQ), AUM, and revenue (production) generated by the adviser as of 2016. Other adviser
controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24,
etc.). Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             50
                                  Table 10: Conditioning on Career Interruptions


                   Dependent Variable                     Job Separation      New Employment
                                                             (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)
                   Female                               -0.50***   -0.50***   -3.84*** -3.84***
                                                         (0.16)     (0.16)     (0.29)    (0.29)
                   Misconduct                           25.8***    25.5***    -9.01*** -8.27***
                                                         (2.21)     (2.38)     (1.45)    (1.51)
                   Misconduct   ×   Female              9.95***    9.98***    -3.49*** -3.59***
                                                         (1.90)     (1.89)     (1.27)    (1.28)
                   Career Interruption                  4.05***    4.04***    -2.38*** -2.32***
                                                         (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.30)    (0.30)
                   Career Interruption   ×Misconduct                 1.76               -4.85***
                                                                    (1.89)               (1.55)


                   Adviser Controls                          X        X          X         X
                   Year×Firm×County×License F.E.             X        X          X         X
                   Observations                        4,093,438 4,093,438    660,127   660,127
                   R-squared                             0.404      0.404      0.465     0.465
                   Mean of Dependent Variable            19.2%      19.2%      51.4%     51.4%


Note: Table 10 displays the regression results for two linear probability models. The dependent variable in columns
(1) and (2) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser left his rm (eq. 3). The dependent
variable in columns (3) and (4) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser joined a new rm
within one year (eq. 4). In columns (3) and (4), we restrict the sample to advisers who left their rms in a given
year. Career interruption is a dummy variable indicating whether or not an adviser has previously left the nancial
services industry for more than six months. Coecients are in percentage points. Other adviser controls include
the adviser's experience. Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard errors
are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                        51
                                Table 11: Stratifying on Adviser Industry Experience


                                    (a) Advisers with 5 or Fewer Years Industry Experience

                   Dependent Variable                Misconduct Job Separation New Employment
                   Female                              -0.18***        -1.14***              -2.19***
                                                       (0.026)           (0.23)               (0.28)
                   Misconduct                                           37.2***              -12.6***
                                                                         (3.76)               (2.06)
                   Misconduct   ×   Female                              8.87***               -2.06
                                                                         (1.67)               (1.32)




                   Adviser Controls                       X                X                    X
                   Year×Firm×County F.E.                  X                X                    X
                   Observations                       1,985,627        1,854,824             409,506
                   R-squared                            0.098            0.311                0.359
                   Mean of Dependent Variable           0.34%            23.8%                45.7%




                                    (b) Advisers with 15 or More Years Industry Experience

                   Dependent Variable                Misconduct Job Separation New Employment
                   Female                              -0.49***          0.23*               -6.67***
                                                       (0.033)           (0.12)               (0.44)
                   Misconduct                                           18.0***              -6.89***
                                                                         (1.08)               (1.27)
                   Misconduct   ×   Female                              4.45***                1.13
                                                                         (1.51)               (2.53)


                   Adviser Controls                       X                X                    X
                   Year×Firm×County F.E.                  X                X                    X
                   Observations                       1,887,084        1,663,752             209,358
                   R-squared                            0.151            0.411                0.434
                   Mean of Dependent Variable           0.88%            14.8%                63.4%


Note: Tables 11a and b display the regression results for three linear probability models. The dependent variable
in column (1) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in year        t
(eq. 1). The dependent variable in column (2) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser left
his rm (eq. 3). The dependent variable in column (3) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial
adviser joined a new rm within one year (eq. 4). In column (3), we restrict the sample to those advisers who
left their rms in a given year. In panel (a), we restrict our analysis to those advisers with ve or fewer years of
industry experience. In panel (b), we restrict our analysis to those advisers with fteen or more years of experience.
Coecients are in percentage points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables
for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.). Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period
2005-2015. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                              52
Appendix

A1: Disclosure Denitions23
Civil-Final:     This type of disclosure event involves (1) an injunction issued by a court in connection with

investment-related activity, (2) a nding by a court of a violation of any investment-related statute or regulation,

or (3) an action brought by a state or foreign nancial regulatory authority that is dismissed by a court pursuant

to a settlement agreement.


Civil - Pending:       This type of disclosure event involves a pending civil court action that seeks an injunction in

connection with any investment-related activity or alleges a violation of any investment-related statute or

regulation.


Customer Dispute - Award/Judgment:                     This type of disclosure event involves a nal, consumer-initiated,

investment-related arbitration or civil suit containing allegations of sales practice violations against the adviser

that resulted in an arbitration award or civil judgment for the customer.


Customer Dispute - Settled:             This type of disclosure event involves a consumer-initiated, investment-related

complaint, arbitration proceeding or civil suit containing allegations of sale practice violations against the adviser

that resulted in a monetary settlement to the customer.


Customer Dispute - Closed-No Action/Withdrawn/Dismissed/Denied/Final:                              This type of disclosure

event involves (1) a consumer-initiated, investment-related arbitration or civil suit containing allegations of sales

practice violations against the individual adviser that was dismissed, withdrawn, or denied; or (2) a

consumer-initiated, investment-related written complaint containing allegations that the adviser engaged in sales

practice violations resulting in compensatory damages of at least $5,000, forgery, theft, or misappropriation, or

conversion of funds or securities, which was closed without action, withdrawn, or denied.


Customer Dispute - Pending:              This type of disclosure event involves (1) a pending consumer-initiated,

investment-related arbitration or civil suit that contains allegations of sales practice violations against the

adviser; or (2) a pending, consumer-initiated, investment related written complaint containing allegations that the

adviser engaged in, sales practice violations resulting in compensatory damages of at least $5,000, forgery, theft,

or misappropriation, or conversion of funds or securities.


Employment Separation After Allegations:                   This type of disclosure event involves a situation where the

adviser voluntarily resigned, was discharged, or was permitted to resign after being accused of (1) violating

investment-related statutes, regulations, rules or industry standards of conduct; (2) fraud or the wrongful taking

of property; or (3) failure to supervise in connection with investment-related statutes, regulations, rules, or

industry standards of conduct.


Judgment/Lien:          This type of disclosure event involves an unsatised and outstanding judgments or liens

against the adviser.
 23 Denitions   as per http://brokercheck.nra.org/




                                                                 53
Criminal - Final Disposition:      This type of disclosure event involves a criminal charge against the adviser that

has resulted in a conviction, acquittal, dismissal, or plea. The criminal matter may pertain to any felony or

certain misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion, fraud, and wrongful

taking of property.


Financial - Final:    This type of disclosure event involves a bankruptcy, compromise with one or more creditors,

or Securities Investor Protection Corporation liquidation involving the adviser or an organization the adviser

controlled that occurred within the last 10 years.


Financial - Pending:     This type of disclosure event involves a pending bankruptcy, compromise with one or

more creditors, or Securities Investor Protection Corporation liquidation involving the adviser or an organization

the adviser controlled that occurred within the last 10 years.


Investigation:   This type of disclosure event involves any ongoing formal investigation by an entity such as a

grand jury state or federal agency, self-regulatory organization or foreign regulatory authority. Subpoenas,

preliminary or routine regulatory inquiries, and general requests by a regulatory entity for information are not

considered investigations and therefore are not included in a BrokerCheck report.


Regulatory - Final:     This type of disclosure event may involves (1) a nal, formal proceeding initiated by a

regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulatory such as the

Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for a violation of investment-related rules

or regulations; or (2) a revocation or suspension of a adviser's authority to act as an attorney, accountant, or

federal contractor.


Civil Bond:   This type of disclosure event involves a civil bond for the adviser that has been denied, paid, or

revoked by a bonding company.


Criminal - On Appeal:       This type of disclosure event involves a conviction for any felony or certain

misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion, fraud, and wrongful taking of

property that is currently on appeal.


Criminal - Pending Charge:        This type of disclosure event involves a formal charge for a crime involving a

felony or certain misdemeanor oenses, including bribery, perjury, forgery, counterfeiting, extortion, fraud, and

wrongful taking of property that is currently pending.


Regulatory - On Appeal:       This type of disclosure event may involves (1) a formal proceeding initiated by a

regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulator such as the

Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for a violation of investment-related rules

or regulations that is currently on appeal; or (2) a revocation or suspension of a adviser's authority to act as an

attorney, accountant, or federal contractor that is currently on appeal.


Regulatory - Pending:      This type of disclosure event involves a pending formal proceeding initiated by a

regulatory authority (e.g., a state securities agency, self-regulatory organization, federal regulatory agency such as



                                                          54
the Securities and Exchange Commission, foreign nancial regulatory body) for alleged violations of

investment-related rules or regulations.



Civil - On Appeal:    This type of disclosure event involves an injunction issued by a court in connection with

investment-related activity or a nding by a court of a violation of any investment-related statute or regulation

that is currently on appeal.




                                                        55
A2: FINRA Qualications and Exams24
Series 1, 7, 7a, and 7b Exam:             The Series 7 exam  the General Securities Representative Qualication

Examination (GS)  assesses the competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform his or her job

as a general securities representative. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the

knowledge needed to perform the critical functions of a general securities representative, including sales of

corporate securities, municipal securities, investment company securities, variable annuities, direct participation

programs, options and government securities. The Series 7 exam replaced the Series 1 Exam (Registered

Representative Examination).



Series 2 Exam:         The Series 2 exam is the Non-Member General Securities Examination and was retired in 1996.



Series 3 Exam:         The Series 3 exam the National Commodities Futures Examinationis a National Futures

Association (NFA) exam administered by FINRA



Series 4 Exam:         The Series 4 - Registered Options Principal Exam (OP) The Series 4 examthe Registered

Options Principal Qualication Examination (OP)assesses the competency of an entry-level options principal

candidate to perform his or her job as a registered options principal.



Series 5 Exam:         The Series 5 exam is the Interest Rate Options Exam. The Series 5 exam was retired in 2010.



Series 6 Exam:         The Series 6 examthe Investment Company and Variable Contracts Products Representative

Qualication Examination (IR)assesses the competency of an entry-level representative to perform his or her

job as an investment company and variable contracts products representative. The exam measures the degree to

which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed to perform the critical functions of an investment company

and variable contract products representative, including sales of mutual funds and variable annuities.



Series 8, 9, 10, and 12 Exam:             The General Securities Sales Supervisor Qualication Examination (Series 9

and 10) is intended to test a candidate's knowledge of securities industry rules and certain statutory provisions

applicable to the supervision of sales activities at a general securities-oriented branch oce. The examination

question bank and question allocation is developed through a committee of securities industry professionals with

experience in retail securities sales. The Series 9 and 10 exams replaced the Series 8 and Series 12 exam (NYSE

Branch Manager Examination).



Series 11 Exam:         The Series 11 examthe Assistant Representative - Order Processing Examination

(AR)assesses the competency of an entry-level registered assistant representative to perform his or her job as

an order-processing assistant representative.



Series 14 and 14a Exam:             The Series 14 examthe Compliance Ocial Qualication Examination (CO) 

assesses the competency of an entry-level compliance ocial candidate to perform his or her job as a compliance

ocer. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate, who will supervise 10 or more people engaged in

 24 Denitions   as   per   http://www.nra.org/industry/qualication-exams?bc=1   and   http://www.nra.org/industry/qualication-
exam-eective-dates




                                                                56
compliance activities or are responsible for the overall day-to-day compliance activities of the rm, possesses the

knowledge needed to perform the job responsibilities.



Series 15 Exam:     The Series 15 exam is the Foreign Currency Options Examination. The Series 15 exam was

retired in 2008.



Series 16 Exam:     The Series 16 examthe Supervisory Analysts Qualication Examination (SA)assesses the

competency of an entry-level supervisory analyst to perform his or her job as a supervisory analyst. The exam

measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed to perform the critical functions of a

supervisory analyst, including the rules and statutory provisions applicable to the preparation and approval of

research reports.



Series 17 Exam:     The Series 17 examthe United Kingdom Securities Representative Qualication

Examination (IE)an abbreviated version of the Series 7 exam, is appropriate for candidates who hold a

registration in good standing with the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the United Kingdom and are

seeking registration in the U.S.



Series 18 Exam:     The Series 18 exam is the Securities Industry Rules and Regulations Examination. The Series

18 exam was retired in 1988.



Series 21 Exam:     The Series 21 exam is the NYSE Front Line Specialist Clerk Examination.



Series 22 Exam:     The Series 22 exam  the Direct Participation Programs Limited Representative

Examination (DR)  assesses the competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform his or her job

as a direct participation programs representative.



Series 23 Exam:     The Series 23the General Securities Principal Qualication Examination-Sales Supervisor

Module (GP)assesses the competency of an entry-level general securities principal candidate to perform his or

her job.



Series 24 Exam:     The Series 24 examthe General Securities Principal Qualication Examination

(GP)assesses the competency of an entry-level general securities principal candidate to perform his or her job

as a general securities principal. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge

needed to perform the critical functions of a general securities principal, including the rules and statutory

provisions applicable to the supervisory management of a general securities broker-dealer.



Series 25 Exam:     The Series 25 exam is the NYSE Trading Assistant Examination. The Series 25 exam was

retired in 2016.



Series 26 Exam:     The Series 26 examthe Investment Company and Variable Contracts Products Principal

Examination (IP)assesses the competency of an entry-level investment company and variable products principal

candidate to perform his or her job.




                                                         57
Series 27 Exam:     The Series 27 examthe Financial and Operations Principal Qualication Examination

(FN)assesses the competency of an entry-level nancial and operations principal (FINOP) candidate to perform

his or her job as a FINOP. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge and

understanding of the nancial responsibilities, rules and recordkeeping requirements of broker-dealers.


Series 28 Exam:     The Series 28 examthe Introducing Broker-Dealer Financial and Operations Principal

Qualication Examination (FI)assesses the competency of an entry-level nancial and operations principal

(FINOP) candidate to perform his or her job as a FINOP in an introducing broker-dealer that does not carry

customer accounts or hold customer funds or securities.


Series 30 Exam:     The Series 30 examthe NFA Branch Managers Examinationis a National Futures

Association (NFA) exam administered by FINRA.


Series 31 Exam:     The Series 31 examthe Futures Managed Funds Examinationis a National Futures

Association (NFA) exam administered by FINRA.


Series 32 Exam:     The Series 32 examthe Limited Futures Examination-Regulationsis a National Futures

Association (NFA) exam administered by FINRA.


Series 33 Exam:    The Series 33 exam is the Financial Instruments Examination. The Series 33 exam was retired

in 2005.


Series 34 Exam:     The Series 34 examthe Retail O-Exchange Forex Examinationis a National Futures

Association (NFA) exam administered by FINRA.


Series 37 Exam:     The Series 37 examthe Canada Securities Representative Qualication Examination

(CD)an abbreviated version of the Series 7 exam, is appropriate for candidates who hold a registration in good

standing with Canadian securities regulatory authorities and are seeking registration in the U.S. The exam

assesses the competency of the candidate to perform his or her job as a general securities representative in the

U.S. It measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed to perform the critical

functions of a general securities representative, including sales of corporate securities, investment company

securities, variable annuities, direct participation programs, options and government securities.


Series 38 Exam: The Series 37 examthe Canada Securities Representative Qualication Examination
(CD)an abbreviated version of the Series 7 exam, is appropriate for candidates who hold a registration in good

standing with Canadian securities regulatory authorities and are seeking registration in the U.S. The exam

assesses the competency of the candidate to perform his or her job as a general securities representative in the

U.S. It measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed to perform the critical

functions of a general securities representative, including sales of corporate securities, investment company

securities, variable annuities, direct participation programs, options and government securities.


Series 39 Exam:    The Series 39 examthe Direct Participation Programs Principal Qualication Examination

(DP)assesses the competency of a direct participation program (DPP) principal candidate to perform his or her



                                                          58
job as a DPP principal. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed

to perform the critical functions of a DPP principal, including the rules and statutory provisions applicable to the

supervisory management of a broker-dealer that limits its products to direct participation programs.



Series 40 Exam:     The Series 40 exam is the Registered Principal Examination. The Series 40 exam was retired

in 1979.



Series 41 Exam:     The Series 41 exam is the NYSE Allied Member Examination.



Series 42 Exam:     The Series 42 examthe Registered Options Representative Qualication Examination (OR)

 assesses the competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform his or her job as an options

representative. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge needed to

perform the critical functions of an options representative, including handling option accounts and the

understanding of equity, debt, foreign currency and index options.



Series 44 Exam:     The Series 44 exam is the Pacic Exchange Inc. (PCX) Market Maker Exam.



Series 45 Exam:     The Series 45 exam is the Pacic Exchange Inc. (PCX) Floor Broker Exam.



Series 46 Exam:     The Series 46 exam is the Pacic Exchange Inc. (PCX) Market Maker acting as a Floor

Broker Exam.



Series 48 Exam:     The Series 48 exam is the AMEX Market Maker Exam.



Series 49 Exam:     The Series 49 exam is the AMEX Floor Broker Exam.



Series 50 Exam:     Series 50Municipal Advisor Representative Examinationis a Municipal Securities

Rulemaking Board (MSRB) exam.



Series 51 Exam:    The Series 51 examthe Municipal Fund Securities Limited Principal Qualication

Examination (FP)is a Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) exam.



Series 52 Exam:    The Series 52 examthe Municipal Securities Representative Qualication Examination

(MR)is a Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) exam.



Series 53 Exam:    The Series 53 examthe Municipal Securities Principal Qualication Examination (MP)is a

Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) exam.



Series 54 Exam:     The Series 54 exam is the Municipal Securities Financial and Operations Principal

Examination. The exam was retired in 1989.



Series 55, Series 56 and 57 Exam:       The Series 57 exam  the Securities Trader Representative Exam 

assesses the competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform their job as a securities trader

representative. The Series 57 exam replaced the Series 55 exam (the Equity Trader Examination) and the Series

56 exam (the Proprietary Trader Examination).



                                                         59
Series 62 Exam:    The Series 62the Corporate Securities Representative Qualication Examination

(CS)assesses the competency of an entry-level representative to perform his or her job as a corporate securities

representative.


Series 63 Exam:     The Uniform Securities Agent State Law Examination was developed by NASAA in

cooperation with representatives of the securities industry and industry associations. The examination, called the

Series 63 exam, is designed to qualify candidates as securities agents. The examination covers the principles of

state securities regulation reected in the Uniform Securities Act (with the amendments adopted by NASAA and

rules prohibiting dishonest and unethical business practices). The examination is intended to provide a basis for

state securities administrators to determine an applicant's knowledge and understanding of state law and

regulations.


Series 64 Exam:     The Series 65 exam is the NASAA Real Estate Securities Exam.


Series 65 Exam:    The Uniform Investment Adviser Law Examination and the available study outline were

developed by NASAA. The examination, called the Series 65 exam, is designed to qualify candidates as

investment adviser representatives. The exam covers topics that have been determined to be necessary to

understand in order to provide investment advice to clients.


Series 66 Exam:     The Uniform Combined State Law Examination was developed by NASAA based on industry

requests. The examination (also called the Series 66) is designed to qualify candidates as both securities agents

and investment adviser representatives. The exam covers topics that have been determined to be necessary to

provide investment advice and eect securities transactions for clients.


Series 72 Exam:     The Series 72 examthe Government Securities Representative Qualication Examination

(RG)assesses the competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform his or her job as a

government securities representative. The exam measures the degree to which each candidate possesses the

knowledge needed to perform the critical functions of a government securities representative, including

transacting a rm's business in Treasury, government agency and mortgage-backed securities.


Series 79 Exam:     The Series 79 exam  the Investment Banking Representative Exam  assesses the

competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform their job as an investment banking

representative.


Series 82 Exam:     The Series 82 exam  the Private Securities Oerings Representative Exam  assesses the

competency of an entry-level registered representative to perform their job as a private securities oerings

representative.


Series 86 and 87 Exams:      The Series 86/87 exam  the Research Analyst Exam  assesses the competency of

an entry-level registered representative to perform their job as a research analyst.


Series 99 Exam:    The Series 99 exam  the Operations Professional Exam  assesses the competency of an

entry-level registered representative to perform their job as an operations professional.




                                                         60
A3: Gender Punishment Gap in Reemployment: Duration Analysis
Another way to measure dierences in reemployment prospects across genders is through the duration out of the

industry. Figure A3 displays the duration out of the industry survival function for male and female advisers, cut

by whether the adviser engaged in misconduct in the year prior to unemployment. As the gure illustrates, on

average, the duration out of the industry spells for female advisers are longer than those for male advisers. This

is the case both for advisers with misconduct in the past year and for advisers without misconduct. Roughly 50%

of female advisers remain out of the industry after 24 months, while only 44% of male advisers remain out of the

industry after 24 months. More relevant to dierential punishment across genders is the increase in the duration

out of the industry due to misconduct. The probability of long-term unemployment out of the industry following

misconduct increases substantially more for female advisers than for their male counterparts.

   The simple non-parametric survival analysis in Figure A3 does not account for other dierences among nancial

advisers, such as their experience or qualications. We formally analyze the impact of misconduct on an adviser's

job search by estimating the following Cox proportional hazards model:



            λit (τ ) = λ0 (τ )exp (γ1 F emalei + γ2 M isc.it−1 × M aleit + γ3 M isc.it−1 × F emalei + βXit + µt ) ,         (11)



where    λi (τ )   is the hazard rate of nding new employment in the industry for individual          i   conditional on being

unemployed for        τ   months. The hazard rate is a function of the baseline hazard   λ0 (τ )   and changes proportionally

depending on whether the nancial adviser was reprimanded for misconduct in the year preceding the unemployment

spell,   M isconductit−1 ,    gender, and the interaction of the two. We also control for an adviser's characteristics      Xit
and include time xed eects         µt   to account for aggregate uctuations in the employment market.

   Table A4 reports the hazard ratios corresponding to our Cox proportional hazards model. Any reported hazard

ratio less than one suggests that the covariate is correlated with longer unemployment spells.                   The estimates

rearm the results displayed in Figure A3. The results indicate that female advisers face longer duration out of

the industry spells relative to male advisers. Female advisers have a 4% smaller chance of nding new employment

in the industry at any given moment in time relative to male advisers. Misconduct results in longer duration out

of the industry spells for both male and female advisers, but the eect is much larger for female advisers. A male

adviser who had engaged in misconduct in the year prior to the start of his unemployment spell has a               16%   smaller

chance of nding new employment in the industry at any given moment in time relative to a male adviser without

recent misconduct (Table A4 column 1). Conversely, a female adviser who engaged in misconduct has a 26% smaller

chance of nding new employment in the industry at any given moment in time relative to a female adviser without

misconduct (Table A4 column 1).




                                                                61
A3: Recidivism and Selection
A challenge in accessing the relative recidivism propensities across genders is that we only observe recidivism among

advisers who remain employed in the industry. Here, we account for sample selection using a semi-parametric two

step method.      In the rst step we estimate the probability an adviser experience's an employment separation

following his/her initial misconduct oense



                                      Separationit+1 = βg Xit + µjg + µlg + µtg + εit                                    (12)



The vector of adviser controls       Xit   includes the adviser's experience and licenses (series 6, 7, 63, 24, etc.).   We

also include rm, year, and county xed eects.           Furthermore, we allow the parameters to vary exibly across

genders to allow the dierential treatment of men and women to vary across rms, regions, and over time. We

use the predicted values from our employment separation regression (eq 12) to calculate an adviser's propensity to

experience an employment separation,         p̂.
      We then re-estimate using our recidivism specication (eq. 10) where include a fourth order polynomial of      p̂ as a
control function. Estimating the sample selection model semi-parametrically requires an exclusion restriction. We

use the adviser's past characteristics at the time of the oense (experience, employer, location, licenses, etc.) as an

exclusion restriction. This exclusion restriction requires that conditional on the adviser's current observable char-

acteristics, the past observable characteristics that help determine whether he/she was red following misconduct

such as experience, rm, or location, are uncorrelated with recidivism.


                                                                             4
                                                                             X
                               M isconductijlt = βXit + µj + µl + µg +             φk p̂ki + ηijlt                       (13)
                                                                             k=1


In our analysis, we restrict our observations to those advisers who initially engaged in misconduct and did not

experience an employment separation following the previous misconduct.                Table A6 displays the corresponding

estimates where use a semi-parametric control function to address the potential selection issues. Consistent with

the selection model, we restrict the data set to those advisers who engaged in misconduct but remained with their

employer the following year. In each specication we estimate a negative and signicant relationship between gender

and misconduct. In column (4) we also interact gender with the propensity to experience an employment separation

p̂.   The interaction term helps us recover the distribution of recidivism across male and female advisers similar to

Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil (2006).           We continue to estimate a negative relationship between recidivism and

female across the support of   p̂.




                                                               62
A4: Additional Figures and Tables

                            Figure A1: Job Displacement - Male vs. Female Advisers




Note: Figure A1 plots the annual job turnover among male and female advisers at distressed rms over the period
2005-2014. We dene distressed rms as rms that reduce the number of nancial advisers they employ by 10% or
more in a given year.




                                     Figure A2: Job Turnover by Experience




Figure A2 displays job turnover among male and female advisers conditional on the advisers' experience. Obser-
vations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015.




                                                        63
                                    Figure A3: Unemployment and Misconduct




Figure A3 displays the duration out of the industry survival functions for all adviser out of the industry spells over
the period 2005-2015. The solid black and gray lines display the duration out of the industry survival functions for
male and female advisers did not receive a misconduct disclosure in the year prior to their spell. The dashed lines
display the the duration out of the industry survival functions for male and female advisers who were reprimanded
for misconduct in the year prior to the adviser's spell.




                                                           64
                                      Table A1: Financial Advisers by State


         Rank           State     Pct Female    Number of Observations    Female Turnover   Male Turnover
           1     Iowa                 32.30%                    74,940            16.57%          15.78%
           2     New Mexico           29.89%                    15,383            14.17%          13.68%
           3     Alaska               29.70%                     4,788            13.07%          11.15%
           4     Puerto Rico          28.46%                     9,116            17.39%          15.21%
           5     Wyoming              28.28%                     5,028            11.92%          12.37%
           6     Hawaii               27.95%                    13,966            13.87%          14.69%
           7     Washington           27.70%                    89,201            16.38%          15.57%
           8     Colorado             27.66%                   153,124            16.13%          16.72%
           9     Missouri             27.43%                   132,450            17.33%          19.28%
          10     Delaware             27.42%                    15,948            19.14%          19.38%
          11     North Dakota         27.37%                    10,336            15.86%          13.89%
          12     Arizona              27.33%                   126,564            18.75%          19.61%
          13     Rhode Island         26.99%                    33,819            21.69%          19.50%
          14     Minnesota            26.89%                   174,716            23.06%          23.24%
          15     Florida              26.71%                   350,989            17.81%          18.64%
          16     Kentucky             26.67%                    50,509            15.92%          14.59%
          17     Montana              26.67%                    11,947            11.49%          11.95%
          18     Wisconsin            26.53%                   111,672            15.51%          15.31%
          19     California           26.45%                   601,664            19.38%          19.14%
          20     Nebraska             26.37%                    57,875            17.26%          18.94%
          21     Texas                26.22%                   367,645            18.75%          18.07%
          22     Georgia              25.93%                   168,652            24.49%          23.08%
          23     Oklahoma             25.90%                    40,419            15.87%          13.18%
          24     Indiana              25.81%                    91,892            18.87%          17.02%
          25     Ohio                 25.78%                   212,704            18.52%          17.38%
          26     Oregon               25.66%                    52,675            17.08%          16.37%
          27     Michigan             25.46%                   138,815            16.79%          15.46%
          28     Virginia             25.33%                   106,954            16.42%          16.44%
          29     Nevada               25.32%                    28,493            20.04%          19.80%
          30     Kansas               25.27%                    52,437            15.28%          15.69%
          31     Vermont              25.17%                     9,590            16.28%          18.25%
          32     Maryland             25.15%                    96,829            17.54%          17.37%
          33     New Hampshire        25.14%                    33,289            17.78%          16.25%
          34     North Carolina       25.02%                   155,334            16.50%          16.08%
          35     Louisiana            24.53%                    43,942            17.69%          15.16%
          36     Connecticut          24.37%                   145,698            19.82%          19.94%
          37     Maine                24.11%                    14,236            18.59%          17.37%
          38     South Dakota         24.04%                    11,250            14.59%          13.20%
          39     Illinois             23.91%                   430,477            17.11%          16.26%
          40     Pennsylvania         23.54%                   256,151            15.35%          15.32%
          41     Tennessee            23.10%                    79,351            17.80%          16.07%
          42     Massachusetts        22.59%                   193,717            22.04%          19.89%
          43     West Virginia        22.33%                    11,686            17.13%          13.62%
          44     Alabama              22.28%                    45,115            20.37%          17.73%
          45     Arkansas             21.97%                    24,257            12.27%          14.45%
          46     New York             21.74%                  1,223,637           21.18%          22.29%
          47     South Carolina       21.59%                    38,491            16.17%          15.02%
          48     New Jersey           21.37%                   265,635            18.39%          18.69%
          49     Idaho                21.13%                    16,396            17.45%          15.95%
          50     Mississippi          20.01%                    22,150            19.20%          18.63%
          51     Utah                 16.26%                    49,928            18.33%          16.89%


Note: Table A1 displays the summary statistics corresponding to our panel of male and female nancial advisers
at the state level. Turnover reects the percentage of advisers who leave their rms in a given year. Observations
are at the adviser by year level over the period 2005-2015.




                                                        65
                                              Table A2: Alternative Gender Data


                   Dependent Variable                   Misconduct Job Separation New Employment
                   Female                                  -0.29***                -0.65***           -1.12***
                                                            (0.031)                 (0.15)               (0.20)
                   Misconduct                                                      11.5***                 0.16
                                                                                    (0.76)               (0.44)
                   Misconduct     ×   Female                                       3.37***                 -2.06
                                                                                    (1.27)               (1.60)


                   Adviser Controls                              X                    X                     X
                   Year×Firm×County F.E.                         X                    X                     X
                   Observations                            3,787,172              3,359,568           340,136
                   R-squared                                 0.113                  0.435                0.240
                   Mean of Dependent Variable                0.5%                  11.3 %                  92%


Note:   Table A2 displays the regression results for three linear probability models.                        The dependent variable in
column (1) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in year                        t
(eq. 1). The dependent variable in column (2) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser left
his rm (eq. 3). The dependent variable in column (3) is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial
adviser joined a new rm within one year (eq.              4).   In column (3), we restrict the sample to advisers who left
their rms in a given year. Here we identify the gender of each adviser using data from Meridian IQ. Meridian IQ
contains data on the gender of active advisers as of 2016. Because we only observe the gender for active advisers
in Meridian IQ, our ability to identify the impact of misconduct on an adviser's reemployment prospects is limited
(all of the advisers in the Meridian IQ data set are active and employed as of 2016 by construction). Other adviser
controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24,
etc.). Observations are at the adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                             Table A3: Gender Gap in Promotions


                                                                           (1)            (2)        (3)
                              Misconduct                              -0.17**         -0.13**       -0.10
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.065)      (0.065)
                              Misconduct      ×   Female              -0.25**          -0.18*       -0.14
                                                                          (0.11)       (0.10)      (0.11)
                              Female                                  -0.25***       -0.22***     -0.082***
                                                                      (0.030)         (0.035)      (0.023)


                              Adviser Controls                                            X          X
                              Year×Firm×County F.E.                                                  X
                              Observations                           5,657,813 5,657,813 5,351,741
                              R-squared                                   0.000        0.008        0.094
                              Mean of Dependent Variable                  0.8%         0.8%         0.8%


Note: Table A3 displays the regression results corresponding to a linear probability model. The dependent variable
is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser passed the general securities principal exam
(Series 24) at time   t.   Coecients are expressed in percentage points.                    Observations are at the nancial adviser
by year level over the period 2005-2015. We restrict our sample to those nancial advisers that are not general
securities principals prior to time    t.   Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6, 7, 63,
and investment adviser exams), and number of other qualications. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                     66
                    Table A4: Gender Punishment Gap In Reemployment: Duration Analysis


                                                                 (1)          (2)


                                   Misconduct (Male)          0.84***       0.85***
                                                              (0.0075)      (0.0076)
                                   Misconduct (Female)        0.74***       0.75***
                                                               (0.019)      (0.020)
                                   Female                     0.96***       0.96***
                                                              (0.0029)      (0.0029)


                                   Adviser Controls              X               X
                                   Year F.E.                                     X
                                   Observations               1,109,210    1,109,210


Note: Table A4 displays the estimation results corresponding to a Cox proportional hazard model (eq. 11). The
dependent variable is the length of an out of the industry spell in months. The key independent variable of interest,
Misconduct, is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the adviser received a misconduct disclosure in the year
prior to his/her unemployment spell. We interact Misconduct with the gender of the adviser to allow the eect to
be dierent for male and female advisers. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience, tests (series 6,
7, 63, 24 and investment adviser exam), and number of other qualications. The coecients are reported in terms
of proportional hazards such that a coecient less than one indicates that it takes longer for an adviser to nd a
new job. Observations are at the nancial adviser by out of the industry spell level. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                Table A5: Job Turnover Among Advisers Who Eventually Engage in Misconduct


                                                               (1)          (2)          (3)
                          Female                           -1.72***       -1.79***     -1.58***
                                                              (0.65)       (0.59)       (0.35)




                          Adviser Controls                                   X            X
                          Year×Firm×County F.E.                                           X
                          Observations                     102,915        102,915      63,124
                          R-squared                           0.000        0.013        0.596
                          Mean of Dependent Variable          15.9%        15.9%        17.8%


Note: Table A5 displays the regression results corresponding to a linear probability model (eq. 3). The dependent
variable is a dummy variable indicating whether or not a nancial adviser left his rm (either leaving the industry
or switching rms). Observations are at the nancial adviser-by-year level over the period 2005-2015. We restrict
the sample to observations corresponding to advisers who had not yet received a misconduct disclosure but who
will ultimately receive one or more misconduct disclosures over the course of his/her career. Other adviser controls
include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.).
Coecients are in percentage points. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                         67
                                   Table A6: Recidivism and Selection Correction


                                                              (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)
                       Female                                -0.59** -0.97*** -0.51* -0.98**
                                                             (0.24)   (0.28)   (0.27)     (0.45)
                       Female×Propensity                                                   2.88
                                                                                          (2.08)
                       Female×Propensity
                                           2                                              -4.20
                                                                                          (2.87)


                       Adviser Controls                                 X        X          X
                       Year F.E.                                                 X          X
                       Firm F.E.                                                 X          X
                       County F.E.                                               X          X
                       Observations                          87,088   87,088   86,753    86,753
                       R-squared                             0.000    0.008    0.090      0.090
                       Mean of Dependent Variable 5.3%        5.3%    5.3%     5.3%


Note: Table A6 displays the regression results for a linear probability model (eq.        13).    The dependent variable
is whether or not a nancial adviser received a misconduct disclosure at time     t.    We restrict our observations to
those advisers who initially engaged in misconduct and did not experience an employment separation following
misconduct. Because our sample represents a "selected" sample of individuals who engaged in misconduct and did
not experience an employment separation following misconduct, we correct for the potential selection using a two-
step semi-parametric method as described in the Appendix. Coecient units are percentage points. Propensity
measures the adviser's probability of being red following his/her initial misconduct disclosure (eq.12).         Other
adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser holds (Series 6,
7, 24, etc.). Observations are at the adviser-by-year level. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by
rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                        68
                                    Table A7: Turnover in Firms that Downsize


                                                  (1)             (2)             ( 3)             (4)               (5)
            Downsize                           22.9***         22.5***
                                                (1.88)          (1.91)
            Downsize   ×   Female                1.91           1.99*            0.32             0.21            0.59
                                                (1.02)          (1.00)           (0.29)          (0.22)          (0.37)
            Female                               -0.14         -0.86***      -0.59***            -0.61**        -0.58***
                                                (0.22)          (0.26)           (0.17)          (0.19)          (0.16)
            Adviser Controls                                      X                X               X                 X
            Year×Firm×County×License F.E.                                          X               X                 X
            Downsize: 5%+                                                                          X
            Downsize: 25%+                                                                                           X
            Observations                       6,002,088       6,002,088     4,093,438          4,093,438      4,093,438
            R-squared                            0.042          0.049            0.401           0.401           0.401
            Mean of Dependent Variable          18.8%           18.8%            19.2%
                                                19.2%
                                                19.2%


Note: Table A7 displays the results for a linear probability model (eq. 3). The dependent variable is a dummy
variable indicating whether or not the adviser experienced a job separation between time                   t   and   t + 1.       The key
independent variable of interest is the dummy variable   Downsizeijt ,     which indicates whether or not rm                 j   reduced
the number of advisers it employs by some percentage between time            t   and   t + 1.    In columns (1)-(3), we dene
Downsize     as a rm that reduced its number of advisers by 10% or more.                In columns (4) and (5), we redene
Downsize     as a rm that its number of advisers by 5% or more and 25% or more. Coecients are in percentage
points. Other adviser controls include the adviser's experience and dummy variables for the licenses the adviser
holds (Series 6, 7, 24, etc.). Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by rm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.10.




                                                          69
