NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL CYCLES WITH HETEROGENEOUS INTERMEDIARIES
Nuno Coimbra
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 23245
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23245

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised January 2019

We are especially grateful to Roberto Chang, Mark Gertler, Hans Gersbach, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Ralph Koijen, Anton Korinek, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Matteo
Maggiori, Frederic Malherbe, Alberto Martin, David Martinez-Miera, Thomas Philippon, Xavier
Ragot, Alp Simsek and Hyun Song Shin for very valuable comments. We also thank seminar
participants at the NBER EF&G Summer Institute, Stanford SITE conference, MIT Sloan,
Chicago Booth, Harvard University, Princeton University, NYU, CREI, the Institute of
International Economics in Stockholm, the New York Federal Reserve Bank, the Bank of
England, the Macroprudential Policy Conference at the Sverige Riksbank, the Banque de France,
the Bank of Canada, the Swiss National Bank, the London School of Economics, the Annual
Research Conference of the Bank for International Settlements, the Paris School of Economics,
the Rennes Macroeconomics Conference and London Business School. We thank Arvind
Krishnamurthy for sharing his data on long term investment and leverage of the US banking
sector and Rustam Jamilov for excellent research assistance. Rey thanks the ERC for financial
support (ERC Advanced Grant 695722). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Nuno Coimbra and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Cycles with Heterogeneous Intermediaries
Nuno Coimbra and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 23245
March 2017, Revised January 2019
JEL No. E32,E44,G21
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a dynamic macroeconomic model with heterogeneous financial
intermediaries and endogenous entry. It features time-varying endogenous macroeconomic risk
that arises from the risk-shifting behaviour of the cross-section of financial intermediaries. We
show that when interest rates are high, a decrease in interest rates stimulates investment and
increases financial stability. In contrast, when interest rates are low, further stimulus can increase
aggregate risk while inducing a fall in the risk premium. In this case, there is a trade-off between
stimulating the economy and financial stability.

Nuno Coimbra
Paris School of Economics
CES-Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne
106-112 boulevard de l'Hôpital 75647
Paris cedex 13, FRANCE
nuno.coimbra@psemail.eu
Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu

1

Introduction

The global financial crisis of 2007-2008 has called into question our modelling
of the role of financial intermediaries in the economy. The financial sector, far from
being a veil, plays a key role in the transmission and amplification of shocks and in
driving fluctuations in aggregate risk. The precise mechanisms by which this happens
are still debated. In particular, understanding the underlying forces driving endogenous
systemic risk, the concentration of risk in some balance sheets and the interactions
between monetary policy and financial stability are key issues. A long tradition of
scholars such as Fisher (1933), Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) argued that
financial sector expansions and contractions are important drivers of fluctuations in
economic activity and financial stability. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009b) and Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) among others show that financial
crises tend to be preceded by a rapid expansion of credit. Schularick and Taylor (2012)
study the long run dynamics of money, credit and output over the period 1870-2008
and find that financial crises tend to be ”booms gone bust”. Financial cycles have
been analysed in the literature typically through the lenses of models featuring one
representative financial intermediary subject to capital market frictions. In contrast, we
emphasise the importance of heterogeneity in risk taking across financial intermediaries
in driving aggregate outcomes.
Changes in market shares due to increased risk taking by some intermediaries play
a large role in the risk build-up phase of a crisis. For Sweden, Englund (2016) explains
how between 1985 and 1990 the rate of increase of lending by financial institutions
jumped to 16% due in part to deregulation. There were rapid shifts in market shares:
between 1985 and 1988 the lending shares of Sparbanken Sverige and of Gota increased
from 20.8 to 22.1% and from 7.9% to 8.9% of all bank lending respectively, while more
conservative players held back. There was a significant correlation between the rate of
credit expansion and the subsequent credit losses in the crisis, leading to bailouts. For
Spain, Santos (2017) emphasizes how between 2002 and 2009, the regional banks (cajas)
leveraged a lot to invest in the real estate sector, their combined balance sheet reaching
40% of Spanish GDP in 2009. Some (Bancaja) more than tripled their balance sheet
while more ”conservative” ones (Catalunya Caixa) doubled it. They ended up all being

2

nationalized in the crisis. In Germany, as described by Hellwig (2018), Landesbanken
and local savings banks whose borrowing was guaranteed by German Lander and
municipalities until 2005 took the opportunity to gorge on cheap funds increasing
their debt by around e250bn over the period 2001 to 2005. As the market for Asset
Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) doubled in size between 2000 and 2006 the share
of Landesbanken in that market grew from 6% to 8%. In fact, the weaker was the
stand-alone credit rating of the Landesbank, the larger the subsequent increase in risk
taking. Deutsche Bank leveraged up to quadruple the size of its balance sheet from
about e0.5 trillion in early 1990s to about e2 trillion in 2008 as a RoE of 25% was
regularly targeted by the bank CEO. German taxpayers ended up paying about e70
billion to support their financial institutions. In the US, as noted by Korinek and
Nowak (2017), large risk taking by some financial intermediaries also played a big role
in the mortgage boom. Countrywide increased its size to capture more than 20% of the
US market in 2006 and had to be rescued in 2008. Wilmarth (2013) mentions the high
risk culture of the too-big-to-fail Citigroup as a possible explanation behind the massive
expansion of its balance sheet during the boom years. Citigroup nearly doubled the
share of its subprime mortgage business from 10% in 2005 to 19% in 2007. During the
period 2007 to the spring of 2010, Citigroup recorded more than $130 billion in credit
losses and write-downs. It received its first government bailout in October 2008 (it was
bailed out 3 times in total).
Accounting for such heterogeneity in risk taking behaviour and its macroeconomic
implications is important. A large literature has recognized the centrality of financial
frictions such as collateral, net worth or Value-at-Risk (VaR) constraints for representative firms and intermediaries1 . But that literature has not allowed for heterogeneity in
risk taking; it has focused on the transmission and the amplification of shocks rather
than the endogenous risk build up phase of the financial cycle and the concentration
of risk in some balance sheets. We build a novel framework with a continuum of
1

See in particular, but not only, Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)),
Lorenzoni (2008), Mendoza (2010), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), Gertler and Karadi (2011), Gertler,
Kiyotaki and Queralto (2012), Farhi and Werning (2016), Aoki, Benigno and Kiyotaki (2016) who use
collateral constraints; Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013) where an
intermediary cannot raise more than a fixed amount of equity; Jon Danielsson, Hyun Song Shin and
Jean-Pierre Zigrand (2010), Adrian and Shin (2010), Bruno and Shin (2015b), Coimbra (2016) and
Acharya et al. (2017) where an intermediary faces Value-at-Risk constraints.

3

financial intermediaries heterogeneous in their VaR constraints2 and a moral hazard
friction due to limited liability and government guarantees which generate risk-shifting.
Heterogeneous VaRs may reflect different risk attitudes by the boards of financial
intermediaries or different implementations of regulatory constraints across institutions
and supervisors.
In our model, the dynamics of the distribution of leverage across intermediaries
is a key determinant of financial stability. When high risk-taking intermediaries are
dominant, they increase the price of risky assets and concentrate most of the aggregate
risk on their balance sheets. The leverage distribution across intermediaries is positively
skewed and financial stability is lower, as a large fraction of assets are in the hands of
intermediaries with a high probability of default. This tends to happen when financing
costs are low, perhaps due to deregulation, a savings glut, expansionary monetary policy
or when volatility is low. We link financial stability explicitly to the risk of intermediary
default. This is unlike most of the previous literature where systemic risk is mapped into
the probability that a financing constraint binds in the future. Credit booms generated
by low costs of funds will then be associated with worsened financial stability and lower
risk premia. This is consistent with the evidence reported in Krishnamurthy and Muir
(2017) that spreads tend to be low before crises.3 Our model also generates booms
driven by high expected productivity which do not increase financial instability, unlike
those driven by lower costs of funds (or low volatility). Risk-shifting and different VaR
constraints across financial intermediaries jointly generate heterogeneous willingness
to pay for risky assets and a link between aggregate risk taking and the distribution
of leverage4 . We provide therefore a different and complementary view of financial
fragility from Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2012). For these authors, excess risk
taking comes from neglecting that some improbable risk materializes. In our model, it
2

See Adrian and Shin (2014) for microfoundations of VaR constraints.
These authors note that standard models such as Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), He and Krishnamurthy (2013) or Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) ”will not match the pre-crisis spread evidence.
In the(se) models, a prolonged period in which fragility and leverage rises will also be coupled with an
increase in spreads and risk premia. That is, the logic of these models is that asset prices are forward
looking and will reflect the increased risk of a crisis as fragility grows”.
4
Allen and Gale (2000) have shown that current and future credit expansion can increase risk-shifting
and create bubbles in asset markets. Nuño and Thomas (2017) show that the presence of risk-shifting
creates a link between asset prices and bank leverage.
3

4

is the presence of limited liability that leads bankers to optimally ignore downside risk
within the default region, while government guarantees insure depositors5 .
Our framework generates an endogenous non-linearity in the trade-off between monetary policy (which affects the funding costs of intermediaries) and financial stability6 .
When the level of interest rates is high, a fall in interest rates leads an increase in
leverage (intensive margin) and to entry of less risk-taking intermediaries into the
market for risky projects (extensive margin). The average intermediary is then less
risky, so a fall in the cost of funds has the effect of improving financial stability and
expanding the capital stock. There is no trade-off in this case between stimulating the
economy and financial stability. However, when interest rates are very low, a further
decrease benefits the most leveraged risk-taking intermediaries and competition drives
out the more prudent ones. Stimulating the economy also shifts the distribution of
assets towards the more risk-taking intermediaries, which have a higher default risk and
increases aggregate risk-shifting. There is a trade-off between increasing investment
and financial stability. This non-monotonicity constitutes a substantial difference from
the existing literature and is a robust mechanism coming from the interplay of the two
margins. It provides a novel way to model the risk-taking channel of monetary policy
analysed in Borio and Zhu (2012), Challe, Mojon and Ragot (2013)7 , Angeloni, Faia
and Lo Duca (2015), Bruno and Shin (2015a) and Acharya and Plantin (2016).8
5

Baron and Xiong (2017) show that, more broadly, creditors of banks do not price the risk taken by
bankers during credit expansions. Deposit guarantees have also the effect of ruling out bank runs in
our framework. For models focusing on runs see Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2015) and Angeloni and Faia (2013)). Kareken and Wallace (1978) point out that an important side
effect of deposit insurance is excessive risk taking.
6
Our model is about the behaviour of the real interest rate so the connection with monetary policy
is only partial. Any change in regulation that affects funding costs would have similar implications.
So would higher savings rates or large capital inflows. An extension of the model featuring nominal
variables is left for future work.
7
Challe, Mojon and Ragot (2013) describe a two-period model with heterogeneous intermediaries
and limited liability which, like ours, features a link between interest rates and systemic risk. They
focus on portfolio choice and heterogeneity in equity of intermediaries while we emphasize aggregate
uncertainty and differences in risk taking. Unlike them, we embed the financial sector in a DSGE
model.
8
Recent empirical evidence on the risk-taking channel of monetary policy has been provided by
Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and Suarez (2017) on US data, Jimenez et al. (2014) and Morais et al. (2019),
exploiting registry data on millions of loans of the Spanish and Mexican Central Banks respectively.
Importantly, using detailed Turkish data, Baskaya et al. (2017) highlight the importance of bank
heterogeneity for credit creation and the transmission of global financing cost shocks. Coimbra and Rey

5

A few papers have, like us, put their emphasis on the boom phase of the financial
cycle. In Martinez-Miera and Suarez (2014), bankers determine their exposure to
systemic shocks by trading-off the risk-shifting gains due to limited liability with the
value of preserving their capital after a crisis. Malherbe (2015) and Gersbach and Rochet
(2017) present models with excessive credit during economic booms as increased lending
by an individual bank exerts a negative externality on all other banks. Martinez-Miera
and Repullo (2017) analyse ”search for yield” in an environment with safe and risky
entrepreneurs and banks (with no equity) facing a moral hazard friction a la Holmstrom
and Tirole (1997). In their model, riskier entrepreneurs endogenously borrow from
monitoring banks while safer entrepreneurs borrow from non-monitoring banks (called
shadow banks).9 Another small set of papers have analysed financial sectors with
heterogeneous agents. Geanakoplos (2010) studies leverage cycles driven by wealth
reallocations between optimists and pessimists. Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012) also
emphasize financial frictions and heterogeneity in the beliefs of investors to generate
fluctuations in asset prices. Boissay, Collard and Smets (2016) feature intermediaries
heterogeneous in their intermediation skills. In their set up, low ability intermediaries
become active in boom times and adverse selection plays an important role in credit
collapses.10
The recent paper of Korinek and Nowak (2017) is the most closely related to our
work while using a very different modelling approach. Like us, the authors emphasize
that heterogeneity in the financial sector and compositional effects drive the dynamics
of aggregate risk. They use evolutionary dynamics tools however to characterize the
dynamics of the distribution of the wealth of bankers: good shocks raise the fraction of
wealth controlled by high risk takers and therefore increase aggregate risk taking in an
incomplete market environment. The converse holds for bad shocks. They do not study
(2018) show that in a cross section of countries, credit creation tends to me more elastic to decreases
in funding costs when the leverage distribution of the banking system is more skewed. For a model of
the deposit channel of monetary policy see Drechsler, Savov and Schnabl (2017).
9
Begenau and Landvoigt (2017) present a quantitative model of banks and shadow banks to analyse
optimal banking regulation.
10
Their modelling strategy and ours are however very different and so are the implications of the
two models. In particular in their set-up there is a backward bending demand curve for loans; not in
ours. They also do not model monetary policy, nor the cross-section of banks leverage, which is a key
variable for us.

6

the interaction between low rates (monetary policy) and financial stability. On the
empirical side, our work relates to recent work by Koijen and Yogo (2019) who develop
and test models where heterogeneity across institutional investors is an important driver
of asset pricing.
Our model of financial intermediation has several advantages. First, it embeds an
endogenous risk-taking channel in general equilibrium and therefore allows to study
the usual expansionary effect of monetary policy jointly with its effect on financial
stability. Second, it is able to generate periods of low risk premium which coincide
with periods of high endogenous macroeconomic risk. These periods also correspond to
high levels of investment and inflated asset prices due to stronger risk-shifting motives.
The model also generates credit booms driven by high expected productivity, which
do not increase financial fragility. Third, the model opens the door to a vast array of
empirical tests based on microeconomic data on banks, shadow banks, asset managers,
etc... Indeed, the heterogeneity can in principle be matched to data on the leverage
behavior of financial intermediaries or business lines within them.11
Section 2 of the paper describes the model. Section 3 presents the main results in
partial equilibrium to build intuition. Section 4 shows the general equilibrium results
and the response to monetary policy and productivity shocks. Section 5 looks at some
illustrative empirical evidence for the cross-sectional implications of the model. The
effect of large negative productivity shocks and the case of financial crises with costly
intermediary default is analyzed in section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2

The Model

The general equilibrium model is composed of a representative risk-averse household
who faces an intertemporal consumption saving decision, a continuum of risk-neutral,
heterogeneous financial intermediaries, and a stylized central bank and government.
There is aggregate uncertainty, in the form of productivity and monetary policy shocks.
Given the heterogeneity in bank balance sheets that the model features, this will lead
11

Our model attempts to perform in macro-finance something similar to what Melitz (2003) has
done in international trade by relating aggregate outcomes to underlying microeconomic heterogeneity.
We are not aware of any other paper in the macro-finance literature that pursues a similar aim.

7

to heterogeneity in default risk in the intermediation sector.

2.1

Households and the production sector

The representative household has an infinite horizon and consumes a final good CtH .
She finances her purchases using labour income Wt and returns from a savings portfolio.
We assume that the household has a fixed labour supply and does not invest directly
in the capital stock Kt .12 She can either save using a one-to-one storage technology
StH and/or deposit DtH with financial intermediaries at interest rate rtD . The return on
deposits RtD ≡ 1 + rtD is risk-free and guaranteed by the government. Intermediaries
use deposits, along with inside equity ωit , to invest in capital and storage. In Section 4
we will introduce monetary policy as a source of wholesale funding. Monetary policy
will therefore affect the weighted average cost of funds for intermediaries.
The production function combines labour and capital in a typical Cobb-Douglas
function. Since labour supply is fixed, we normalize it to 1. Output Yt is produced
according to the following technology:
θ
Yt = Zt Kt−1
L1−θ
t

(1)

where Zt represents total factor productivity and θ the capital share of output. Given
θ−1
Lt = 1 in equilibrium, firm maximization implies that wages Wt = (1 − θ)Zt Kt−1
. We
will introduce some idiosyncratic risk to financial intermediation, so the return on a
θ−1
unit of capital will be intermediary specific RitK = θZit Kt−1
+ (1 − δ) (more on this
later).
12

Given households are risk-averse and intermediaries are risk neutral (and engage in risk-shifting),
relaxing the assumption households cannot invest directly would make no difference to their portfolio
in equilibrium unless all intermediaries are constrained. There are also little hedging properties in
the asset, since the correlation of the shock to returns with wage income is positive. In the numerical
exercises it is never the case that all intermediaries are constrained as some choose not to leverage, so
to simplify notation and clarify the household problem, we assume directly that only intermediaries
can invest in the risky capital stock.

8

The household program can be written as follows:
max

{Ct ,StH ,DtH }
CtH

+

DtH

∞
t=0

E0

∞
X

β t u(CtH )

s.t.

(2)

t=0

H
H
+ StH = RtD Dt−1
+ St−1
+ Wt − Tt

∀t

(3)

where β is the subjective discount factor and u(.) the period utility function. Tt are
lump sum taxes and StH are savings invested in the one-to-one storage technology. Note
that the return on deposits is risk-free despite the possibility of intermediary default.
The reason is that deposits are guaranteed by the government, which may need to
raise taxes Tt in the event intermediaries cannot cover their liabilities. Households
understand that the higher the leverage of intermediaries, the more likely it is for them
to be taxed in the future. However, they do not internalize this in their individual
portfolio decisions since each household cannot by itself change aggregate deposits nor
the expectation of future taxes.
The return on storage is also risk-free, which implies that households will be
indifferent between deposits and storage if and only if RtD = 1. Therefore, they will
not save in the form of deposits if RtD < 1 and will not invest in storage if RtD > 1. In
equilibrium, the deposit rate will be bounded from below by the unity return on storage,
implying that RtD ≥ 1. In the case RtD = 1, the deposit quantity will be determined by
financial intermediary demand, with the remaining household savings being allocated
to storage.

2.2

Financial intermediaries

The financial sector is composed of two-period financial intermediaries which fund
themselves through inside equity and household deposits13 . They use these funds to
invest in the aggregate risky capital stock and/or in the riskless one-to-one storage
technology. Intermediaries are risk neutral agents who maximize expected second period
consumption subject to a Value-at-Risk constraint. They also benefit from limited
13

We will extend the funding options to include wholesale funding, whose cost is influenced by
monetary policy, in section 4. The economy in our benchmark case does not feature an interbank
market or other funding possibilities. We relax this assumption and allow for interbank market in
Appendix E. Qualitative results are unchanged.

9

liability. To capture the diversity of risk attitudes among financial intermediaries, we
assume that they are heterogeneous in αi , the maximal probability their return on
equity is negative according to their Value-at-Risk (VaR) constraint. αi is exogenously
given and is the key parameter in the VaR constraint. This probability varies across
intermediaries and is continuously distributed according to the measure G(αi ) with
αi ∈ [α, α].
The balance sheet of intermediary i at the end of period t is as follows:
Assets

Liabilities

kit
sit

ωit
dit

where kit are the shares of the aggregate capital stock held by intermediary i, sit the
amount of storage held, dit the deposit amount contracted at interest rate rtD , and ωit
the inside equity. At the beginning of the next period, aggregate and idiosyncratic
shocks are revealed and the net cash flow πi,t+1 is:
K
πi,t+1 = Ri,t+1
kit + sit − RtD dit

(4)

K
Intermediary return on capital Ri,t+1
is risky and depends on the ex-post productivity
of the capital held by the intermediary. It features an idiosyncratic and an aggregate
productivity component. With probability ζ, the intermediary is hit by a negative
idiosyncratic shock and its capital fails to produce anything, although it still recovers
undepreciated capital at t + 1. With probability (1 − ζ) it is not hit by the negative
K
idiosyncratic shock.14 We can then describe idiosyncratic returns Ri,t+1
as follows:

(
K
Ri,t+1

=

1−δ
with probability ζ
θ−1
θZ̃t+1 Kt + (1 − δ) with probability 1 − ζ

(5)

where Z̃t is the aggregate component and can be interpreted as the productivity of
capital conditional on no idiosyncratic shock. ζ is a measure of idiosyncratic risk. The
14

We can think of ζ as an operational risk shock. It is mainly introduced for computational purposes
in order to ensure that the lowest (positive) probabilities of default of leveraged intermediaries are
never numerically indistinguishable from zero.

10

aggregate component follows a simple AR(1) process in logs
log Z̃t+1 = (1 − ρz )µz + ρz log Z̃t + εzt+1
εzt+1 ∼ N (0, σz )

(6)
(7)

εzt is the shock to the log of exogenous productivity (conditional on no idiosyncratic
shock) with persistence ρz and standard deviation σz . µz is a scaling parameter such
that E(Z) = E(Z̃(1 − ζ)) = 1. Let F (zt ) be the cumulative distribution function
(cdf) of exp(zt ), a notation which will be convenient later. Expected return on capital
 K 
 K 
will be equal across intermediaries and we define E Rt+1
≡ E Ri,t+1
. Differences
in willingness to pay for shares of the capital stock will however arise in the presence
of heterogeneous default risk and limited liability, generating an intermediary-specific
option value of default.
2.2.1

Value-at-Risk constraint

Financial intermediaries are assumed to be constrained by a Value-at-Risk condition (VaR). This condition imposes that intermediary i invests in such a way that
the probability its return on equity is negative must be smaller than an exogenous
intermediary-specific parameter αi .15 The VaR constraint for intermediary i can then
be written as:
Pr(πi,t+1 < ωit ) ≤ αi

(8)

The probability that the net cash flow is smaller than starting equity ωit must
be less or equal than αi . This constraint follows the spirit of the Basel Agreements,
which aim at limiting downside risk and preserving an equity cushion. Furthermore,
Value-at-Risk techniques are used by banks and other financial intermediaries (for
example asset managers) to manage risk internally. When binding, it also has the
property of generating procyclical leverage, which can be observed in the data for some
15

Alternatively we could posit that the threshold is at a calibrated non-zero return on equity. There
is a mapping between the distribution G(αi ) and such a threshold, so for any value we could find a
G̃(αi ) that would make the two specifications equivalent given expected returns. We decide to use the
current one as it reduces the parameter space.

11

intermediaries as described in Geanakoplos (2011) and Adrian and Shin (2014) when
equity is measured at book value. Using a panel of European and US commercial and
investment banks Kalemli-Özcan, Sorensen and Yesiltas (2012) also provide evidence
of procyclical leverage while emphasizing cross-sectional variations across types of
intermediaries.
Heterogeneity in the parameter of the VaR constraint can be rationalized in different
ways. It could be understood as reflecting different risk management practices or
differentiated implementation of regulatory requirements by different supervisors. For
example, the Basel Committee undertook a review of the consistency of risk weights
used when calculating how much capital a sample of banks put aside for precisely defined
portfolio. When given a diversified test portfolio the banks surveyed produced a wide
range of results in terms of modelled VaR and gave answers ranging from 13 million to
33 million euros in terms of capital requirement with a median of about 18 million (see
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) p.52). Some of the differences are due
to different models used, some to different discretionary requirements by supervisors
and some to different risk appetites, as ”Basel standards deliberately allow banks and
supervisors some flexibility in measuring risks in order to accommodate for differences
in risk appetite and local practices” (p.7). As a matter of fact, Figure 15 shows that
leverage is highly heterogeneous in the cross-section of financial intermediaries.
2.2.2

Intermediary investment problem

We assume that the risk neutral intermediaries live for two periods, receive a
constant endowment of equity ωit = ω in the first and consume their net worth in the
second. This assumption of constant equity is a simplifying assumption but we find
that book value equity is indeed very sticky in the data. We show in Figure 11 the
almost one-for-one correlation between changes in the size of debt and assets at book
value, for a very broad sample of banks using Bankscope data. Figure 11 also shows the
stickiness of book value equity relative to assets and debt. Balance sheet expansions
and contractions tend to be done through changes in debt and not through movements
in equity. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) present remarkable evidence on
the time series of bank long-term assets, short-term debt and equity as a percentage of
GDP for the US. We replicate their findings and show in Figure 12 a strong correlation
12

between long-term assets and short term debt (0.994) and a far smaller one between
equity and assets (0.283). In addition, if we detrend the series, the correlations are,
respectively, 0.972 and -0.02174 so still very high for assets and debt but virtually
zero between equity and assets. Furthermore the magnitudes of long term assets and
short term debt are comparable throughout, highlighting the central role of leverage
in funding investment in the economy. The macro-finance literature often focuses on
the dynamics of net worth, assuming a representative agent (see e.g. Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2015)), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He and Krishnamurthy (2014),
Jermann and Quadrini (2012)) and abstracting from the cross sectional differences in
intermediaries. We take a complementary approach. To highlight the novel nature
of our mechanism, we instead assume constant equity, thus abstracting from the net
worth channel and putting a sharp focus on the effects generated by the heterogeneous
dynamics of leverage in the cross-section.
When the net cash flow πi,t is positive, it is consumed by financial intermediary i
and we denote its consumption by cit .16 When the net cash flow is negative, cit = 0
and the intermediary defaults. Government steps in to repay depositors as it upholds
deposit insurance. This is a pure transfer, funded by a lump sum tax on households.
Hence, in our model, households are forward-looking and do intertemporal optimization
while most of the action in the intermediation sector comes from heterogenous leverage
and risk taking in the cross-section. This two-period modeling choice is made for
simplicity and allows us to focus on the role of different leverage responses across
financial intermediaries17 .
Each intermediary has to decide whether it participates or not in the market for
risky assets or invests in the storage technology (participating intermediary versus nonparticipating intermediary) and, conditionally on participating, whether it uses deposits
to lever up (risky intermediary) or just invests its own equity (safe intermediary). Note
that this label of risky or safe is based on the possibility (or not) of defaulting on
lenders, not in terms of the volatility of their return on assets or equity. These will only
be risk free for non-participating ones, which invest only in storage. In Appendix E, we
16

When intermediary j is inactive, then cjt = ω as the return of the storage technology is one.
Other papers in the literature have used related assumptions, for example exogenous death of
intermediaries in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015).
17

13

show that an alternative model where intermediaries can choose to lend to each other
as an outside option has very similar implications.18
Intermediaries are assumed to be (constrained) risk-neutral price takers, operating
in a competitive environment. Each maximizes consumption over the next period by
picking kit (investment in risky assets) and sit (investment in the storage technology),
under its VaR constraint, while taking interest rates on deposits RtD and asset return
K
distributions Rt+1
(ε) as given. The program of each intermediary i is given by:
Vit = max Et (ci,t+1 )
s.t. Pr(πi,t+1 < ωit ) ≤ αi

(9)
(10)

kit + sit = ωit + dit

(11)

ci,t+1 = max (0, πi,t+1 )

(12)

K
kit + sit − RtD dit
πi,t+1 = Ri,t+1

where αi is the VaR threshold (the maximum probability of not being able to repay
stakeholders fully) and πi,t+1 the net cash flow.
Intermediaries can also choose to stay out of capital markets and not participate.
In this case, they have the outside option of investing all their equity in the storage
technology and collect it at the beginning of the next period. The value function of a
non-participating intermediary investing in the outside option is:
VitO = V O = ω
2.2.3

(13)

Limited liability

The presence of limited liability truncates the profit function at zero, generating an
option value of default that intermediaries can exploit. For a given expected value of
returns, a higher variance increases the option value of default as intermediaries benefit
from the upside but do not suffer from the downside. For a given choice of kit and dit
18

In Appendix E, we consider a standard centralized market for intermediary borrowing. For a
model of financial stability issues arising from banking networks see Aldasoro, Gatti and Faia (2017).

14

we have that:
Et [max(0, πi,t+1 )] ≥ Et [πi,t+1 ]

(14)

with the inequality being strict whenever the probability of default is strictly positive.
Deposit insurance transfers tit happen when the net cash flow is negative and are given
by:
tit+1 = max (0, −πt+1 )

(15)

The max operator selects the appropriate case depending on whether intermediary i can
repay its liabilities or not. If it can, then deposits repayments are lower than return on
assets and deposit insurance transfers are zero. Total intermediary consumption CtI and
aggregate transfers/taxes Tt are given by integrating over the mass of intermediaries:
CtI

Z
=
Z

Tt =

cit dG(αi )

(16)

tit dG(αi )

(17)

For now we assume default is costless in the sense that there is no deadweight loss when
the government is required to pay deposit insurance. In section 6, we will drop the
assumption of costless default by having a more general setup that allows for a lower
return on assets held by defaulting intermediaries.

2.3

Investment strategies and financial market equilibrium

Financial intermediaries are price takers, therefore the decision of each one depends
only on the expected return on assets (taking into account limited liability) and the
cost of liabilities. Since the mass of each intermediary is zero, individual balance sheet
size does not affect returns on the aggregate capital stock. Intermediary i will be a
participating intermediary in the market for risky assets whenever Vit ≥ V O . This
condition determines entry and exit into the market for risky capital endogenously.
There is however another important endogenous decision. Intermediaries which
participate in the market for risky assets have to choose whether to lever up and, if
15

they do, by how much. We will refer to the decision to lever up or not, i.e. to enter the
market for deposits as the extensive margin. We will refer to the decision regarding
how much to lever up as the intensive margin. Financial intermediaries which lever up
are risky intermediaries. Financial intermediaries which participate in the market for
risky capital but do not lever up are safe intermediaries.
K
Proposition 2.1 When E[Rt+1
] ≥ 1, participating intermediary i will either lever up
to its VaR constraint or not raise deposits at all.

Proof: See Appendix B.
Proposition 2.1 states that if the return to risky capital is higher in expectation
than the return on the storage technology then whenever an intermediary decides to
lever up, it will do so up to its VaR constraint and will not invest in storage. Hence all
risky intermediaries will be operating at their constraint.
K
When expected return on risky capital is smaller than return on storage: E[Rt+1
] < 1,
it might still be the case that capital is preferred to storage in equilibrium by some
intermediaries due to limited liability. We would then have equilibria in which some
intermediaries invest in storage and possibly some of the most risk-taking ones leverage
up a lot taking advantage of the option value of default. In what follows we focus on
K
cases where E[Rt+1
] ≥ 1 which is always the case in our simulations.
2.3.1

Intensive margin and endogenous leverage

e
Let Zt+1
≡ Et (Z̃t+1 ), an expectation known at t. For a participating intermediary i
deciding to lever up, the VaR condition will bind (see Proposition 2.1):

 i

Pr πt+1
≤ ω = αi

(18)

Hence, after some straightforward algebra, we obtain the following:
"
ζ + (1 − ζ) Pr e

εzt+1

≤

ω D
r
kit t
θ−1
e
θZt+1
Kt

rtD + δ −

16

#
= αi

(19)

The leverage λit of an active intermediary is given by:
λit ≡

kit
rtD


=
θ−1 −1 αi −ζ
ω
D
e
rt − θZt+1 Kt F
+δ
1−ζ

(20)

where we defined leverage as assets over equity and F −1 as the inverse cdf of the
i −ζ
z
technology shock eεt+1 evaluated at probability α1−ζ
. Note that intermediaries with
αi < ζ will never participate.

i −ζ
i
e
− δ be the ex-post return on capital for which the
Let rtα ≡ θZt+1
Ktθ−1 F −1 α1−ζ
return on equity of risky intermediary αi is zero. The expression above can then be
simply written as:
rtD
λit = D
(21)
i
rt − rtα
This expression for leverage is only true when the constraint is binding for risky
intermediary αi . In equilibrium, decreasing marginal returns to K ensure that the
denominator is always positive. Otherwise the constraint would not be binding and
i
risky intermediaries would increase K, which in turn would reduce rtα .
Proposition 2.2 For a participating intermediary i, the leverage λit has the following
properties: it is increasing in αi , decreasing in the cost of funds rtD and increasing
∂ 2 λit
e
in expected marginal productivity of capital θZt+1
Ktθ−1 . Furthermore, ∂(r
D )2 > 0 and
∂ 2 λit
∂rtD ∂αi

t

< 0.

Proof: Immediate from Equation (20) and given the monotonicity of the cdf and
the shape of F −1 ().
Proposition 2.2 implies that, from the perspective of a participating individual
intermediary (i.e. absent general equilibrium effects on Kt ), leverage will be decreasing
in the cost of funds rtD . For a given balance sheet size, decreasing the cost of liabilities
increases expected net cash flows and thus decreases the probability of distress. From 2.1,
intermediaries would then choose to increase leverage until their probability of distress
hits the VaR constraint. Furthermore, when interest rates are low the probability of
default is lower ceteris paribus. In that region, the pdf is flatter therefore increases
in leverage translate into small increases in probability of distress. This means that
17

intermediaries can increase leverage by sizable amounts until they hit the VaR constraint.
So the lower rtD , the stronger the intensive margin effect. Similarly for high α (looser
constraints) leverage can be increased a lot before the constraint is hit. Therefore the
leverage of the most risk-taking intermediaries will react more to interest rate changes.
Generally, intermediary leverage will also be decreasing
 i in the volatility of the
−ζ
is increasing in σz ,
productivity shocks σz . This will be true whenever F −1 α1−ζ
implying realistically that the probability of a negative return on equity is (ceteris
paribus) increasing in the volatility of returns.
2.3.2

Extensive margin and endogenous leverage

We now focus on the extensive margin, that is to say whether intermediaries who
participate in risky capital markets choose to lever up using deposits or not.19
Let V L denote the value function of risky intermediaries who decide to lever up
using deposits and V N the value function of the safe ones who only invest at most
their equity in the risky capital stock. We denote by Eit the expectation of a financial
intermediary taking into account limited liability (expectation truncated at zero).
K
VitL = Eit [Ri,t+1
kit − RtD dit ]

(22)

K
VitN = Et [Ri,t+1
]kitN + ω − kitN

(23)

with kitN ∈ {0, ω}. Since there is no risk of defaulting on deposits if you have none,
there is no option value of default for non-levered intermediaries. This N group could
potentially also include intermediaries who invest only a fraction of their equity in the
capital stock. Given our choice of VaR constraint, safe intermediaries will either invest
ω in the capital stock or not at all.20
We can then use the condition VitL = VitN to find the cut-off value αtL = αtj for
19

Intermediaries can also decide not to invest in risky capital markets and instead to use the storage
technology. If they do so, then their value function is V O = ω given the unit return to storage and
linear utility.


i
1−α
−ζ
20
Note that the VaR condition of a safe intermediary can be written as Pr eεt+1 < δK
≤ α1−ζ
.
e
θZt+1
Since this is not a function of kit , the inequality will either be true and the intermediary will invest up
to ω, or it won’t and he cannot invest any amount in the capital stock without violating it. Note also
that the inequality is always false for αi < ζ.

18

which intermediary j is indifferent between leveraging up or not. Above αtL (looser VaR
constraints), all intermediaries will be levered up to their respective constraints and do
not invest in storage as shown in Proposition 2.1. For any levered intermediary i, we
have:


 K 
K
Eit kit Ri,t+1
− RtD dit ≥ ω Et Rt+1

(24)

where the left hand side is the expected payoff on the assets of intermediary i and
the right hand side is the expected payoff when it invests only its equity ω in capital
markets. Using the balance sheet equation kit = dit + ω, we can substitute for deposits,
which leads to the following condition:



 K 
K
Eit kit Ri,t+1
− RtD + RtD ω ≥ ω Et Rt+1

(25)

For the marginal intermediary j, equation (25) holds with equality:

 K 


K
Ejt kjt Rj,t+1
− RtD + RtD ω = ω Et Rt+1

(26)

Since all risky intermediaries will be at the constraint, we can combine equation (26)
with equation (20) evaluated at the marginal intermediary (whose VaR parameter is
 K 
e
αtL ). Moreover, Et Rt+1
is a function of Zt+1
and Kt but is independent of i. Therefore
equation (26) and equation (20) jointly define an implicit function of the threshold VaR
e
parameter αtL (= αj ) with variables (rtD , Zt+1
, Kt ).
Hence we have the following result:
Proposition 2.3 There exists a cut-off value αtL in the distribution of VaR parameters
such that all intermediaries with VaR constraints looser than the cut-off will borrow to
leverage up to their constraint. All intermediaries with VaR constraints tighter than the
cut-off will choose to not leverage. Equations (26) and (20) define an implicit function
e
of the threshold αtL = A(rtD , Zt+1
, Kt ).

19

2.3.3

Financial market equilibrium and deposit demand curve

To close the financial market equilibrium, we need to use the market clearing
condition. The aggregate capital stock of the economy is equal to the total investment
in risky projects by all intermediaries.
Z

α

Kt =

kit dG(αi )

(27)

α

This integral can be divided into capital held by risky levered intermediaries (above
αtL ) and capital held by safe intermediaries who do not lever up but invest all their
equity in the capital stock (between αtN and αtL ). Below αtN all intermediaries invest all
their equity in storage.
For safe intermediaries who invest
 1−θall their equity in capital shares, the VaR
δK
≤ αi . We can pin down αtN by looking at
constraint is given by ζ + (1 − ζ)F θZte
t+1
the marginal safe intermediary for whom the constraint binds exactly.
αtN


= ζ + (1 − ζ)F

δKt1−θ
e
θZt+1


(28)

In equilibrium, the market clearing condition for K can then be written as:
Z

α

Kt =
αL
t



kit dG(αi ) + G(αtL ) − G(αtN ) ω

(29)

Where kit is given by the asset purchases of risky intermediaries described in equation
(20). Along with the expression for αtN in equation (28), the market clearing equation
e
e
(29) defines an implicit function of (αtL , rtD , Zt+1
, Kt ). Since Zt+1
is determined at t by
state variables and intermediaries are price takers, the financial market clearing function
e
together with the implicit function αtL = A(rtD , Zt+1
, Kt ) pin down the aggregate capital
stock Kt and the marginal levered intermediary αtL , for a given deposit rate rtD and
e
expected productivity Zt+1
.
Together they determine the aggregate demand curve for deposits as a function of
deposit rates and expected productivity. By pinning down (αL , K), they also determine
e
the entire distribution of leverage in the financial sector for a given (rtD , Zt+1
). In

20

general equilibrium, the deposit rate rtD will be determined in conjunction with the
aggregate deposit supply curve coming from the recursive household problem described
in section 4.

2.4

Measuring Financial Stability

The model establishes an important relation between funding costs and the crosssectional distribution of risk taking by financial intermediaries. Financial stability is a
multidimensional object depending on time-varying distributions of leverage and risk
taking which are functions of present and future states. For expositional purposes, we
summarize this object into a few simple but relevant measures of financial instability in
order to track its evolution.
Our baseline measure M 1 is the probability that in the next period all leveraged
intermediaries will be in distress, defined as the inability to repay in full their stakeholders
(deposits and equity). This has a very direct link with the Value-at-Risk constraint, as
for each levered intermediary the probability of distress will be simply the parameter
αi . Given aggregate shocks by definition affect all intermediaries, then Mt1 = αtL . If the
least risk-taking leveraged intermediary is in distress, so must all the intermediaries
with higher leverage.21 In the model, a rise in αtL (meaning that the marginal entrant
has a looser Value-at-Risk constraint) is then a fall in financial stability according to
M 1 . The baseline measure has the advantage of not only describing the risk of the
whole sector but also of tracking the marginal investor in financial markets an important
concept in leverage cycles, as highlighted by Geanakoplos (2011).
The model features significant risk-shifting behavior, as levered financial intermediaries take advantage of limited liability and the option value of default. Moreover, the
riskier the intermediary, the larger will be their option value of default. To have a sense
of aggregate distortions to investment caused by risk-shifting, we calculate a Weighted
Option Value of Default by weighing each intermediary’s option value of default by
their total assets. This measure M 2 can therefore be interpreted as the average option
value of default per unit of capital in the economy.
21

More precisely, in the presence of idiosyncratic shocks M 1 would be an affine transformation of αtL ,
with Mt1 = ζ + (1 − ζ)αtL . Given this transformation is time-invariant, for simplicity we set M 1 = αtL
even in the case with idiosyncratic shocks.

21

In the following sections we will use measures M 1 and M 2 to track the dynamics of
financial stability in response to monetary and productivity shocks.22

3

Partial equilibrium results

To provide a better illustration of the financial sector mechanics in the model, we
first show a set of partial equilibrium results taking as given the deposit rate, before
moving on to general equilibrium in section 4 where the household problem will close the
model. From now on we study the properties of the model using numerical simulations.23
We begin by analysing the distribution of intermediary leverage conditional on the
e
. In Figure 1, we show an example
deposit rates rtD and on expected productivity Zt+1
of the cross-sectional distribution of leverage for three different values of the deposit
rate. The calibration of the model is discussed in more detail in section 4.
In the three cases, the area below each line24 is proportional to the aggregate capital
R
stock Kt = kit dG(αi ). The vertical line showing a drop in leverage marks the
cut-off and identifies the marginal levered intermediary αtL . To the left of the cut-off
αtL , intermediaries are not levered, which corresponds to the more conservative VaR
constraints. They are the safe intermediaries. To the right of the cut-off, leverage
and balance sheet size kit increase with αti . That is, the more risk-taking is the
e
. Those are
intermediary, the larger will be its balance sheet for a given rtD and Zt+1
risky intermediaries.
The graph illustrates how the intensive and extensive margins affect leverage and
the aggregate capital stock as the deposit interest rate changes. For the three cases
displayed, as deposit rates fall, the intensive margin for the most risky intermediaries
is always increasing. That is, for each such intermediary that is levered up, the balance
sheet grows when the cost of funds falls. For a given balance sheet size, a lower rate
would reduce the probability of default as it reduces the amount that needs to be
22

Given that we can describe the whole cross-sectional distribution of leverage and intermediary risk
we can also use a range of potential alternative measures. We highlight this point by providing 3 other
measures in Appendix C.
23
We performed many different calibrations but only report a few. Results (available upon request)
are qualitatively robust across simulations.
24
Assuming a uniform distribution for G(αi ) as in the baseline calibration. The details of the
numerical method to solve the model are given in Appendix A.

22

Interest Rates
High

λit − 1

Medium
Low

α

αL

αi

α

Figure 1: Cross-sectional distribution of leverage λit as a function of the VaR parameter αi

repaid next period. This relaxes the VaR constraint, so intermediaries at the top of the
distribution expand their balance sheet up to the new limit and grow in size.
Perhaps less intuitively, the effect for intermediaries in the middle of the distribution
and on the extensive margin is ambiguous. One would expect that a fall in interest
rate would lead to entry by more risk averse intermediaries. This is what happens
when one goes from a high level of interest rate to a medium level of interest rate
(the cut-off moves to the left). But this is no longer the case when one moves from a
medium level of interest rate to a low level of interest rate: the cut-off moves to the
right. Depending on the level of interest rates, a fall in interest rates can lead to more
or fewer intermediaries choosing to lever up. We explain below this strong non-linearity
of the effect of interest rates on financial stability and the leverage of intermediaries in
the middle of the distribution.

23

3.1

Non-linear trade-off between increased output and financial stability

Following a fall in deposit rates, the riskier intermediaries expand their asset holdings
raising the aggregate capital stock. This lowers the return on risky asset holdings due
to decreasing returns to (aggregate) capital. As seen in the graph above, there are very
interesting asymmetries depending on the level of the interest rate.
When the interest rate level is high, the lower cost of liabilities reduces the probability
of default for a given balance sheet size. Hence all intermediaries with a risky business
model are able to lever more (intensive margin). In this case, there are also positive
returns for the (previously) marginal intermediary due to the now lower cost of leverage.
More intermediaries can lever up and enter the market for deposits (extensive margin),
reducing the cut-off αL . The financial system then becomes less risky since newly
entered intermediaries have a stricter VaR constraint. There is therefore no trade-off
between using lower interest rates to stimulate investment and financial stability.
When the interest rate level is low, the intensive margin effect of a decrease in the
interest rate is strong (see Proposition 2.2), leverage and investment are high and the
curvature of the production function leads to a decrease in expected asset returns which
is large enough to price out of the market the most risk averse of the previously levered
intermediaries. The sign of the effect on αL depends on whether the fall in asset returns
is stronger than the fall in the cost of liabilities. In the case of initially low interest rates,
a further fall (in those rates) leads to fewer intermediaries choosing to lever up. The
intermediaries remaining are larger and more risk taking on average. There is therefore
a clear trade-off between an expansionary monetary policy (that lowers funding costs)
and financial stability.
In order to gain some intuition, we can look at two polar cases. In the first, aggregate
K
capital is infinitely elastic and return distributions Rt+1
(ε) are fixed. In this case, a
decrease in the cost of funding can only lead to entry as the (previously) marginal
intermediary will now make positive profits. The cut-off falls and there is no tradeoff. In the second example, aggregate capital is fixed and returns adjust to clear the
market25 . If a fall in the cost of funding allows more leverage from the more risk-taking
25

In this case, the price of capital will adjust as it is no longer pinned down by the investment

24

intermediaries, then it must be that the (previously) marginal intermediary no longer
holds capital and returns fall enough to price him out. In this case, there will always
be a trade-off. In intermediate cases, the strength of the intensive margin effect is
important as it determines the extent to which returns fall due to decreasing returns in
the aggregate capital stock. The stronger is this effect (i.e. the more leverage increases
following a fall in interest rates or the more interest-elastic the intermediaries are),
the more likely a trade-off will be present. As stated in Proposition 2.2, leverage
increases faster as the interest rate falls (conditional on being levered). This means the
intensive margin effect is particularly strong when interest rates are low. Proposition
2.2 also states that leverage reacts more, the more risk-taking is the intermediary
implying additionally that the most risk-taking intermediaries grow faster. This leads
to additional skewness in the cross-sectional distribution of leverage.
Hence, as shown in Figure 1, when interest rates fall from high to medium to
low, balance sheets become more heterogeneous in size and the difference between the
most leveraged and the least leveraged intermediary rises. We highlight the following
properties of our model:
1) Heterogeneity, skewness of leverage and aggregate investment
In Figure 2, the left panel plots the cut-off αtL as a function of deposit rates rtD
for three different productivity levels, while the middle panel does the same for the
aggregate capital stock Kt . Kt is monotonically decreasing with rtD . As expected,
the lower is the interest rate, the higher will be aggregate investment and we have a
standard deposit demand curve. However, the change in financial structure underlying
the smooth response in the capital stock is non-monotonic. As we can see from the left
panel, the cut-off αtL first decreases when we go from high interest rates to lower ones
and then goes up sharply as we approach zero. There is a change in the composition of
intermediaries. Less risk-taking intermediaries reduce their exposure and decrease asset
holdings as they are priced out by more risk-taking institutions due to decreasing returns
to capital. The latter use low interest rates to increase their leverage significantly.
technology. For recent macroeconomic models in which extensive and intensive margin have interesting
interactions (albeit in very different contexts) see Martin and Ventura (2015) and Bergin and Corsetti
(2015).

25

Productivity

Productivity

0

rD

0

Low
Medium
High

Skewness

K

αLt

Low
Medium
High

rD

0

rD

Figure 2: Cut-off level αtL and aggregate capital stock as a function of deposit rates rtD

The lower is the interest rate, the more heterogeneous is leverage across intermediaries. Since the intensive margin of high αi intermediaries responds more than low
αi , when interest rates are low there is an increased concentration of assets in the
most risk-taking intermediaries. Also, a fall in the extensive margin is more likely
at low rates, which amplifies this effect. In the right panel of Figure 2 we show the
cross-sectional skewness of leverage is a decreasing function of the interest rate. The
concentration of assets in riskier intermediaries generates more risk-shifting in aggregate.
Hence, similar aggregate investment outcomes can be supported by different underlying
financial structures with very different implications for financial stability.
2) Trade-off between financial stability and economic activity
When interest rates are high, a fall in interest rates leads to entry by less risk-taking
intermediaries (a fall in the cut-off αtL ) into levered markets. But when interest rates
are low, a fall in interest rates leads to a rise in the cut-off αtL , which means the least
risk-taking intermediaries reduce their exposure to the risky asset through deleveraging,
while the more risk-taking intermediaries increase their balance sheet size and leverage.
We illustrate this point in our partial equilibrium setting by doing a 100 basis points
monetary expansion for different target rates. As we will see in section 4, these results
carry on to the general equilibrium setting. For this experiment, we assume a very

26

simple monetary policy rule:
ν
Rt = Rt−1
R̄1−ν εR
t

(30)

where Rt = 1 + rtD is the return on deposit or the cost of leverage for intermediaries. εR
t
is a monetary policy shock and ν is the persistence of the shock, calibrated26 to 0.24.
R̄ is the long-run level of interest rates therefore each of the lines above is calibrated to
a different R̄. For simplicity, in this simple partial equilibrium exercise, we assume that
the monetary authority can directly affect the deposit rate. We relax this assumption
in section 4 and show how it can be mapped into this exercise.
Cutoff αLt

Output

Leverage (active banks)
Target Rates

40

0.6

High

4
0.4
3

Medium
Low

30

0.2
20

0
2
−0.2
1

10

−0.4
0

−0.6
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

2

4

6

8

10

12

2

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 3: Partial equilibrium IRF to a 100 basis points fall in deposit rates. Scale in percentage
point deviations from the baseline

Results can be seen in Figure 3, plotted as percentage changes from their respective
values at target rates R̄.27 The time period corresponds to one year and the state of the
economy when the shock hits is the one corresponding to the target rates. In the left
graph we see that the rise in output is relatively insensitive to the level of the target
interest rate. The behaviour of the cut-off αtL is, however, very differentiated. When the
target rates are high, there is a negative effect of a monetary expansion on the cut-off.
26

Annualized value as estimated by Curdia et al. (2015)
Note that there is no truly dynamic aspect in the partial equilibrium model and it can be seen
as a sequence of static problems. The general equilibrium model of section 4 will feature a fully
dynamic household problem which affects the banking problem, since the household inter-temporal
maximization will determine the deposit supply curve and the equilibrium level of deposit rates.
27

27

That means that less risk-taking intermediaries enter risky markets and the average
probability of intermediary default falls. In this case, there is no trade-off between
financial stability and monetary expansion. This is definitely not the case when target
interest rates are low. In that case, average leverage of active banks increases massively
by 43% and the cut-off also rises. The large increase in leverage by very risk-taking
intermediaries then prices out the less risk-taking ones at the margin, raising the average
probability of default among levered intermediaries. This large effect on leverage is a
combination of both the intensive margin effect, and a composition effect due to exit of
the most risk averse intermediaries. For intermediate levels, we see that this effect is
muted, with leverage increasing only slightly and financial stability improving (cutoff
going down).
Hence, according to our baseline measure M 1 = αL of financial stability, there is a
trade-off between financial stability and monetary policy when interest rates are low,
but not when they are high.
The level of the interest rate matters since it affects the sensitivity of the intensive
margin to changes in the cost of funds. The fact that risk-taking intermediaries are
able to lever more during a monetary expansion can increase the capital stock while
pricing out of the market less risk-taking intermediaries. This means that the financial
sector becomes less stable, with risky assets concentrated in very large, more risk-taking
financial institutions. Hence, there is also potentially large mispricing of risk since the
riskier intermediaries are those who engage the most in risk-shifting (measured in the
aggregate by M2). Other measures of financial stability presented in Appendix C also
highlight the presence of an important trade-off which occurs only at low levels of the
interest rate.
We note all the effects described above regarding the dispersion and the cyclicality of
leverage, financial stability and aggregate risk-shifting can occur even in the absence of
monetary policy shocks. The cyclicality of the savings behaviour or of capital flows and
their effect on equilibrium deposit rates will also lead to cyclical movements in leverage
and investment. To understand this more fully, we now close the general equilibrium
model by adding the intertemporally optimizing household sector to determine the
deposit rate endogenously.

28

4

General Equilibrium

In this section, we solve the model in general equilibrium by joining the household
and intermediary problems. We show that the financial sector equilibrium can be
easily integrated in a standard dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework, with
monetary policy and productivity shocks. We introduce costly default in section 6.

4.1

Monetary policy as a change in the cost of external funds

In this section we allow intermediaries to fund themselves through wholesale funding
lit . We assume that the monetary authority can control the rate of wholesale funding
relative to deposits, by providing funds at a spread γt from deposits.28 . Wholesale
funding is remunerated at rate RtL = 1 + rtL and we denote the deposit rate rtD as before.
We assume that:
RtL = RtD (1 − γt )

(31)

Monetary policy is exogenous, akin to a funding subsidy γt which follows a simple
AR(1) process in logs.
log γt = (1 − ργ )µγ + ργ log γt−1 + εγt
εγt

∼ N (0, σγ )

(32)
(33)

where µγ is the central bank target subsidy, ργ the subsidy’s persistence and εγ are
monetary policy shocks with σγ standard deviation.
If the central bank were to provide unlimited funds to intermediaries at this rate,
they would leverage using only wholesale funding. We assume that wholesale funding is
given in a fixed proportion χ of other liabilites, which in this case are simply deposits.
28

The monetary authority is assumed to be a deep-pocketed institution which can always fund
wholesale funding. Like deposits, wholesale funds are always repayed (by bailout if necessary). To
avoid dealing with the monetary authority’s internal asset management, we assume that the cost of
fund is a deadweight loss (or gain).

29

Total wholesale funding for intermediary i is then:
lit = χdit

(34)

The balance sheet of an intermediary i is then:
Assets

Liabilities

kit
sit

ω
dit
lit

Given our assumptions, we can then define RtF as the total cost of a unit of funding
and fit as total external funds of bank i.
RtF =

1 + χ(1 − γt ) D
Rt
1+χ

(35)

fit = (1 + χ)dit

(36)

The balance sheet can be rewritten as follows:
Assets

Liabilities

kit
sit

ω
fit

With external funds being remunerated at rate RtF . We obtain the same banking
problem as before, replacing deposits by total funds fit and the deposit rate by the unit
cost of funds RtF . We can solve as before by mapping fit and RtF easily into deposits
dit and their rate RtD . By moving γt the central bank will be able to change RtF as long
as changes in equilibrium RtD do not offset perfectly the changes in the spread on the
total cost of funding.

4.2

Solving the dynamic model

The financial sector equilibrium determines investment given funding costs RtF and
e
expected productivity Zt+1
. We can then solve for the aggregate capital stock K and

30

e
cut-off αtL as a function of RtF and expected productivity Zt+1
.

K = K ∗ (RF , Z e )

(37)

αL = αL,∗ (RF , Z e )

(38)

By integrating balance sheet equations, we obtain an expression for total funds Ft and
deposit supply Dt :
Z

α

Ft =
αL
t
Z α

Dt =

(kit − ω) dG(αi )
dit dG(αi ) =

αL
t

Ft
1+χ

(39)
(40)

R
where Ft = fit dG(αi ) are total liabilities held by leveraged intermediaries and Dt is
the aggregate deposit demand. Market clearing in the deposit market requires supply
and demand to be equal.
DtH = Dt

(41)

Goods market clearing requires that output is used in consumption of intermediaries and
households, investment and the accumulation of storage. The investment good is the
consumption good and there are no capital or investment adjustment costs29 . Aggregate
investment It is given by the law of motion of the capital stock Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + It .
The resource constraint of the economy is as follows:

H
I
St−1
+ St−1
+ Yt = CtH + CtI + StH + StI + It + TtL

(42)

R
R
R
L
where CtI = cit dG(αi ) and TtL = lit dG(αi ) − Rt−1
li,t−1 dG(αi ) is the net wholeR
sale funding. StH are the holdings of storage held by households and StI = sit dG(αi )
are aggregate storage holdings held by financial intermediaries at t.
Definition 2: Equilibrium.
29

We also do not constrain investment to be necessarily positive.

31

H
I
Let S = {Dt−1 , St−1
, St−1
, Kt−1 , Zt−1 , γt−1 , εzt , εγt }∞
t=0 be the vector of state variables
and shocks. Given a sequence of rates {rtD }∞
t=0 , monetary policy rule and financial
L
market rules K(S), α (S), S(S), let us define the optimal decisions of the representative
household as C H (S), DH (S), S H (S).

H
H
An equilibrium is a sequence of rates {rtD }∞
t=0 , and policy rules C (S), D (S),
S H (S), S I (S), K(S), αL (S), such that:

• C(S), DH (S), S H (S), S I (S), K(S), αtL (S) are optimal given {rtD }∞
t=0
• Asset and goods markets clear at every period t
In equilibrium, we need to find a deposit rate which, conditional on exogenous
variables and the financial sector equilibrium, is consistent with the household problem.
We proceed by iterating on rtD , imposing the financial market equilibrium results. For a
given deposit rate rtD , we find the law of motion for household wealth and consumption,
use the Euler equation errors to update the deposit rate and repeat until convergence.
A more detailed explanation of the algorithm used for our global solution method can
be seen in Appendix A.

4.3

Calibration

To solve the model numerically, we need to specify the period utility function,
the shape of the distribution of the VaR probabilities and calibrate the remaining
parameters. Given the interaction between extensive and intensive margin effects, the
mass of intermediaries in a given section of the distribution could have an important
role in determining which of the two effects dominates. To highlight that the results
described are not a consequence of this distribution, we assume that G(αi ) is uniform
between [0, α]. For the utility function, we assume a standard CRRA representation.
u(C) =

C 1−ψ − 1
1−ψ

(43)

The calibration can be seen in Table 1. For the utility function parameters, risk
aversion ψ, the subjective discount factor β, the TFP parameters ρz and σz we use
32

Table 1: Calibration of selected parameters

Parameter Value
ψ
4
β
0.96
z
ρ
0.9
σz
0.03
µγ
0.023
ργ
0.816
σγ
0.0128
χ
0.41
1+χ
θ
0.35
δ
0.1
ω
0.697
α
0.4961
ζ
0.01

Description
Risk aversion parameter
Subjective discount factor
AR(1) parameter for TFP
Standard deviation of TFP shock
Target spread over deposit rates
Spread persistence
Standard deviation of spread
Wholesale funding percentage
Capital share of output
Depreciation rate
Equity of intermediaries
Upper bound of distribution G(αi )
Idiosyncratic unproductive capital probability

standard values from the literature. Similarly for θ, the capital share of output, and for
δ the depreciation rate of the capital stock. To calibrate the monetary policy parameters,
we calculate the subsidy as the difference between the Effective Fed funds Rate and 1/β,
the long-run deposit rate. We then fit an AR(1) process to get the parameters used.
The wholesale funding percentage used to calibrate χ was calculated from the time
series mean of the cross-sectional asset-weighted average in Bankscope data30 for the
period 1993-2015. For the purpose of this calibration, wholesale funding was assumed
to be all non-deposit liabilities of each financial intermediary.
We calibrate α to match the probability of default of the median risky intermediary
when deposit rates are at steady-state. Using FDIC data on failed banks, we find
that the median age of failed banks in the US was around 20.5 years. The full sample
distribution of ages at failure can be seen in Figure 18. We then calibrate α to match a
default probability 5% for the median intermediary when RtD = 1/β. This also implies
a default probability for the riskiest intermediary α of 22%. Turan G. Bali, Stephen J.
Brown and Mustafa O. Caglayan (2014) report that the median lifespan of a hedge
30

Bankscope contains a large panel of financial intermediaries’ balance sheet data. See Appendix D.

33

fund is slightly less than 5 years, a value close to what our calibration implies for α.
ω is chosen to fit leverage at steady-state. Some of the intermediaries are leveraged
and others are not, so we cannot use only Bankscope data (which contains mostly
leveraged banks) to calibrate leverage. According to the ”broad measure” of Other
Financial Institutions (OFIs) in the Global Shadow Banking Report (Financial Stability
Board (2015)), non-levered intermediaries hold about 137 trillions of assets while banking
assets are around 135 trillion. We use these figures to calculate an asset-weighted average
of leverage of 7.3, which is reached by combining the Bankscope asset-weighted average
leverage of 13.5 for 2015 and assuming a leverage of 1 for the OFIs. We target our
calibration of ω so that the median risky intermediary matches this value.
The size of the equity endowment ω and the volatility of aggregate shocks σz will
also contribute to determine the financial sector reaction to changes in deposit rates.
For that reason, we also conducted some comparative statics on both σz and ω to
see how the model changes with those parameter calibrations. There is very little
effect on the first moments of real variables such as output and consumption but there
are important changes on equilibrium leverage and financial stability when we vary ω
and/or σz . In general, the easier it is for riskier intermediaries to absorb the market,
then less stable will financial markets be. Increases in ω and decreases in σz both
worsen financial stability. Low volatility of the fundamental shocks σz will lead to lower
financial stability since riskier intermediaries will find it easier to capture the market.
More details can be found in Appendix F.
The value of α and the shape of its distribution will also matter for financial stability.
Increasing α leads to a less financially stable financial sector. We leave for future work
to perform a (technically challenging) estimation of the model where the distributions of
α or ω could potentially be backed out from the data and focus here on understanding
the qualitative implications of the model.

4.4

Monetary policy shocks

We now look at the impact of a positive subsidy shock, which we will refer to as
an expansionary monetary policy shock or a decrease in the cost of funds. In Figure

34

4 we see the impact of a 100 basis points to the subsidy31 in three different scenarios
to illustrate the non-linear effects of monetary policy on financial stability. Impulse
response functions are expressed as deviations from the respective scenario in the
absence of the shock. This monetary policy loosening decreases the funding rate of
the banks by 8 bp as can be seen in the left panel of Figure 5. Scenario 1 (blue line)
features a low initial capital stock (corresponding to high equilibrium levels of the
interest rate). Scenario 2 (red line) is for a larger capital stock (corresponding to a low
level of equilibrium interest rate). Scenario 3 (black line) is at the risky steady-state32 .
As in Coeurdacier, Rey and Winant (2011) we define the risky steady-state as the
steady-state in which there are no shocks but economic agents take into account the
full stochastic structure of the model when they optimize (unlike in the deterministic
steady-state where they expect no shocks).

0.35

0.15

6

0.3

5
0.1

0.25

4

0.2

3

0.05
0.15

2
0.1

0

1

0.05
0

-0.05

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 4: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt

We can easily relate the general equilibrium results to the partial equilibrium
intuitions developed above. In the case of a low initial capital stock (associated with
a high equilibrium funding rate), a positive monetary policy shock expands output,
increases aggregate leverage and at the same time it reduces the cut-off αL , due to the
31
Note that this translates into a lower reduction in the total cost of funds (see Figure 5). This is
due to the fact that the cost of funds is a composite of deposits and wholesale funds, but also due to
endogenous movements in the deposit rate.
32
These three scenarios were chosen to illustrate the parallel with the partial equilibrium setting,
since the solution of the model is such that there is, ceteris paribus, a negative correlation between the
initial capital stock and the funding rate.

35

entry of less risk-taking intermediaries in deposit markets. We are in the ”no trade-off
zone of monetary policy” where a decrease in the interest rate increases investment
and financial stability. In the case of a high initial capital stock (associated to a low
funding cost for intermediaries), an expansionary shock has a larger positive effect on
output and leverage but this time intermediaries at the margin choose not to lever
up. In contrast, the most risk-taking intermediaries leverage significantly and financial
stability is affected negatively.
This is a very different trade-off from the traditional Phillips curve which has been the
benchmark model driving monetary policy analysis for many years. Aggregate economic
variables such as consumption, wealth or capital behave smoothly as evidence in Figure
13, but the underlying change in financial structure supporting these macroeconomic
outcomes can become less stable depending on the level of the interest rate.
Funding rates RF (bp)

Premium over deposits (bp)

Weighted Option Value of Default (∆%)

0

−2

25

−5
−3

−10

−4

20

−15
15

−20

−5

−25
−6

10

−30
5

−35

−7

−40

−8
5

10

15

20

25

30

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 5: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt : Financial variables

As seen in Figure 5, the Weighted Option Value of Default also increases drastically
with a monetary policy loosening when interest rates are low. The option value of
default is defined as the difference between expected profits under limited liability
and the (untruncated) cash flow. The larger this difference, the bigger the distortions
coming from the presence of the limited liability and the worse for financial stability.
Since the option value of default is intermediary-specific due to the heterogeneity of
balance sheets, we construct an asset-weighted mean to illustrate the aggregate effect.
When the interest rate is lower, the decrease in the cost of funds generates a very large
increase due to the exit of safer intermediaries but also to the increase in leverage
36

skewness in the cross-section. The impulse response functions for the alternative risk
measures of Figure 17 in Appendix C also illustrate the presence of a strong trade-off
when interest rates are low. Finally, the premium over deposits goes down as monetary
policy expands since the demand for deposits goes up and the expected return to risky
capital goes down due to decreasing returns.

4.5

Productivity driven leverage

Cycles in leverage can be driven by movements in the cost of funds, but also by
changes in expected productivity. When leverage is driven by an increase in productivity
then the ensuing leverage growth does not come at the cost of financial stability. There
is a fundamental difference between a credit boom driven by a shift in supply (i.e.
cheaper access to funds) and a boom driven by demand for credit (i.e. better investment
opportunities). Productivity shocks in our framework are an example of the latter
as they forecast larger productivity in the future. In general equilibrium supply and
demand of credit are interdependent so this distinction is simply to clarify the intuition
and relate it to the original shock leading to credit growth.
We now look at a shock to productivity. In Figure 6 we see the impact of a one
standard deviation positive productivity shock in the same 3 scenarios as the previous
section.
0.6
0

3

0.4
0.2

2.5

-0.05

0

2

-0.2
-0.1

1.5

-0.4
-0.6

1

-0.15

-0.8
-1

0.5
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 6: Shock to exogenous productivity

The effects are similar irrespective of the position in the state space and the level
37

of interest rates at the time of the shock. Total leverage goes up due to increased
investment opportunities and is hump-shaped, as can be seen in the first panel. The
hump-shape is due to the initial pressure of credit demand which requires higher deposit
rates to clear the market. After impact household wealth accumulates and deposit rates
start to fall, leading to a hump-shaped response of credit and investment as the positive
productivity shock fades out.
This effect can be also seen on the premium over deposits (right panel). On impact,
there is a larger rise of deposit rates than expected returns, despite the better investment
opportunities coming from higher expected productivity. The effect on the premium is
however very small (1bp decrease on impact), only a small fraction of the effect seen
after a monetary policy shock (40bp). In the middle panel, we also see that financial
stability overall slightly improves in all scenarios, apart from a short-lived marginal
uptick on impact in the middle scenario. Again these are small effects, indicating
that productivity driven leverage booms are not a concern for financial stability in
the same way that credit supply driven ones are. As Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017)
show, credit booms accompanied by the tightening of spreads can predict financial
crises, while those without such a tightening do not. We are able to rationalize this
fact through the cross-sectional composition of the financial sector and the difference
between productivity driven and credit supply driven leverage.

5

Empirical evidence on the cross-section of intermediary balance sheets

We do not present here a test of our model but a number of important new stylized facts on the cross sectional distribution of intermediaries balance sheets over
the cycle. To the best of our knowledge, these facts were not reported previously as
the literature did not feature intermediary heterogeneity. We use balance sheet data
of financial intermediaries from Bankscope (see Appendix D) to compute leverage at
the intermediary level. Leverage is defined as the ratio of assets over equity at book value.
Fact 1: Heterogeneous leverage dynamics and correlation with the Fed

38

funds rate. In Figure 7 we show the time series of leverage weighted by intermediary
assets for different quantiles of the distribution and for the aggregate together with
the CPI-deflated Fed Funds rate. There is strong heterogeneity within the financial
sector in terms of time variation of leverage and its correlation with the interest rate.
Up to 2007, the correlation between the top 1% and the real effective Fed Funds rate
is -0.49 and it is -0.31 for the average leverage.33 The more leveraged intermediaries
increase leverage sharply as interest rates fall to low levels in the early 2000s34 . This
large increase in leverage is neither apparent in the median nor the bottom 1% of the
distribution. In the pre-crisis period we find strong evidence of heterogeneity in the
cross-section of leverage. The correlation between the median quantile with the top 1%
is strongly negative (-0.81) and the correlation between the bottom 1% and the top 1%
is -0.1.
30

120
Top 1%

Median
Bottom 1%

15

RFFR (RHS)

3

3

RFFR (RHS)

3

100
25

1.5

1.5

1.5

10

80
0

0

0

20
−1.5

Mean leverage

5

60

−1.5

−1.5

RFFR (RHS)

15
1995

2000

2005

2010

−3
2015

40

1995

2000

2005

2010

−3
2015

1995

2000

2005

2010

−3
2015

Figure 7: Mean and selected quantiles of asset-weighted leverage of intermediaries (blue, LHS
scale) and real (CPI-deflated) Effective Fed Funds Rate (red, RHS scale, pp).

The model predicts heterogeneous leverage dynamics in the cross-section, even
as aggregate leverage is monotonically decreasing with the interest rate. In the top
quantiles, leverage and interest rates are negatively related. In intermediate quantiles,
33

Results are very similar if we use instead nominal rates, as can be seen in Figure 15. The correlation
between the top 1% and the nominal effective Fed Funds rate is -0.26 and it is -0.11 for the average
leverage.
34
Note that in 2006-07 the Fed Funds rate increases. However, during that period, the maturity of
liabilities of the large banks decreased: about a quarter of the liabilities of broker dealer balance sheet
was overnight repos at the eve of the financial crisis, thereby keeping funding costs very low.

39

some intermediaries may stop leveraging as interest rate goes down so the correlation
sign may flip. For intermediaries that remain levered, Proposition 2.2 indicates that the
covariance between interest rates and leverage should be larger for the most risk-taking
(and most levered) intermediaries. The post-2008 period is of course very special with
large state interventions and changes in regulation as well as unconventional monetary policy at the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB), all elements which are absent for our model.
Fact 2: Skewness of leverage and Fed Funds rate
We use the same data as before to compute the time series of the skewness of
leverage. In Figure 8, we present the time series of asset-weighted skewness in parallel
with the movements of the Effective Fed Funds Rate both in real terms (left panel)
and in nominal terms (right panel). There is a strong negative correlation between the
Effective Fed Funds Rate and skewness (correlation of -0.45 up to 2007 for the real rate
and of -0.58 for the nominal rate), with a large spike in skewness when interest rates
fell strongly in the early 2000s.35
The model is consistent with this fact. In the right panel of Figure 2, we show
the shape of cross-sectional skewness as a function of rtD for three different levels
of productivity. It is apparent that the direct impact of productivity on skewness,
although positive, seems second-order relative to the impact of interest rates. Low
levels of the interest rate are associated with an increased skewness of leverage: risk
gets concentrated in the (endogenously) larger, more risk-taking players. This is a very
distinctive implication, which is borne out in the data. These results are striking and
very encouraging for the mechanism of the model. We are not aware of any paper
studying the distribution and skewness of leverage and linking it to the interest rate.
Fact 3: Exposure to macroeconomic risk, leverage and returns
We analyse the leverage of financial intermediaries in the run up to the crisis and
look at its correlation with returns and the exposure to aggregate risk (measured by
the world market beta). The left panel of Figure 9 shows a positive correlation (0.59)
35
Admittedly, the situation after 2008 when monetary policy is at the ZLB is (as explained above)
quite unusual with large state interventions in the banking sector and changes in regulation, including
leverage caps. We also computed skewness using only US bank data, results were very similar and are
available on request.

40

Skewness
RFFR (RHS)

3

9

8

1.5

8

7

0

7

6

−1.5 6

9

Skewness
FFR (RHS)

6

4

2

5

1995

2000

2005

2010

−3
2015

5

1995

2000

2005

2010

0
2015

Figure 8: Time series of asset-weighted skewness of intermediary leverage (blue, LHS scale)
and the real Effective Fed Funds Rate (left panel) and the nominal effective Fed Funds rate
(right panel) in pp (red, RHS scale).

40
35
30
25
20
15
10

Barclays Commerzbank
Societe GeneraleUBS Dexia
Deutsche Bank
Lloyds
BNP
Credit Suisse
Morgan Stanley
RBS
Nordea
Goldman Sachs
Unicredit State Street
HSBC BBVA
JP Morgan Santander
Citigroup
Bank of America
Wells Fargo BNY Mellon

0.5
1
1.5
Average pre-crisis Beta

Average return pre-crisis (pp)

Average leverage pre-crisis

between pre-crisis betas and leverage, while the one on the right also shows a positive
correlation (0.32) between pre-crisis leverage and returns, confirming the results of
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), who in addition show that the higher beta banks
tended to do worse in the crisis as they were more exposed to aggregate risk.

1.5
1

0.5

Santander
BBVA
BNP Societe Gene
Credit Suisse
Unicredit
Deutsche Bank
State Street
Dexia
BNY Mellon
UBS
Lloyds
JP Morgan
Barclays
HSBC
Morgan Stanley
Bank of America
Wells Fargo
RBS

0

−0.5

2

Nordea
Goldman Sachs Commerzbank

2

10

Citigroup

15
20
25
30
35
Average leverage pre-crisis

Figure 9: Pre-crisis leverage, world market betas and returns for Systemically Important
Financial Institutions (SIFIs)

41

The model is consistent with this pattern: it implies that the intermediaries which
become endogenously larger and more leveraged make higher profits in good states of
the world but are more exposed to aggregate risk.
Although none of this constitutes a formal test of the model, we view these facts as
supporting the relevance of the main mechanism of our framework. This underlines
the importance of looking at cross-sectional dynamics of the balance sheets of financial
intermediaries in order to understand macroeconomic developments.

6

Costly intermediary default

We now consider the case of costly intermediary default. As in the previous section,
leveraged intermediaries in risky financial markets will default on depositors if the
realisation of the productivity shock is low enough. This requires intervention by the
government to pay for deposit insurance, which is now less benign than previously
assumed as there is a deadweight loss36 .
To include a cost of intermediary bailouts we assume that capital held by defaulting
intermediaries suffers a proportional productivity loss ∆ relative to the productivity of
capital held by non-defaulting intermediaries. This loss can arise from (real) bankruptcy
costs or some degree of inalienability in investment projects. The main assumption is
that these costs are proportional to the output of the respective capital shares. Let µdt
be the share of capital held by defaulting intermediaries. We can define an aggregate
productivity loss ∆t = µdt ∆ which is an increasing function in the share of capital held
by defaulting intermediaries. Note that the productivity of capital held by healthy
intermediaries is unaffected at t, so the impact on aggregate productivity is coming only
from cross-sectional differences between defaulting and non-defaulting intermediaries.
We also consider the possibility that this disruption spreads to the entire financial
market in the following periods by affecting productivity of all intermediaries in future
periods by ∆t . The loss of aggregative productivity is then intermediary-specific during
default, but it can affect the whole economy moving forward (the allocative process of
the whole economy is impaired). When it happens we call this the crisis state. We
36

As before, deposit guarantees will be financed by lump sum taxation of households. The welfare
analysis of our setup is left for future work.

42

model the persistence of the crisis state through a Poisson process, with a constant
probability p of exiting the crisis at each period. Depending on the process, variable ξt
takes the value of one if the crisis carries on to the next period or zero if it does not.
Our specification nests both the case of costless default (∆ = 0) and the case where
there is no disruption of financial markets in subsequent periods (p = 1). We have:

R
µdt

=

kit 1(πi <0) dG(αi )
Kt

∆t = ξt−1 max(µdt−1 ∆, ∆t−1 )

(44)
(45)
(46)

where the indicator function takes the value of 1 if intermediaries of type i default or 0
if not. If there are also defaults during a crisis state, then the max operator ensures
that the largest penalty applies going forward. Whenever the economy is in crisis,
productivity for all financial intermediaries is scaled down by a factor µdt proportional
to the percentage of total capital held by defaulting intermediaries. ξt−1 is known to
agents when they make their investment decisions at period t − 1, so the uncertainty
on the returns on their capital investment is only on the realization of the exogenous
productivity process37 . This timing assumption allows us to keep tractability as the
Z
e
= (1 − ∆t )Ztρ . Since
main difference in the financial sector block is that now Zt+1
both ∆t and Zt are state variables, we can still solve for the financial sector equilibrium
as before.
This set up is tractable and allows us to parameterize crises of different severity and
length. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) present a classic description of the characteristics
of crises across history, and evidence that crises associated with banking crises are more
severe. Borio et al. (2016) and Laeven and Valencia (2012) present empirical evidence
showing that there can be substantial and long lasting productivity drops after financial
crises. To calibrate these parameters we refer to the database of Laeven and Valencia
(2012), setting p = 0.5 to target an average crisis length of 2 years as in the data, and
37

There is still uncertainty on asset returns if the intermediary defaults but this is not considered in
the intermediary problem due to limited liability truncating the profit functions at zero in those states.

43

∆ = 0.115 implying a maximal efficiency loss of 11.5% per year38 .

6.1

Productivity shocks and financial crises

In this section we study the impact of a financial crisis on the path of the economy,
following a large productivity shock. Figure 10 shows the impact of a large productivity
shock in 3 possible scenarios39 .
Funding rates RF (bp)

Cutoff αL (∆%)

Output (∆%)

−2

0.7

80

0.6

60

−4

0.5

40

−6

0.4

20
0

0.3

−20

−8
0.2
−10

−40

0.1

−60

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 10: Large shock to exogenous productivity

In scenario 1 (red line) the economy at the risky steady-state is hit at period t
by the largest possible shock that does not trigger any defaults. In scenarios 2 (blue
line) and 3 (black line) the economy is hit with the smallest shock such that all levered
intermediaries default. The difference between scenarios 2 and 3 is in the length of the
crisis. Scenario 2 is the short crisis scenario, where the crisis only carries on to the next
period, ξ1 = 1. Scenario 3 is the ”unlucky” scenario, where the crisis carries on for an
additional 5 periods: ξs = 1 for t = 1 to t = 6. The length of the crisis is unknown
beforehand to the agents in the economy, although as mentioned before they observe
the value of ξt when they make their investment decisions at t. Not surprisingly, when
the crisis hits there is a large decline in output. As expected productivity is low, only
the intermediaries with the looser VaR constraints can operate. There is a strong fall
38

In the database of Laeven and Valencia (2012), the average cumulative output loss is 23% over the
length of the crisis, which is on average two years.
39
Impulse response functions expressed in basis points deviations for rates or otherwise in percent
deviations from the risky-steady state

44

in deposit demand due to the low expected productivity, which severely tightens the
constraint.
In equilibrium the fall in deposit demand generates a fall in funding costs due to
decreased deposit rates. For the cases with defaults, one can observe a small initial
decrease in the cut-off after an initial jump. This is because on impact the economy
jumps to the trade-off region. As interest rates start rising from that point onward,
the economy travels through the U-shape with the cut-off falling initially and then
increasing as interest rates rise.
The length of the crisis also has very interesting dynamic effects on wealth. Given
that households expect to exit the crisis state with probability p, when exit fails to
materialize in Scenario 3 they are running down their wealth and their consumption
dips down (see Figure 14). As wealth falls, deposit rates and funding costs (see Figure
10) grow as it becomes more costly for the household to save and fund bank leverage.
When eventually the economy exits the crisis state, household wealth is low and demand
for leverage jumps, leading to a jump in funding rates to compensate households for
decreased consumption today. This leads also to a higher risk premium as expected
return to capital jumps up. Total leverage and investment, which had seen severe
contractions start to go up again (see Figure 14). This effect is also present with a
short crisis, but is particularly stark for the longer crisis.

7

Conclusion

This paper develops a novel framework for modeling a financial sector with heterogeneous financial intermediaries and aggregate risk. The heterogeneity in the VaR
constraints coupled with limited liability generates endogenous time variation in leverage, risk-shifting and financial stability. The interaction between the intensive and
the extensive margins of investment creates a rich set of non-linear dynamics where
the level of interest rates plays a key role. When interest rates are high, a monetary
expansion increases both the intensive margin and the extensive margin. The monetary authority is able to stimulate the economy, while at the same time increasing
financial stability. When interest rates are already low, a further reduction can lead to
large increases in leverage by the most risk-taking institutions, pricing out previously
45

active intermediaries, due to decreasing aggregate returns to capital. Importantly,
the intermediaries which decrease their balance sheet size have lower probabilities of
default than those that remain levered, leading to an increase in systemic risk. Our
model, unlike the existing literature, generates a trade-off between economic activity
and financial stability depending on the level of the interest rate. During booms driven
by low funding costs and increased credit supply, risk premia are low as there is a lot of
risk-shifting by the most risk-taking intermediaries in the economy. Booms driven by
positive productivity shocks do not lead to an increase in financial instability nor to
such low levels of risk premia.
Because our framework has heterogeneity at its heart, it allows us to make use
of cross-sectional data on intermediary balance sheets. We derive novel implications
linking the times series of the skewness of leverage and monetary policy which are
strikingly borne out in the data. We believe we are the first paper to link changes in the
cross-sectional distribution of leverage, macroeconomic developments and fluctuations
in financial stability. We show that similar macroeconomic outcomes can be supported
by very different underlying financial structures. This has important implications for
the transmission of monetary policy and the sensitivity of the economy to interest rate
movements.
A major advantage of our framework is that our financial block is easy to embed
in a standard dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework. We plan to extend
our model to environments with sticky prices and a more complex portfolio choice on
the bank side as well as to study boom and bust cycles in emerging markets. We also
plan to apply it to explain the dynamics of the real estate market, using detailed data,
as well as the endogenous dynamics of the VIX. The model could also be calibrated
to fit a distribution of financial intermediaries characteristics. One could in practice
back out the distribution of αi from leverage data and allow for a distribution of
intermediary-specific equity ω i . That said, allowing for time variation in equity would
require the introduction of an additional state-variable in the financial sector problem
which would make the solution more computationally intensive.40 We leave these issues
and the welfare implications of our model for future research.
40

And having together time-varying and intermediary-specific equity would require an infinitely
dimensional state-space without additional assumptions.

46

References
Acharya, Viral, and Guillaume Plantin. 2016. “Monetary Easing and Financial Instability.” mimeo NYU Stern and Sciences Po.
Acharya, Viral V., Lasse H. Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson. 2017. “Measuring Systemic Risk.” The Review of Financial Studies, 30(1): 2–47.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk.”
Review of Financial Studies, 27(2): 373–403.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun S. Shin. 2010. “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics,
, ed. Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, Chapter 12, 601–650. Elsevier.
Aldasoro, Inaki, Domenico Delli Gatti, and Ester Faia. 2017. “Bank networks: Contagion, systemic risk and prudential policy.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
142: 164 – 188.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 2000. “Bubbles and Crises.” The Economic Journal,
110(460): 236–255.
Angeloni, Ignazio, and Ester Faia. 2013. “Capital regulation and monetary policy with
fragile banks.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(3): 311–324.
Angeloni, Ignazio, Ester Faia, and Marco Lo Duca. 2015. “Monetary policy and risk
taking.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 52(C): 285–307.
Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2016. “Monetary and
Financial Policies in Emerging Markets .” mimeo,Tokyo University, London School of
Economics, and Princeton University.
Bali, Turan G., Stephen J. Brown, and Mustafa O. Caglayan. 2014. “Macroeconomic
risk and hedge fund returns.” Journal of Financial Economics, 114(1): 1–19.
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong. 2017. “Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2): 713–764.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 2013. “Analysis of risk-weighted assets
for market risk.” Bank for International Settlements Regulatory Consistency Assessment
Programmme (RCAP).
Baskaya, Yusuf Soner, Julian di Giovanni, Sebnem Kalemli-Özcan, and
Mehmet Fatih Ulu. 2017. “International Spillovers and Local Credit Cycles.” NBER
Working Paper, 23149.
Begenau, Juliane, and Tim Landvoigt. 2017. “Financial Regulation in a Quantitative
Model of the Modern Banking System.” mimeo Stanford GSB and Austin.
Bergin, Paul R, and Giancarlo Corsetti. 2015. “Beyond Competitive Devaluations: The
Monetary Dimensions of Comparative Advantage.” CEPR Discussion Papers, 10718.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 79(1): 14–31.
Boissay, Frederic, Fabrice Collard, and Frank Smets. 2016. “Booms and Systemic
Banking Crises.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(2).
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu. 2012. “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary
policy: A missing link in the transmission mechanism?” Journal of Financial Stability,
8(4): 236–251.
Borio, Claudio, Enisse Kharroubi, Christian Upper, and Fabrizio Zampolli. 2016.
“Labour reallocation and productivity dynamics: financial causes, real consequences.” Bank
for International Settlements BIS Working Papers 534.

47

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. “A Macroeconomic Model with
a Financial Sector.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 379–421.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015a. “Capital flows and the risk-taking
channel of monetary policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71(C): 119–132.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015b. “Cross-Border Banking and Global
Liquidity.” Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 535–564.
Challe, Edouard, Benoit Mojon, and Xavier Ragot. 2013. “Equilibrium risk shifting
and interest rate in an opaque financial system.” European Economic Review, 63(C): 117–
133.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Hélène Rey, and Pablo Winant. 2011. “The Risky Steady State.”
American Economic Review, 101(3): 398–401.
Coimbra, Nuno. 2016. “Sovereigns at Risk: a dynamic model of sovereign debt and banking
leverage.” mimeo Paris School of Economics.
Coimbra, Nuno, and Helene Rey. 2018. “Financial Cycles and Credit Growth across
Countries.” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108: 509–12.
Curdia, Vasco, Andrea Ferrero, Ging Cee Ng, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2015. “Has
U.S. monetary policy tracked the efficient interest rate?” Journal of Monetary Economics,
70: 72 – 83.
Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand. 2010. “Risk Appetite
and Endogenous Risk.” Financial Markets Group FMG Discussion Papers dp647.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Gustavo Suarez. 2017. “Bank Leverage and
Monetary Policy’s Risk-Taking Channel: Evidence from the United States.” The Journal
of Finance, 72(2): 613–654.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,
and Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy, 91(3): 401–19.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2017. “The Deposits Channel
of Monetary Policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1819–1876.
Englund, Peter. 2016. “The Swedish 1990s Banking Crisis.” mimeo Stockholm School of
Economics.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2016. “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in
the Presence of Nominal Rigidities.” Harvard University OpenScholar Working Paper 95131.
Financial Stability Board. 2015. “Global Shadow Banking Report 2015.” Financial Stability
Board.
Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica,
1(4): 337–57.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2012. “Why does bad news increase volatility and
decrease leverage?” Journal of Economic Theory, 147(2): 501–525.
Geanakoplos, John. 2010. “The Leverage Cycle.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 24(1): 1–
66.
Geanakoplos, John. 2011. “What’s Missing from Macroeconomics: Endogenous Leverage
and Default.” In Approaches to Monetary Policy Revisited – Lesson from the Crisis, Sixth
ECB Central Banking Conference. 220–238.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2012. “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3): 452 –
468.
Gersbach, Hans, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2017. “Capital Regulation and Credit
Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 90: 113–124.

48

Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2015. “Banking, Liquidity, and Bank Runs in
an Infinite Horizon Economy.” American Economic Review, 105(7): 2011–43.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2011. “A model of unconventional monetary policy.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1): 17–34.
Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Albert Queralto. 2012. “Financial crises,
bank risk exposure and government financial policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
59(S): S17–S34.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories of the Twentieth
Century for the Twenty-First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1): 226–65.
Hellwig, Martin. 2018. “Germany and the Financial Crises 2007-2017.” mimeo Max Planck
Institute for Research on Collective Goods and Bonn University.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2013. “Intermediary Asset Pricing.” American
Economic Review, 103(2): 732–70.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2014. “A Macroeconomic Framework for
Quantifying Systemic Risk.” NBER Working Paper 19885.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1997. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds,
and The Real Sector.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3): 663–691.
Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
Shocks.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 238–71.
Jimenez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Jesus Saurina. 2014.
“Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do TwentyThree Million Bank Loans Say
About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit RiskTaking?” Econometrica, 82(2): 463–505.
Kalemli-Özcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas. 2012. “Leverage across
firms, banks, and countries.” Journal of International Economics, 88(2): 284–298.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The causes of
banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review, 89(3): 473–124–
500.
Kareken, John H, and Neil Wallace. 1978. “Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A
Partial-Equilibrium Exposition.” The Journal of Business, 51(3): 413–38.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1978. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
New York: Basic Books.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 211–48.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., and Motohiro Yogo. 2019. “A Demand System Approach to Asset
Pricing.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Korinek, Anton, and Martin Nowak. 2017. “Risk-taking dynamics and financial stability.”
mimeo, Harvard and John Hopkins.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2015. “The impact of Treasury supply on financial sector lending and stability.” Journal of Financial Economics,
118(3): 571–600.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir. 2017. “How Credit Cycles across a Financial
Crisis.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23850.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2012. “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update.”
International Monetary Fund, Working Papers, 12/163.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3): 809–
833.
Malherbe, Frédéric. 2015. “Optimal capital requirements over the business and financial

49

cycles.” C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers CEPR Discussion Papers 10387.
Martin, Alberto, and Jaume Ventura. 2015. “Financial Reforms and Capital Flows:
Insights from General Equilibrium.” In . Vol. 21 of Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic
Policies Book Series, Chapter 7, 109–137. Central Bank of Chile.
Martinez-Miera, David, and Javier Suarez. 2014. “Banks’ Endogenous Systemic Risktaking.” mimeo, CEMFI.
Martinez-Miera, David, and Rafael Repullo. 2017. “Search for Yield.” Econometrica,
85(2): 351–378.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695–1725.
Mendoza, Enrique G. 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.” American
Economic Review, 100(5): 1941–66.
Minsky, Hyman. 1977. “The Financial Instability Hypothesis: an Interpretation of Keynes
and Alternative to Standard Theory.” Challenge, 1: 20–27.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey. 2015. “US Monetary Policy and the Global
Financial Cycle.” NBER Working Papers 21722.
Morais, Bernardo, José-Luis Peydró, Jessica Roldá-Peña, and Claudia RuizOrtega. 2019. “The International Bank Lending Channel of Monetary Policy Rates and QE:
Credit Supply, Reach-for-Yield, and Real Effects.” The Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Nuño, Galo, and Carlos Thomas. 2017. “Bank leverage cycles.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(2).
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009a. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly. . 1 ed., Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009b. This Time Is Different: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, New Jersey:Princeton University Press.
Santos, Tano. 2017. “El Diluvio: The Spanish Banking Crisis, 2008-2012.” mimeo Columbia
University.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” American Economic Review,
102(2): 1029–61.
Tauchen, George, and Robert Hussey. 1991. “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining
Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models.” Econometrica, 59(2): 371–96.
Wilmarth, Arthur. 2013. “Citigroup: A Case Study in Managerial and Regulatory Failures.”
Indiana Law Review, 47: 69–137.

50

Figures
500
Change in debt or equity

Debt
Equity

0

−500
−400

−200
0
200
400
Change in total assets

Figure 11: Yearly changes in total asset against yearly changes in equity or debt from 1993 to
2015. Billions of USD. Source: Bankscope

100
90

Short Term Debt
Long Term Assets
Equity

80

% GDP

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1952

1972

1992
Year

2012

Figure 12: Bank short-term debt, long-term assets and equity as a percentage of US GDP.
Data constructed as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015).

51

Household consumption (∆%)

Wealth (∆%)

Capital (∆%)

0.4
0.8

0.35
0.3

1

High K0
Low K0

0.9

K0 = K̄

0.8

0.6

0.25

0.7
0.4

0.2

0.6
0.5

0.15

0.2
0.4

0.1
5

10

15

20

25

30

0

0.3
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 13: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt : Real variables
Wealth (∆%)

Household consumption (∆%)
−1

Capital (∆%)

−2

−2

−4

−4

−6

−6

−8

−8

−6

−10

−10

−7

−12

No crisis
Short crisis
Long crisis

−2
−3
−4
−5

5

10

15

20

25

30

−12
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 14: Large shock to exogenous productivity: Real variables
30

120

Top 1%

6

FFR (RHS)

6

Median
Bottom 1%

15

6

FFR (RHS)

100
25
4

4

4

10

80
20
2

2
60

2

5

Mean leverage
FFR (RHS)

15
1995

2000

2005

2010

0
2015

40

1995

2000

2005

2010

0
2015

1995

2000

2005

2010

0
2015

Figure 15: Mean and selected quantiles of asset-weighted leverage of intermediaries (blue, LHS
scale) and the Effective Fed Funds Rate (red, RHS scale, pp).

52

Appendix A. Numerical solution method
For online publication

The solution method is composed of two main blocks. The first block solves the
partial equilibrium problem for a grid of points for variables rF and Z e . We discretize
the state space using 100 nodes for Z e and 200 for rF . Given funding costs rF and
expected productivity Z e we can solve jointly for equations (25) and (27), plugging in
equation (20) in the latter. We also use the property that levered intermediaries never
invest in storage. This gives us policy functions K ∗ (rF , Z e ) and αL,∗ (rF , Z e ).
The second block is the recursive one. First we define the household savings problem
as a function of disposable wealth Ωt , productivity Z̃t , efficiency adjustment ∆t and
monetary policy γt .
H
H
Ωt = (1 − θ)Yt − Tt + Dt−1
+ St−1

The procedure entails the following steps
1. Discretize the state space S for the variables (Ω, Z, ∆, γ). The process for Z and
γ are approximated using a Tauchen and Hussey (1991) quadrature procedure
with 11 and 7 nodes respectively. The state space for the variable Ω is discretized
using 500 nodes and we use 10 for ∆.
2. Iterate on prices rD and policy function C ∗ (S) starting with an initial guess rD (S)
for deposit prices and C ∗ (S). For every point Sj ∈ S:
(a) Using the state vector and rjD , calculate rjF and Zje .
(b) Solve for (Kj , αjL ) using K ∗ (rjF , Zje ) and αL,∗ (rjF , Zje ). Back out deposit
supply Dj from the balance sheet equations.
(c) Plug Dj in the budget constraint of the agent. Together with Cj = C ∗ (Sj )
this pins down SjH .
(d) Calculate expectations of (S 0 |S) and update deposit prices and policy functions using the optimality conditions and numerical integration.
(e) Check for convergence. If ||(rj0 − rj )|| + ||(Cj∗ )0 − Cj∗ || is smaller than a
threshold value stop. Else, go back to (a) and repeat.
53

To numerically integrate intermediary variables, Gauss-Legendre quadrature using 51
points is used. To calculate expectations of future net disposable wealth, we also need
to calculate taxes conditional on future shocks. For a given productivity draw Z 0 |Zj we
identify the threshold intermediary for which no bailout is needed: (RK ki − RD di ) = ω.
We can then calculate the amount Tt of taxes required by numerical integration.

Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 2.1
For online publication
K
When E[Ri,t+1
] ≥ 1, participating intermediary i will either lever up to its Value-ati
Risk constraint: dit = dt , or not raise deposits at all : dit = 0.
K
Given the option value of default and the condition E[Ri,t+1
] ≥ 1, participating
intermediaries will not invest in storage. The Value-at-Risk constraint bounds the
i
maximum level of leverage of intermediary i, therefore dit ∈ [0, dt ]. The expected profits
of intermediary i as a function of deposits are:

πti (dit )

Z

∞

= (1 − ζ)
εit (dit )

 K

Rt+1 (ω + dit ) − RtD dit dF (ε)

(47)

where εit is the max of 0 (the lower bound of the support for ε) and the shock for which
profits are zero).

εit (dit ) = max 0,

RtD dit
ω+dit

−1+δ


(48)



θZ Ktθ−1
ρZ

Taking derivatives:
∂πti
= (1 − ζ)
∂dit

Z

∞

εit (dit )


∂εi
K
Rt+1
(ε) − RtD dF (ε) − πti (εi ) i
∂dt

(49)

i

∂ε
Lemma 1 Given equations (47) and (48), then πti (εit ) ∂d
i = 0
t

For any dit ≥
and

∂εi
∂dit

ω(1−δ)
,
RtD −1+δ

then πti (εit ) = 0 by definition of εit . For dit <

= 0 due to the max operator.
54

ω(1−δ)
,
RtD −1+δ

then ei = 0

We have as first and second derivatives:
Z ∞

∂πti
K
(ε) − RtD dF (ε)
= (1 − ζ)
Rt+1
∂dit
εit (dit )
2 i
 K
 i
∂ πt
D ∂εt
=
−(1
−
ζ)
R
(ε(d
))
−
R
it
t+1
t
∂d2i,t
∂dit

(50)

∂π i
K
Given the monotonicity of Rt+1
(ε), then ∀d˜ such that ∂ditt = 0, it follows that
d˜
K
˜ − RD < 0 or all elements in the integral are non-negative and it cannot
Rt+1
(εit (d))
t
∂εi
∂ 2 πi
be zero. Since t > 0, then 2t > 0 by equation (50). If d˜ exists, it must be
∂dit

∂dit d˜

a minimum and
 we therefore
 conclude that the maximum must be at the bounds:
i i
dit = arg max πt (0), πt (dt ) .

Appendix C. Alternative Measures of Financial Stability
For online publication

We present three alternative measures of financial stability. M 3 is the asset-weighted
Rα
mean of active αi . We have that Mt3 = αL αi KkitL dG(αi ), where KtL is the total asset
t
t
holdings of leveraged intermediaries. This measure has the advantage of not only
capturing the extensive margin effect but also capturing the effect of skewness on
aggregate financial stability. That is, a financial sector with the same cut-off αtL but
with a more skewed distribution of leverage will on aggregate be more risky, as a larger
share of the capital would be held by more risk-taking intermediaries.
We also explore a fourth measure of financial stability M 4 : the probability that a
fraction κ of the capital KtL is held by distressed intermediaries in the next period. Mt4
Rα
is the solution to the equation M 4 kit dG(αi ) = κKtL . This measure would be equivalent
t
to the baseline measure M 1 if we set κ = 1, so it can be seen as a generalization of
the first measure. Setting this fraction to a lower value captures some of the skewness
effects mentioned. We implement this measure with a fraction arbitrarily set at κ = 0.5,
so the probability that half of the capital is held by distressed intermediaries in the
next period.
Finally we also calculate a fifth measure, M 5 : the expected share of capital held by
defaulting intermediaries at t + 1. This measure relates to the costly default described

55

Asset-Weighted Mean of active αi

in Section 6. If the deadweight loss is proportional to the share of capital held by
defaulting intermediaries, then this measure gives us a sense of the expected efficiency
costs of decreasing financial stability. Figure 16 shows theses measures as a function of
the interest rate in partial equilibrium. All of them show a significant adverse effect of
an interest rate decrease on financial stability when interest rates are low. In contrast
financial stability does not worsen with a decrease in the interest rate when the level of
the interest rate is high.
Productivity

Low
Medium
High

rD

0

Productivity
Low
Medium
High

rD

0

Low
Medium
High

E(%K in default)

Pr(50%K in distressed intermediaries)

Productivity

rD

0

Figure 16: Alternative measures of financial stability and interest rate

Asset-Weighted Mean of active αi (∆%)
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Pr[50%K distressed]

(pp)

E[%K in default]

0.04

1.6

0.035

1.4

0.03

1.2

0.025

1

0.02

0.8

0.015

0.6

0.01

0.4

0.005
0

0.2

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

(pp)

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 17: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt : Alternative measures

56

30

Appendix D. Data Description
For online publication

Bank balance sheet data uses annual data from the Bankscope database. Bank
return data are from Datastream. Market returns were calculated using the MSCI
World Index data available from Bloomberg. The Effective Federal Funds Rate and the
CPI are from the Federal Reserve Economic Data.
The leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total assets to total equity, here defined
as common equity. We drop negative equity from the dataset, and institutions with
assets worth less than 1 million USD. We also remove institutions that have leverage
larger than 1000 at least once across the sample.
For the leverage series, we compute both unweighted and weighted averages of the
leverage ratio for each quarter. For the weighted average we use total assets as weights.
We checked using total equity as weights and results are qualitatively unchanged. We
also compute the 1st and 99th percentiles of both unweighted and weighted leverage.
For the skewness of leverage, we compute the cross-sectional standard deviation
and third moment of the leverage ratio for every period. And then compute the
cross-sectional sample skewness using a simple approach laid out below.
PN

i=1

mt (3) =
s
st =
St =

(xit − x̄t )3
N

PN

i=1

(xit − x̄t )2
N

mt (3)
(st )3

where xit is the leverage ratio of bank i in period t, x̄t is the period-specific
cross-sectional mean of leverage, St is the sample cross-sectional in period t, st is the
period-specific sample cross-sectional variance and mt (3) the period-specific sample
third central moment of the cross-section. In the leverage figures shown, we define xit
as asset-weighted leverage and then use the above formulas. We also ran the same
exercise using unweighted leverage or equity-weighted leverage
with similar results. For
q
robustness we also used the small sample variant st =
qualitative difference.
57

PN

2
i=1 (xit −x̄t )

N −1

and there was no

Year
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

Assets
Mean
St.Dev.
12419
39962
13725
44263
14638
42323
14278
35918
16778
42793
18661
47154
21478
64999
24176
77576
27648
87629
28693
91765
32012
103752
44022
149190
46877
152941
56112
193439
71684
245968
67652
258317
63755
240442
66402
232329
64599
235938
65011
238222
69559
249110
70429
245651
67587
228692

Equity
Mean St.Dev.
737
1930
825
2179
898
2200
912
2109
1073
2469
1290
3158
1526
4632
1768
5599
2079
6843
2224
7328
2414
8030
3160
10731
3287
10794
3697
12586
4458
14634
4359
16032
4872
17701
5191
17920
5318
18441
5570
19317
6468
22352
6734
23223
6923
23808

Mean
14.71
14.81
14.33
14.82
14.57
13.71
14.30
14.04
14.00
14.09
14.52
14.58
16.28
15.69
15.23
15.59
14.54
12.90
12.96
12.51
10.69
10.58
10.43

Leverage
St.Dev. Skewness
13.77
10.67
10.95
5.47
11.16
5.73
16.26
9.48
16.96
10.44
10.69
5.67
13.26
7.95
15.11
10.79
17.40
11.10
25.57
13.34
28.92
11.23
17.96
7.65
27.52
7.77
24.76
8.28
19.00
5.78
27.13
13.73
17.88
6.21
11.93
4.77
20.23
13.19
21.56
13.29
7.47
3.18
7.71
4.31
7.31
3.49

#Obs
276
329
349
364
369
392
437
456
446
458
454
444
468
422
396
374
401
448
461
467
469
475
439

Table 2: Descriptive cross-sectional statistics by period (unweighted).

Frequency

60

40

20

0

0

20

40 60 80 100
Years at Failure

Figure 18: Histogram of age of banks at closing date (in years). Data for failures in the US
since October, 2000. Source: FDIC.

58

Appendix E. Interbank market
For online publication

In this appendix, we present a version of the baseline model where intermediaries
can supply funds to each other through deposits. The main difference in the financial
intermediary problem, is that inactive intermediaries will optimally choose to deposit
their net worth, thus supplying funds to leveraged banks. These deposits are also
guaranteed by the government and therefore the same asset as household deposits from
the point of view of the borrowing bank.
Whenever RtD > 1, storage is dominated by deposits and will never be used. Inactive
intermediaries will also optimally prefer to hold deposits over shares of the capital
stock. Since intermediaries are risk-neutral, the presence of an option value of default
K
implies that in equilibrium RtD > E(Rt+1
). Since inactive intermediaries will not be
able to exploit the option value of default, they strictly prefer deposits over shares of
the capital stock, implying αtN = αL for all t. The balance sheet of an intermediary i
that chooses to lend its net worth is then:
Assets

Liabilities

−dit

ωit

where to maintain consistency in notation, deposits held as assets are noted as negative
dit . The intermediary program is as before:
Vit = max Et (ci,t+1 )
s.t. Pr(πi,t+1 < ωit ) ≤ αi

(51)
(52)

kit + sit = ωit + dit

(53)

ci,t+1 = max (0, πi,t+1 )

(54)

K
πi,t+1 = Ri,t+1
kit + sit − RtD dit

Since borrowing to deposit is revenue neutral, it follows that Proposition 2.1 again
holds in this case. Each intermediary will choose to leverage up to its VaR constraint

59

or not raise deposits at all. Writing the value functions under this case we have
K
kit − RtD dit ]
VitL = Eit [Ri,t+1

(55)

VitN = RtD ω

(56)

VitO = ω

(57)

The deposit market clearing equation is as before:
Z
Dt =

dit dG(αi ) = DtH

(58)

With the difference that now Dt is the net borrowing from the financial sector as a
whole. The market clearing is Dt = DtH , where DtH are total household deposits. We
Rα
also define DtL = αL dit dG(αi ) as the total deposit liabilities in levered intermediaries.
t
Equation (40) then becomes:
Ft =

DtL
1+χ

(59)

The rest of the equations of the model are exactly the same, but underlying them are a
few key differences. All capital is now held by levered intermediaries, which implies that
no fraction of the capital stock is ever free from potential distress at t + 1. Moreover,
the extensive margin now also affects the deposit supply. The more intermediaries
drop out from levered markets, the larger is aggregate deposit supply (ceteris paribus).
Partial equilibrium results are very similar to the ones without the interbank market,
as can be seen in Figure 19. Note that for the aggregate capital stock supply curve, the
two models are almost indistinguishable.
The main difference in partial equilibrium is that for a given interest rate, the cut-off
is now lower. Non-active intermediaries no longer invest directly in the capital stock.
Had leverage and the cut-off remained the same the capital stock would be smaller and
returns higher. This leads to both higher leverage from intermediaries above the cut-off
(intensive margin) and a lower cut-off (extensive margin).
In general equilibrium, the main results are extremely similar to our baseline model
as can be seen in figures 21 and 22. The main difference seems to be in the behaviour of

60

Productivity

K

αLt

Low
Medium
High

rD

0

rD

0

Figure 19: Cut-off level αtL and aggregate capital stock as a function of deposit rates rtD in the
model with an interbank market (full lines). For comparison, the baseline model is also plotted
(dotted lines).

Cutoff αL (∆%)

Output (∆%)
0.35

Leverage active banks (∆%)

0.15

0.3
0.1

0.25

High K0
Low K0

5

K0 = K̄

4

0.2

3

0.05

0.15

6

2
0.1

0

1

0.05
0

0

−0.05
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 20: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt in the model with an interbank
market (full lines). For comparison, the baseline model is also plotted (dotted lines).

the cut-off where the baseline model seems to have additional amplification, particularly
away from the steady-state.

61

Funding rates RF (bp)

Premium over deposits (bp)
0

−2

−5
−3

−10

−4

−15
−20

−5

−25
−6

−30
−35

−7

−40

−8
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

Weighted Option Value of Default (∆%)

10

15

20

25

30

Total leverage (∆%)

25
20

1

High K0
Low K0

0.9

K0 = K̄

0.8
15
0.7
0.6

10

0.5
5

0.4
0.3

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 21: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt : Financial variables

Household consumption (∆%)

Capital (∆%)

Wealth (∆%)

0.4
0.8

0.35
0.3

1

High K0
Low K0

0.9

K0 = K̄

0.8

0.6

0.25

0.7
0.4

0.2

0.6
0.5

0.15

0.2
0.4

0.1
5

10

15

20

25

30

0

0.3
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 22: Monetary policy shock of 100 basis points to γt : Real variables

62

30

Appendix F. Comparative statics on size of equity and volatility
For online publication

Here we explore the role of volatility and net worth in the financial block of the model.
We perform two exercises. In the first one we change the parameter σz , governing the
exogenous volatility of the TFP process. As we can see in figure 23, the main change is
in the composition of the financial sector. When volatility is higher, the VaR is tighter
and therefore the intensive margin is reduced. Leverage from active intermediaries is
lower, which leads to both lower capital stock and cut-off αL . As it turns out, the lower
is volatility, the easier it is for more risk-taking intermediaries to capture more of the
market due to the loosening of VaR constraints.
We also look at the effect of changing the parameter ω, the endowment of net worth
received by intermediaries. As can be seen in Figure 24, the effect is almost purely
compositional with almost no effect on the total amount of capital (differences too
marginal to show up in the graph). Given that the right hand side of equation (20)
is independent of ω, then changing net worth is just allowing the more risk-taking
intermediaries to acquire more assets (given aggregate variables). As with lower volatility,
the higher ω is the easier it is for more risk-taking intermediaries to capture a larger
share of the market.
Volatility

Volatility

K

αL

0.75 σ
σ
1.25 σ

0.75 σ
σ
1.25 σ

0

rD

0

rD

Figure 23: Comparative statics on volatility and interest rates for the financial sector block

63

Net Worth

K

αL

0.5 ω
ω
1.5 ω

Net worth
0.5 ω
ω
1.5 ω

0

rD

0

rD

Figure 24: Comparative statics on net worth and interest rates for the financial sector block

64

