                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    TRAINING CONTRACTS, EMPLOYEE TURNOVER, AND THE RETURNS FROM
                  FIRM-SPONSORED GENERAL TRAINING

                                      Mitchell Hoffman
                                      Stephen V. Burks

                                     Working Paper 23247
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23247


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017


A previous paper appeared as “Training Contracts, Worker Overconfidence, and the Return from
Firm-Sponsored General Training.” That previous paper has been divided in two, with the present
paper focusing on the impact of training contracts. The other paper (Hoffman and Burks,
2017) focuses on worker overconfidence and uses a different dataset (though also based on
workers from Firm A). Some portions of text are similar across the two papers. We are very
grateful to David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, John Morgan, and Steve Tadelis for their
encouragement and advice. We also thank Ben Handel, Ben Hermalin, Ken Judd, Pat Kline,
Botond Koszegi, Matthew Rabin, and Kenneth Train for especially detailed comments, and we
also thank many seminar/conference participants. We thank the many trucking managers and
drivers who shared their insights with us. We thank managers at Firms A for sharing their data
and for facilitating on-site data collection. We thank Mark Gergen, Anthony Kraus, and Gregory
Lemmer for guidance in understanding relevant legal issues. We thank Graham Beattie, Christina
Chew, Dan Ershov, Sandrena Frischer, Will Kuffel, Amol Lingnurkar, Kristjan Sigurdson, and
Irina Titova for outstanding research assistance. Hoffman acknowledges financial support from
the National Science Foundation IGERT Fellowship, the Kauffman Foundation, and the Social
Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Burks and the Truckers & Turnover
Project acknowledge financial support from Firm A, the MacArthur Foundation, the Sloan
Foundation, the Trucking Industry Program at Georgia Tech, and University of Minnesota,
Morris. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the funders or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mitchell Hoffman and Stephen V. Burks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Training Contracts, Employee Turnover, and the Returns from Firm-sponsored General Training
Mitchell Hoffman and Stephen V. Burks
NBER Working Paper No. 23247
March 2017
JEL No. J24,J41,M53

                                          ABSTRACT

Firms may be reluctant to provide general training if workers can quit and use their gained skills
elsewhere. “Training contracts” that impose a penalty for premature quitting can help alleviate
this inefficiency. Using plausibly exogenous contractual variation from a leading trucking firm,
we show that two training contracts significantly reduced post-training quitting, particularly when
workers are approaching the end of their contracts. Simulating a structural model, we show that
observed worker quit behavior exhibits aspects of optimization (for one of the two contracts), and
that the contracts increased firm profits from training and reduced worker welfare relative to no
contract.


Mitchell Hoffman
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
mitchell.hoffman@rotman.utoronto.ca

Stephen V. Burks
Division of Social Science
University of Minnesota, Morris
600 East 4th Street
Morris, MN 56267
svburks@morris.umn.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23247
1       Introduction

Firm-sponsored training is common in many countries and is a central means by which workers

accumulate human capital (e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999a; Autor, 2001). However, it

has been recognized since Pigou (1912) that general training is subject to a “hold-up” problem:

ﬁrms may be reluctant to train if workers are likely to quit after training. Becker’s (1964) canonical

solution is for workers to pay for training themselves, but this may fail for a number of reasons,

e.g., credit constraints. Understanding what makes training proﬁtable for ﬁrms is important for

policy, given concerns that US workers receive less training than workers in countries with lower

turnover, and for economic theory.1

        To discourage workers from quitting after training, ﬁrms often use training contracts: the

ﬁrm pays for training and workers are ﬁned for premature quitting. Training contracts of this form

are used for many jobs (e.g., truckers, policemen, nurses, pilots, and federal employees, to name

a few), but have received limited attention from economists.2 How do training contracts aﬀect

quitting, as well as ﬁrm proﬁts from training? We demonstrate that training contracts signiﬁcantly

reduce post-training quitting and increase the proﬁtability of general training.

        We show that training contracts reduce quitting using plausibly exogenous contractual varia-

tion from the trucking industry. Although it is one speciﬁc industry, trucking is ideal for our study

because it is large (see Section 3.1 for details), training contracts are widely used, and productivity

(miles driven per week) is easy to measure. At a leading US-based trucking ﬁrm, which we call Firm

A, training was initially provided with no contractual obligation. In an eﬀort to increase retention,

the ﬁrm introduced a training contract ﬁning workers for quitting in their ﬁrst 12 months. Diﬀer-

ent states approved the contract for use at diﬀerent speeds, leading the contract to be phased into

diﬀerent training schools at diﬀerent times. Several years later, contracts were changed a second
    1
     See e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke (1998, 1999a); Autor (2001); Barron et al. (1999); Cappelli (2004) for evidence
that ﬁrms often pay for general training, both nominally and in terms of incidence, and for general discussion of
ﬁrm-sponsored general training. US ﬁrms appear to spend less on training than ﬁrms in other countries (Lynch,
1993; Brunello and Medio, 2001), but ﬁrm training expenditures are still substantial, estimated in 1994 at $50 billion
annually for private-sector formal training programs (Baron and Kreps, 1999).
   2
     We discuss related economics work below. For our examples of workers with training contracts, as well as
discussion of relevant legal issues, see the law articles by Kraus (1993, 2008). Other workers with training contracts
include ﬁreﬁghters, pilots, mechanics, salesmen, paramedics, electricians, accountants, teachers, ﬂight attendants,
bank workers, repairmen, ﬁrm-sponsored MBAs, and social workers. Courts in the US and abroad have generally
ruled that training contracts are legally permissible, arguing they serve the public good by promoting investment in
training. See Appendix E.1 for more on legal issues related to training contracts.


                                                          1
time to an 18-month pro-rated contract, also in a staggered fashion.

      Exploiting the staggered contractual roll-out in a “diﬀ-in-diﬀ,” we estimate that the two

contracts both reduced quitting by about 15%, relative to no contract. The contract eﬀects vary

substantially by worker quarter of tenure, with the largest eﬀects occurring closer to when the

contracts expire. Separate cohort-based event study analysis shows that the contracts led to sharp

changes in quitting in the quarter after the change, as well as no evidence of pre-trends. While these

results may seem intuitive, they violate a basic prediction of the Coase Theorem where negotiation

through side payments leads to eﬃcient turnover irrespective of the quit penalty in place (Lazear,

1990). The results thereby suggest that some condition violating the Coase Theorem (such as

private information and/or costs to contract renegotiation) is at play in this market.

      Having estimated the causal impacts of the contracts, we next discuss mechanisms. In general,

contracts may produce treatment eﬀects by aﬀecting behavior (“incentives”) and/or by aﬀecting

employee selection (“selection”) (Lazear, 2000). In our setting, the evidence is most consistent

with incentives being the driver of the impacts we observe, as the workers brought in under the

training contracts do not appear superior in terms of productivity or ﬁring rates, and do not

appear diﬀerent in terms of background characteristics. After discussing mechanisms, we argue

against several potential confounds / alternative explanations.

      Last, we use a structural model of turnover developed in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) to exam-

ine to what extent observed behavior across the contracts is consistent with a dynamic programming

model, as well as to analyze how training contracts aﬀect worker welfare and ﬁrm proﬁts. After

receiving training, workers make a decision every week whether to quit, gradually learning about

their underlying productivity by observing their weekly miles (similar to Jovanovic (1979)). If in-

dividuals quit, they are ﬁned according to a training contract, which speciﬁes penalties at diﬀerent

tenure levels. The model is estimated entirely oﬀ a subset of about 700 workers facing the 12-month

contract for whom we collected very rich data.

      Using the model to simulate how training contracts aﬀect quitting, we show that the model

delivers similar quantitative estimates to our quasi-experimental estimates, suggesting that observed

worker quit reductions were roughly comparable to those predicted by dynamic optimization. For

the 12-month contract, we show that the time path of the contract impacts relative to no contract

is also consistent with theory. Interestingly, for the 18-month contract, the time path of contract

                                                  2
impacts is quite diﬀerent from the theoretical prediction, even though the model is roughly accurate

in predicting the magnitude of the overall contract impact. Furthermore, we show that the 12-month

and 18-month training contracts led to fairly similar increases in proﬁts relative to not having a

contract. In addition, both contracts moderately decreased worker welfare.

       The central contribution of the paper is to show that training contracts signiﬁcantly reduce

quitting, estimating the eﬀects using plausibly exogenous intra-ﬁrm contractual variation. There

is a large literature on why ﬁrms pay for general training—we provide some of the ﬁrst evidence

that formal contracts play an important role in making training proﬁtable for ﬁrms, and we provide

evidence that our results are causal. Acemoglu and Pischke (1999a) review the literature on ﬁrm-

sponsored general training. There are many other reasons besides credit constraints that ﬁrms may

pay for general training including informational asymmetries, search frictions, and labor market

institutions that compress the wage distribution. The part of the training literature most related to

our paper is that on tuition reimbursement. Employer-provided tuition reimbursement programs

are quite common in the US, being oﬀered in as many as 85% of medium and large ﬁrms (Cappelli,

2004). In a sample of MBA students, Manchester (2010) found that 87% received tuition assistance,

with 42% of those obligated to come back to the ﬁrm for 12 or more months after completing the

MBA.3 We also contribute to the broader empirical contracts literature; Chiappori and Salanie

(2003) argue that theory on contracts has outstripped empirics, reﬂecting that plausibly exogenous

variation in contracts (such as in our paper) is rare.4

       A secondary contribution of our paper is to analyze worker behavior under training con-

tracts using a structural model, using the model to estimate impacts on worker welfare and proﬁts.

Because of the rich, plausibly exogenous contractual variation, we are able to compare quasi-

experimental and structural estimates, something which is fairly rare in the literature (for excep-

tions, see Card and Hyslop (2005) and Todd and Wolpin (2006)), but something that scholars

increasingly advocate when possible (Keane and Wolpin, 2007; Todd and Wolpin, 2006). This is
   3
     For a recent theoretical analysis of employee bonding and turnover, which includes analysis of training contracts,
see Peterson (2010). Dustmann and Schoenberg (2012) analyze a diﬀerent commitment issue in training: the ability
of ﬁrms to commit to providing a certain quality of training.
   4
     Instead of analyzing variation in contracts, Naidu and Yuchtman (2013) study how exogenous labor demand
shocks aﬀect prosecutions for servants breaching employment contracts in 19th century Britain. Naidu et al. (2016)
study the consequences of a Middle Eastern reform that made it easier for migrants to switch employers. By studying
formal training contracts, our paper diﬀers from that studying more informal contracts, which are surveyed by
MacLeod (2007).



                                                          3
useful in two respects. First, it helps shed light on to what extent observed quasi-experimental

impacts are consistent with dynamic optimization. Second, it helps validate the structural model.

      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides theoretical discussion on how training

contracts may aﬀect worker behavior. Section 3 provides background information on the trucking

industry and describes the data. Section 4 provides reduced-form estimates of the contracts, as well

as discusses mechanisms and alternative explanations. Section 5 performs structural simulations.

Section 6 concludes.



2    Theoretical Discussion

In Becker’s (1964) model of training, workers ﬁnance their own training through reduced wages

during the training period. However, if workers have limited credit and training is brief (e.g., a

few weeks, as in trucking), workers will not be able to ﬁnance training through a reduced training

period wage without making their wage highly negative. As we model in Appendix B, this situation

can be remedied with a training contract, helping the ﬁrm recover training costs after quits and

potentially also reducing quitting. The Appendix B model is a stylized one-period version of

the dynamic structural model considered in Section 5, and it allows us to derive a proposition

analytically.

      It is not obvious that a training contract will aﬀect quitting. Suppose that workers and ﬁrms

have no private information and that bargaining is costless. Then, by the Coase Theorem, turnover

will be eﬃcient, occurring when the sum of the worker’s and ﬁrm’s outside options exceeds the

value of the match. Thus, turnover will be unaﬀected by a training contract, as a training contract

is merely a “property right” held by ﬁrms over the quit decision.

      To see why, consider the case where it is socially optimal for the worker to quit, but disadvan-

tageous for the ﬁrm. Without a training contract, the worker will quit; the ﬁrm will try to “bribe”

the worker to stay, but the maximum bribe the ﬁrm is willing to oﬀer will still not be high enough

to retain the worker. With the same situation and a training contract in place, the worker and

ﬁrm will bargain such that (after negotiation) the worker will still quit. Whether the worker must

bribe the ﬁrm to let him quit may be aﬀected by the training contract, but the quitting outcome

will not be.


                                                  4
        In our context, however, it seems unlikely that the conditions of the Coase Theorem will

hold. Workers likely have private information (about their taste for the job or their outside option)

and renegotiating contracts with thousands of workers may be costly for a large ﬁrm like Firm A.

Assuming that workers have private information and that there is no renegotiation, allowing for

training contracts increases ﬁrm proﬁts from training and reduces turnover (Proposition 1 or P1).5

        In a related application of the Coase Theorem, Lazear (1990) analyzes job security provisions

in Europe, where ﬁrms are “ﬁned” (e.g., they must pay severance pay) for ﬁring workers. He shows

theoretically how the Coase Theorem may fail to hold and shows empirically that job security

provisions do indeed aﬀect ﬁrm ﬁring.



3       Background on our Setting and Data Description

3.1     Background

Truckdriving in the US. In 2010, there were roughly 1.8 million US workers operating heavy

trucks such as those used by Firm A (BLS, 2010). Firm A is in the long-distance truckload segment

of the for-hire trucking industry, which is the biggest employment setting in this occupation. There

is an important distinction between short-haul and long-haul trucking. Whereas long-haul truckload

drivers are typically paid by the mile (a piece rate) (Belzer, 2000) and drive long distances away

from home, short-haul truckload drivers are not usually paid by the mile and typically spend fewer

nights away from home.6

        For heavy truckdrivers, the main training is that needed to acquire a commercial driver’s

license (CDL). Most new truckers complete a formal CDL training course, and it is required by law

in some states (BLS, 2010). CDL training is provided at various venues, including truck driving

schools run by trucking ﬁrms, private truck driving schools, and some community colleges. In phone

surveys we did with the 30 largest truckload ﬁrms, about half the ﬁrms report providing CDL
    5
     We note that even if the conditions of the Coase Theorem held, changing training contracts could inﬂuence quit
rates by aﬀecting worker selection—Section 4.2, however, ﬁnds fairly limited evidence of selection eﬀects.
   6
     We highlight several other institutional details here. In truckload, most drivers do not own their own trucks
and the unionization rate is low; in addition, employee turnover is very high, frequently exceeding 100% annually
(Burks et al., 2008). Baker and Hubbard (2004) report that in 1992, around 10% of trucks were driven by drivers
who own their own truck (owner-operators), with the remainder driven by drivers driving company-owned trucks
(company drivers). All the drivers we study are non-union company drivers. Hubbard (2003) provides an analysis of
productivity in trucking.



                                                        5
training at some point from 2001-2010 (see Appendix E.3 for more on the survey). CDL training at

Firm A lasted about 2-3 weeks, though the length of training varied somewhat by training school

and over time. Firm A CDL training included classroom lectures, simulator driving, and actual

behind-the-wheel truck driving. The market price for CDL training varies, but is often several

thousand dollars at private training schools.


       Production. Truckload drivers transport full loads between various locations. Hours worked

are constrained by the federal legal limit of about 60 hours per week. While our data do not contain

driver hours, managers informed us that drivers often work up to the limit.

       At Firm A, load assignment is done by a central dispatching system. Loads are assigned

primarily based on proximity, as well as hours remaining up to the federal limit. Upon ﬁnishing a

load, a driver may begin a new one.

       In long-haul trucking, productivity is measured in miles driven per week. Productivity re-

ﬂects both signiﬁcant persistent diﬀerences across drivers and substantial idiosyncratic variation

within drivers. According to managers at the ﬁrm, productivity diﬀerences across drivers reﬂect

various factors, including speed, skill at avoiding traﬃc, route planning (miles are calculated not by

distance traveled, but according to a pre-speciﬁed distance between two points), not getting lost,

and coordinating with other people to unload the truck. As for the sources of the substantial week-

to-week idiosyncratic variation, managers emphasized weather, traﬃc, variable loading/unloading

time, and disadvantageous load assignments. Thus, driver miles reﬂect both driver performance

and eﬀort, as well as factors that drivers do not control and may be hard to predict. For more on

measuring productivity, see Appendix E.2 and Hoﬀman and Burks (2017).


       Contract Changes. To examine the eﬀects of training contracts, we analyze two large

contract changes at Firm A, a leading trucking ﬁrm. At the start of our data period, Firm A

provided CDL training to thousands of new drivers per year at no cost at several geographically

dispersed training schools. There was no contractual obligation. We omit certain details from our

descriptions to preserve Firm A’s anonymity.

       Around late 2000, management proposed implementing a training contract.7 The primary
   7
     Our impression from talking with managers is that the idea of using a training contract was proposed by a newly
promoted manager, and that the ﬁrm had not previously considered the possibility of using a training contract. Also,
note that our description of the timing of contract changes is for the ﬁve training schools in our sample.


                                                         6
motivation was to increase retention, with a secondary motivation being to help recover costs. To

implement the contracts, contracts had to be certiﬁed by the states where the training schools

were located. This certiﬁcation process took diﬀerent amounts of time in diﬀerent states. In three

training schools, the contract was certiﬁed in 2001 and was put in use on a date in early spring 2002.

At another training school, certiﬁcation did not occur until late spring 2002 and the contract was

not used until fall 2002, and in one school the contract was never used due to certiﬁcation issues.

Managers told us that cross-state diﬀerences in time for state certiﬁcation seemed idiosyncratic and

were unlikely to be related to the type of impact the contracts might have. The quit penalty varied

slightly by training school and was between $3,500 and $4,000. The contract lasted 12 months and

the quit penalty was constant throughout. The contract applied for both quits and ﬁres.8

       After several years of the 12-month contract, in an eﬀort to further increase retention, man-

agement decided to switch to an 18-month contract. The initial penalty for quitting was increased

to roughly $5,000, but gradually decreased with worker tenure—the penalty was reduced by about

$65 per week of service.9 Again, the contract was phased in gradually, being introduced at one

school before being brought to other schools on a date about one year later.10 Adoption of the

12-month and 18-month contracts were made without additional changes to driver pay. Both the

changes to the 12-month and 18-month contracts applied only to new drivers; drivers who had

already signed on with no contract or the 12-month contract did not have their contracts altered.

Appendix A.1 gives further background on the contract changes.


       Enforcement. While it may seem hard to enforce training contracts with truckers, Firm A

made strenuous enforcement eﬀorts. Drivers signed a written contract specifying penalties for early

exit. No bond was posted. Upon early exit, drivers were contacted by Firm A to pay the amount

due. If drivers did not pay, they were often referred to one of multiple collection agencies. For

drivers who remained delinquent, credit agencies were notiﬁed. Although comprehensive driver-

level collection data are not available, the available data and conversations with managers suggest
   8
     According to managers, the contract also covered ﬁres so as to prevent workers who wanted to quit from trying
to get ﬁred; however, according to these managers, the ﬁrm did not intentionally ﬁre workers to collect training
penalties.
   9
     Of the roughly $65 per week that was deducted from the worker’s initial quit penalty, the worker had around
$13 each week deducted from his pay check. After two years with the company, the driver would receive a bonus
payment roughly equal to the total amount deducted from his pay check in the ﬁrst 18 months.
  10
     Unlike the ﬁrst contract change, the order of locations for the second contract change appears to have been more
actively chosen by the ﬁrm. Appendix A.1 discusses why we do not believe it to be a source of bias.


                                                         7
that approximately 30% of quit penalties were collected (details in Appendix A.2).


3.2    Data

The data from Firm A are ideal for analyzing the impact of training contracts due to the large

sample size and high frequency of observation. We focus on new inexperienced drivers who are

trained by Firm A. The data contain weekly miles and earnings, as well as basic demographics and

other information, for thousands of new drivers for 2002-2009. Drivers are primarily paid by the

mile, with small payments for other tasks (e.g., helping unload a truck). The per mile piece rate

increases with driver tenure. We restrict our sample to drivers from 5 training schools, excluding

several schools where the training provided diﬀered and/or the precise contract change dates were

not available. We refer to this sample as the “full sample.” Appendix A.3 provides further details

on sample construction.

       Several other papers by one or both of the authors have analyzed Firm A data on a subset of

roughly 1,000 new drivers trained at one of the ﬁrm’s training schools in late 2005-2006.11 However,

the full 8-year Firm A dataset on all new workers, with hundreds of thousands of worker-weeks, is

much larger than the data subset; our paper is the ﬁrst to analyze the full dataset and the dataset is

critical for identifying the impact of training contracts (given the cross-training school contractual

variation).12

       Table 1 presents sample means. The sample size is omitted to preserve ﬁrm conﬁdentiality.

The sample is primarily male and is majority white. The majority of workers have the 12-month

contract, but there are still sizable shares with no contract and the 12-month contract.

       In the full sample of drivers, we do not observe driver credit scores. However, in the subset

of Firm A drivers studied by Hoﬀman and Burks (2017), there is information on credit scores: the

average credit score is 586 and the median credit score is 564. These are quite low relative to the

US median credit score of 723 (median at time of data collection) and indicate that a substantial

share of drivers are “subprime.”13 Such low credit scores are consistent with many drivers facing
  11
     Appendix A.4 describes several unrelated papers using the data subset (e.g., comparing social preferences of
truckers, students, and non-trucker adults). For details on the Firm A data collection, see Burks et al. (2008).
  12
     A later-written paper, Burks et al. (2015), uses data from 9 ﬁrms, including the full dataset from Firm A, to
study the unrelated question of hiring through employee referrals (for details, see Appendix A.4).
  13
     The credit score is the FICO-98 and has a range of 300-850. Among the drivers, 53% have a credit score less
than 600, compared to a rate of only 15% in the US general population. The credit score deﬁnition of a “subprime”
borrower varies by lender, though the cutoﬀ is frequently 620 or 640. Drivers are particularly over-represented among


                                                         8
credit constraints.

       Figure 1 compares quit hazards under the three contractual regimes. Quit rates are high

(often over 1% per week, though varying substantially based on week of tenure). For drivers with

the 12-month contract, there is a spike in quitting at the 52-week mark. There are also smaller

bumps at the 52-week mark under the no contract and 18-month regimes. Firm A managers

suggested that these bumps in quitting at 52 weeks under the no contract and 18-month contract

regimes may result from workers postponing quitting until then to be able to say that they worked

for a full year at their last employer when applying for other jobs.


       Where do drivers go when they exit? As is common in most personnel datasets, we do

not observe where drivers go when they exit the ﬁrm. For the subset of drivers studied by Hoﬀman

and Burks (2017), we surveyed drivers by mail to collect this information, and we found that most

exiting drivers are not going to jobs in long-haul trucking. Of the drivers responding to our survey,

48% reported moving to a non-trucking job or unemployment, while 25% reported going to a local

driving job. Further, 15% of drivers went to a regional trucking job and only 12% report going to

a job in long-haul trucking.14



4     Analysis

4.1    Do Training Contracts Aﬀect Quitting?

Diﬀ-in-Diﬀ for overall eﬀects. Table 2 shows using Cox proportional hazard models that

training contracts signiﬁcantly reduced quitting. The regressors of interest are dummies for the

12-month and 18-month contracts, which vary at the school-week of hire level. We also include

current quarter-year ﬁxed eﬀects (to control for diﬀerences in quit rates over time), month-year of

hire ﬁxed eﬀects (to control for diﬀerences in quit rate by month of hire), training school dummies,

the annual state unemployment rate, a driver’s average productivity to date, and other controls.
those with credit scores below 550 (a very low score), with 43% of drivers being below 550 compared to 7% of the
general population. We use the “Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Eﬀects on the Availability and
Aﬀordability of Credit” issued by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (Aug. 2007) for information on credit
score statistics. For drivers in the subset studied by Hoﬀman and Burks (2017), Firm A purchased credit scores.
  14
     The survey had a response rate of only 25%; however, we are not particularly concerned about selection bias, as
whether a driver responds to the survey is uncorrelated with most driver characteristics. For further information on
the exit survey, see Section 2.2 and Appendix A5 of Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) for further details.



                                                         9
The training contract dummies are identiﬁed by changes in training contracts across workers hired

at diﬀerent dates at a given training school. Throughout the reduced form analysis, standard

errors are clustered at the training school-week of hire level (the level of variation for the training

contracts). Doing so allows for arbitrary correlation of the error within training school classes

(drivers attending the same training school at the same time).

       In column 1, the coeﬃcients on the 12-month and 18-month contract variables are -0.141

and -0.148, respectively, meaning the contracts decreased quitting by about 14% and 15%. The

estimates remain similar when controls are added for the driver’s current state unemployment rate,

the driver’s average productivity to date (in hundreds of miles driven per week), and demographic

controls.15 The contract coeﬃcients are a bit larger in magnitude once school-speciﬁc time trends

are included, increasing to between −0.20 and −0.24. The coeﬃcient on average productivity to

date (in hundreds of miles per week) is about −0.09, reﬂecting that more productive workers are

less likely to quit. Thus, the impact of the training contracts on quitting is roughly the same as

an increase of average productivity to date of about 150-200 miles per week, where 200 miles per

week is about 10% of weekly average productivity.16

       In assessing magnitudes, it is useful to compare our estimates to those in studies of other

types of contracts. Although often used for higher skilled workers than truckers, one contract that is

related to a training contract is a non-compete agreement, which prohibit employees from starting

competitor ﬁrms or moving to a competitor for a given length of time. Marx et al. (2009) study the

turnover consequences of allowing enforcement of non-compete agreements for Michigan inventors,

ﬁnding that enforcing non-competes led to an 8% drop in turnover for inventors outside the auto

industry.17 Another type of contract/beneﬁt that may aﬀect turnover is health insurance eligibility,
  15
      We control for average productivity to date (as opposed to some other combination of past productivity realiza-
tions) because it is a suﬃcient statistic for past productivity realizations in a normal learning model. Beyond the
overall time eﬀects at the quarter-year of hire level, it is also useful to control for state unemployment, especially
given that the later part of the sample period corresponds with a weakening of the labor market.
   16
      There are also persistent diﬀerences across drivers in underlying weekly productivity, with a standard deviation
of roughly 275 miles (Hoﬀman and Burks, 2017). It is not immediately clear that one wants to control for average
productivity to date in estimating the overall treatment eﬀects of the contracts on quitting. Changes in average
productivity to date may reﬂect idiosyncratic demand factors beyond a driver’s control, and this would be a reason
to control for average productivity. However, changes in underlying productivity may also be reﬂective of worker
selection. We thus believe it is useful to show results with and without controlling for average productivity to date.
In practice, this has little impact on the results.
   17
      That non-competes reduce mobility is also found in a recent study by Balasubramanian et al. (2017), who ﬁnd
that, all else equal, being in the highest enforceability US state reduces turnover of high-tech workers by 7.5% relative
to the lowest enforceability US state.



                                                           10
which may cause “job lock.” Madrian (1994) ﬁnds that having spousal health insurance increases

job turnover by 25%, implying that job lock reduces turnover by 25% (see Gruber and Madrian

(2002) for further discussion of the job lock literature). Based on these estimates, the impact of

the training contracts is about twice as large as those from enforcing non-compete agreements, and

about 60% as large as those from an employee not having spousal health insurance.


      Eﬀects by quarter of tenure. To examine further how the eﬀects of the contracts varied

with tenure, we estimate a linear probability model of quitting on interactions of the contracts with

worker quarter of tenure. Estimates are shown in Figure 2. Under the 12-month contract, relative

to no contract, the largest negative impacts on quitting are observed in weeks 27-52, with quitting

increasing in weeks 53-65. This is probably workers postponing quitting until their 12-month

contract is over and seems consistent with basic worker optimization.

      Under the 18-month contract, relative to no contract, negative impacts on quitting are espe-

cially strong in quarters 5-6. That is, drivers appear reluctant to quit in quarters 5 and 6, even

though (unlike the 12-month contract) the penalty is pro-rated and gradually decreasing. We do

not fully understand this, but we speculate this could reﬂect a (perhaps psychic) value to some

drivers of “ﬁnishing the contract.” We return to this issue later in Section 5.1, where we compare

observed impacts of the contracts to those simulated from a model.

      A potential concern is that quit impacts could be driven by economic conditions. Some of

the drivers with the 18-month contract were hired toward the end of the sample period (2002-

2009) when the labor market began to slow down. We are already addressing national shocks by

including current quarter-year ﬁxed eﬀects (as well as month-year of hire ﬁxed eﬀects), and the

results in Figure 2 already control for a driver’s annual state unemployment rate. While monthly

state unemployment rates may have more noise than annual state unemployment rates, we repeated

Figure 2 using monthly state unemployment rates and achieved a similar picture. Thus, we do not

believe that changes in economic conditions are biasing the results.


      Event study analysis. A complementary approach to identiﬁcation is to analyze the quit

patterns of new drivers hired before and after the contract changes using an event study. To

maximize statistical power, we focus on tenure periods during which the contracts had a big eﬀect,

as indicated in Figure 2. For the transition from no contract to the 12-month contract, we analyze

                                                 11
quitting in the 4th quarter of tenure (weeks 40-52). Under the 12-month contract, drivers may

optimally wait until their year is up before quitting, whereas the same incentive is not present for

drivers with no contract. For the transition to the 18-month contract, we analyze quitting in the

5th and 6th quarters of tenure (weeks 53-78). Those under the 12-month contract may have waited

for the year to end, whereas these weeks are still under contract for the 18-month contract. For

the transition from the 12-month to the 18-month contract, the event study is estimated using:
                                                  
                                                  T
                                                            j
                                     Quitisqt =         θj Dsq + Xisqt λ + isqt                                   (1)
                                                  j=T

where Quitisqt is a dummy for quitting in week t by driver i from school s with quarter of hire q
                        j
and isqt is an error. Dsq is a dummy for whether those in quarter of hire q at training school s are
                                                                     j
j periods from the introduction of the 18-month contract; formally, Dsq = 1(q − es = j), where es is

the quarter when school s adopted the 18-month contract. T and T deﬁne the range of event time

under study. Xisqt is the same vector of control variables as in column 2 of Table 2 (and includes

school ﬁxed eﬀects and month-year of hire ﬁxed eﬀects). We normalize θ−1 = 0.

       As seen in Figure 3, for the transition to the 12-month contract, the probability of quitting

in a week between weeks 40-52 drops by roughly 0.6 percentage points.18 For the transition to

the 18-month contract, there is a substantial decrease in quitting during weeks 53-78 (by over 1

percentage point). These event study impacts are quite sizable relative to the average quit rates

shown in Figure 1. The eﬀects are sudden and persist over time.


4.2    Incentives or Selection?

A decrease in quitting from training contracts may result through incentive and/or selection eﬀects.

If a worker is penalized for quitting, he may become less likely to quit, i.e., an incentive eﬀect.

However, adding a training contract could also aﬀect the selection of workers who choose to work

at the ﬁrm, e.g., quit penalties might deter workers with low productivity or low taste for the

job from signing up. We perform two tests suggesting that the eﬀect of the training contracts on

quitting operated primarily through incentives.
  18
    In panel (a), there is an imbalance in the panel due to the fact that 3 of the training schools only have 1 quarter
of data before the contract change. In Appendix Figure D1, we re-make panel (a) while restricting to the training
school for which we have the longest pre-period before the 12-month contract change (this school got the 12-month
contract in fall 2002) and at which the 12-month contract is eventually introduced. The result is qualitatively similar
to panel (a) of Figure 3. In contrast, for panel (b), we have signiﬁcant pre- and post-periods for all schools.



                                                          12
       Our ﬁrst test is to examine whether selection occurred on various observable characteristics,

the most obvious being productivity: Did adding a training contract lead more productive workers

to begin working at the ﬁrm? As seen in Panel A of Table 3, there is no evidence that the contracts

increased productivity, and the results are reasonably precisely estimated. Columns 1-2 present

results without trimming, whereas columns 3-4 present results while trimming miles at the 5th and

95th percentiles (trimming after dropping 0 mile weeks) to reduce the inﬂuence of productivity

outliers. In column 4, the 95% conﬁdence intervals on the 12-month and 18-month contracts are

about [-22,+34] and [-35,+36], respectively, meaning we can rule out that the contracts either

decreased or increased productivity by more than about 35 miles per week (where 40 miles per

week is around 2% of weekly productivity).19

       One can also test for selection by looking at whether workers with other characteristics

(potentially correlated with taste for the job or tendency to quit) are more likely to choose to

work for the ﬁrm once training contracts are in place. Panel B shows little evidence for this,

with 1 out of 10 coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at 5% signiﬁcance. An additional worker

characteristic/outcome to examine is whether an employee gets ﬁred. If training contracts deterred

low-quality drivers from working at Firm A, one would expect a decrease in the rate of ﬁring.

Appendix Table D1 estimates negative coeﬃcients (i.e., drops in ﬁring from the training contracts),

but none of the coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant. We do not emphasize the ﬁring results

because the ﬁring estimates are less precise than those for quitting (ﬁres are about 3 times rarer

than quits).

       Our second test of selection aims at testing whether there was selection on unobserved taste

for trucking. Suppose that there are two types of drivers: “Good drivers,” who are productive and

who have a high taste for trucking, and “Bad drivers,” who are less productive and have a low taste

for trucking. The training contract would induce positive selection if it caused a greater share of

new workers at the ﬁrm to be “Good drivers.” If the contracts caused positive selection, controlling

for productivity should reduce the estimated magnitude of the coeﬃcients on the contract variables

in quit hazard models. As can be seen in column 3 of Table 2, the contract dummy coeﬃcients are
  19
     We display our test for selection using all weeks of data to maximize power. A concern, however, is that because
more productive people are less likely to quit, the impact of the training contracts on quitting could confound their
impact on selection. To address this issue, we re-did our analysis restricting to drivers in their ﬁrst 6 months for
drivers who stay with the ﬁrm for at least 6 months. In these results, we ﬁnd no evidence that the contracts induced
positive selection.


                                                         13
very similar once productivity is controlled for. Thus, this test provides no evidence to support the

idea that the contract induced signiﬁcant positive selection.20

       These two tests do not ﬁnd much evidence of selection due training contracts. Given the

strong evidence of selection eﬀects of contracts in other personnel settings (e.g., Lazear, 2000), why

does positive selection here seem relatively small or absent?21 One possibility is that for some

reason the contract may not have been salient to drivers when they signed up for the job. However,

this seems unlikely to be the case, as a discussion of training contracts was a mandatory part

of interviews at Firm A, according to managers. What seems a more likely possibility to us is

that workers lack private information about their productivity when signing up. Unlike in Lazear

(2000), the workers here are new to long-haul trucking. Long-haul trucking is very diﬀerent from

most other jobs and it may be diﬃcult to predict how good one will be at it.


4.3    Threats to Identiﬁcation

We discuss potential threats to identiﬁcation and why they are unlikely to aﬀect our results.


       Endogenous Contract Changes. Our estimation assumes that implementation of training

contracts is orthogonal to unobserved factors aﬀecting quitting. However, if training contracts were

implemented in areas expected to have higher quitting, then we will underestimate the eﬀect of

training contracts on quitting. Alternatively, if it was easier to implement training contracts where

future quitting was expected to be lower, then we will overestimate the eﬀect. As noted earlier,

our conversations with managers suggest that contract roll-out seems unlikely to be driven by such

factors. In the data, training contract adoption is not predicted by state unemployment rates (which

may be correlated with unobserved factors aﬀecting quitting), as seen in Table 4. Also, as noted

above, the estimated reductions in quitting are actually a bit larger once training school-speciﬁc

linear quarter-year of hire trends are included (columns 6-7 of Table 2), suggesting the estimated
  20
     This test is inspired by the test for selection in Lazear (2000), who tests for selection by analyzing whether the
coeﬃcient on the piece-rate dummy changes once individual ﬁxed eﬀects are added. He ﬁnds that the coeﬃcient on
the contract dummy falls by half, leading him to conclude that selection explains half the treatment eﬀect of the
contract. Our test is signiﬁcantly more indirect, given that we cannot observe the same individual under multiple
contractual regimes. Accounting for selection by adding individual ﬁxed eﬀects is also used in other papers such as
Lafontaine and Shaw (2016), who study the phenomenon of serial entrepreneurship.
  21
     Another recent piece on evidence on incentives vs. selections comes from Manchester (2012). She shows that
instituting a tuition reimbursement program at a university decreased staﬀ turnover, and provides evidence of eﬀects
operating through selection.



                                                          14
reductions are not the result of pre-existing trends in quitting.


         Worker Sorting Between Schools. Another potential confound to identifying the impact

of training contracts on quitting would be worker sorting between schools. (Note that workers

sorting between schools is diﬀerent from the above-mentioned possibility of workers selecting into

the ﬁrm.) For example, a worker who believed he had a high chance of quitting might prefer to

attend a training school that did not have a training contract. This is unlikely to be an issue at

Firm A because drivers generally attend a training school based on their state of home residence.

Speciﬁcally, 93% of drivers in the full sample attend the modal training school in their state.22


         Concurrent Firm Policy Changes. According to managers, contract changes at training

schools were not accompanied by other changes in Firm A policy, such as changes in worker beneﬁts

or applicant screening.


         Tenure-Varying Contract Enforcement. Under the 12-month contract, quitting after 51

weeks leads to the same penalty as quitting a few weeks after training. Could it have been that

training contracts were enforced diﬀerently depending on worker tenure? Such a possibility does

not threaten identiﬁcation of the overall impact of the training contracts on quitting, but may aﬀect

the interpretation of impacts by tenure. Although disaggregated data on contract enforcement are

not available, managers said that worker tenure did not aﬀect contract enforcement.23



5        Structural Simulations of the Diﬀerent Training Contracts

The analysis so far has considered reduced-form impacts of the contracts. In this section, we use a

structural model developed and estimated in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) to simulate retention, as

well as calculate worker welfare and ﬁrm proﬁts, under the diﬀerent contracts. A main advantage

of the structural approach is that it enables one to perform simulations while accounting for key
    22
      This is generally the training school closest to their state. The percentage attending the modal training school
in their state is 89% if we look at all training schools instead of the 5 training schools in the full sample. Drivers who
don’t attend their state’s modal training school often live in states roughly equidistant from two training schools.
   23
      We note also, if for some reason, there was some workers who were “let oﬀ the hook” somewhat for a quitting
event coming shortly before 52 weeks, and workers understood this, we would expect that this would make the 12-
month contract less impactful than it would be otherwise. That is, such time-varying contact enforcement would
work against us ﬁnding strong results in weeks 40-52, where we are currently ﬁnding strong impacts, and correcting
it would likely make the results stronger than they already are.



                                                           15
features of the work environment studied, including learning about ability, unobserved heterogeneity

in taste for the job, and idiosyncratic taste shocks. The welfare consequences of “locking in”

a worker via a training contract may seem to depend importantly on these features; for example,

locking in a worker who is roughly indiﬀerent between his inside and outside options may have little

worker welfare consequences, but may be much more important when there are large diﬀerences.

         For brevity, we lay out the model in detail in Appendix C. Focusing on the main elements here,

workers solve an “optimal stopping problem” of when (if ever) to quit the ﬁrm. Workers have an

underlying productivity, which is initially unknown to them, but drawn from a known distribution.

Every week, drivers observe their miles, which is a noisy realization of their underlying productivity,

and this enables them to learn about their productivity. The learning process is a generalization

of a purely rational version of Bayes’ Rule, thereby accommodating a broader range of updating

behavior than would be imposed by strict rationality. Workers are compensated by a piece rate,

wt , that depends on their tenure. Workers are risk-neutral and make stay/quit decisions in order

to maximize their perceived expected utility, Vt (xt ):
                                             ∞                                 
                                               
                         Vt (xt ) = max Et          δ s−t us (ds , xs ) |dt , xt .                    (2)
                                      dt ,dt+1,...
                                                     s=t
where dt is a decision each week t about whether to stay or quit; δ is the discount factor; and xt is

the vector of state variables, which includes the realizations of past miles, y1 , ..., yt−1 . If a worker

stays, each week they receive their earnings, plus their persistent non-pecuniary taste for the job,

plus an idiosyncratic error. That is, ut (1, xt ) = α+wt yt +εSt , where α is the mass-point-distributed

non-pecuniary taste for the job and εSt is the idiosyncratic error. In contrast, if the worker quits,

they pay their training contract ﬁne (if any), and receive their outside option thereafter, and in the

week of quitting they also receive an idiosyncratic error. That is, ut (0, xt ) = −kt + 1−δ
                                                                                         rt
                                                                                            + εQ
                                                                                               t , where

kt is the training contract penalty, rt is the outside option per period, and εQ
                                                                               t is the idiosyncratic

error.

         The model in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) is estimated on a subset of 699 workers facing the

12-month contract for whom we collected very rich data, most importantly, weekly on worker’s

subjective beliefs about their productivity. These workers were hired in late 2005 and 2006 at one

of the ﬁrm’s training schools. The subjective belief data are quite valuable because they allow us

to relax the rational expectations assumption in worker productivity forecasting, something which


                                                      16
Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) show is quantitatively important. Burks et al. (2008) and Hoﬀman and

Burks (2017) provide details on data collection for this subset of workers.


5.1    Out-of-sample prediction of contract impacts on quitting

Of course, the extent to which a structural model is useful for examining welfare and proﬁts

depends critically on whether it provides a reasonable account of the data and of the impact of the

training contracts. To do so, we simulate the full data generating process under the three diﬀerent

contractual regimes.

       Figure 4 shows simulated worker survival under the three diﬀerent regimes. Under the 12-

month contract, many workers optimally postpone quitting until after one year, echoing our earlier

reduced form results. To assess the similarity of these results to the quasi-experimental estimates

from Table 2, we ran a Cox proportional hazard model using the simulated data. Table 5 shows

coeﬃcient estimates of -0.182 and -0.185, meaning that the 12-month and 18-month contracts

reduce quitting by around 18-19% relative to no contract in the simulated data, estimates which

lie within the range of estimates of quit reductions presented in Table 2. We simulated 40,000

workers for each of the three contractual conditions—because the sample size here is chosen by the

researcher (and is thus arbitrary), we do not present standard errors in the table.24

       It is worth emphasizing that there is no mechanical reason why the structurally estimated

quit reductions would be similar to the quasi-experimental estimates, as the model is estimated

entirely based oﬀ of a subset of workers facing the 12-month contract. This suggests that the quit

reductions we estimate are broadly consistent with those from a worker who is “optimizing.”25

       In addition to examining whether the overall simulated impacts of the contract are consistent

with our quasi-experimental estimates, we can examine whether this is also true for the time path

of estimates. To do this, Figure 5 replicates Figure 2, but using the simulated data. It shows how

the 12-month contract aﬀects quitting relative to no contract. Panel (a) of Figure 5 is similar to

panel (a) of Figure 2, with signiﬁcant quit reductions, particularly close to the end of the ﬁrst year
   24
      Simulating 40,000 workers per contract seems to be plenty of workers for the simulation to deliver accurate
results. Performing our Cox model on the simulated data and clustering by driver, the standard error on the contract
coeﬃcients is 0.008 for both contracts.
   25
      We use the term “optimizing” with quotation marks for two reasons. First, as we discuss below, some of the
simulated impacts over time diﬀer substantially from the quasi-experimental estimates. Second, the structural model
assumed is not a fully rational model. In particular, it allows workers to have productivity beliefs that may diﬀer
from those predicted by Bayes’ rule, with diﬀerences both in means and variances.


                                                        17
of tenure, and with an increase after that.

       In contrast, for analyzing how the 18-month contract aﬀects quitting relative to no contract,

panel (b) of Appendix Figure 5 is very diﬀerent relative to panel (b) of Figure 2. In Figure 5, the

largest impacts of the 18-month contract take place early in a driver’s tenure when the contract

penalty is still the highest. This is because the contract is pro-rated. For drivers who realize they

are less productive as truckers or who have low taste for the job, it may be optimal to postpone

quitting until quarter 4, 5, or 6 of tenure when the quit penalty is lower.26

       Even though the model is estimated on workers facing the 12-month contract, there is no

mechanical expectation that it be able to replicate the 12-month contract impacts relative to the

no contract regime. Behavior under the no contract regime represents an out-of-sample prediction

for the model.


       Discussion. For the 18-month contract relative to no contract, why might the time-path

of simulated contract impacts diﬀer so much from the quasi-experimental contract impacts? One

possibility alluded to earlier is that there is a particular non-monetary beneﬁt for workers of ﬁnishing

the contract. For example, drivers may believe that there would be reputational consequences for

their future labor market activities if they did not ﬁnish the contract or may feel that it is the

“right thing to do” to ﬁnish their contract with the ﬁrm that trained them (e.g., out of reciprocity

or gift exchange (Akerlof, 1982)).

       Driver behavior could also potentially reﬂect less than fully rational or “behavioral” beliefs.

After taking on an 18-month contract, drivers may mentally “anchor” (e.g., Ariely et al., 2003;

Maniadis et al., 2014) on 18 months as the minimum amount they intend to stay even if they

are not very happy with some aspects of the job. Another related possibility is that the contract

highlighted 18 months of tenure as a goal for workers to achieve (e.g., Corgnet et al., 2015). A

further possibility is that some drivers may not easily understand the diﬀerence between a cliﬀ

format contract (like the 12-month contract) and the 18-month pro-rated contract, and might have
  26
    Besides seeing whether the model is consistent with the reduced form impacts of the training contracts, an
alternative approach is to see whether the model can closely match retention curves out of sample (e.g., Card and
Hyslop, 2005). This is not our preferred approach because although the variation across the training contracts is
plausibly exogenous conditional on control variables, we do not have a randomized experiment. When we have
attempted this approach, we found that the model estimated under 699 workers with the 12-month contract could do
a reasonable job predicting no contract worker behavior out of sample, but struggled somewhat in predicting behavior
under the 18-month contract.



                                                        18
responded to the contract as if the penalty did not vary with tenure.27

       Ultimately, however, it is diﬃcult for us to distinguish the validity of these diﬀerent explana-

tions. Our contribution here is to document that the quit impacts of the 18-month contract diﬀer

from those predicted by a simple dynamic model.


5.2    Impacts on proﬁts and welfare

Proﬁts are computed as production proﬁts, plus penalties from the training contracts, minus ﬁrm

costs from training. For a worker staying T periods at the ﬁrm before quitting, proﬁts are given

by:
                             
                             T                                          
                                                                        T
                        π=         δ t−1 ((P − mc − wt )yt − F C) +           δ t−1 θkt qt − T C                   (3)
                             t=1                                        t=1
Here, δ is the discount factor, P is the price charged by the ﬁrm for a mile of shipping, mc denotes the

non-wage marginal cost per mile (such as fuel costs and truck wear), yt is the driver’s productivity

(miles in a week), F C denotes ﬁxed costs per week (e.g., back oﬃce support for drivers), qt is

a dummy variable for quitting in a given week, θ is the share of the training contract penalty

collected by the ﬁrm, and T C represents the training cost per worker. Worker welfare is calculated

by adding up earnings in trucking, taste for trucking, idiosyncratic shocks, and realizations of the

ﬁxed outside option using equation (6). For calculating ﬁrm proﬁts and worker welfare, we use

the same parameters and use the same simulation procedure as in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) (also

detailed in this paper in Appendix C.2).28

       Table 5 shows that proﬁts are higher with the two training contracts (compared to no con-

tract), but that worker welfare is lower. In addition, proﬁts are slightly higher and worker welfare

slightly lower under the 18-month contract relative to the 12-month contract. For the ﬁrm, workers

stay longer under the contracts, so they have more of an opportunity to opportunity to reap proﬁts

after having made a training investment. For the worker, the contracts limit worker ability to
  27
      To explore this possibility, we simulated the structural model assuming that the 18-month contract was ﬂat at
its initial level instead of pro-rated. As seen in Appendix Figure D2, this does a better job matching the impacts of
the 18-month contract relative to no contract, but it is still quite imperfect.
   28
      As in Hoﬀman and Burks (2017), we focus separately on proﬁts and worker welfare, as opposed to analyzing
total welfare. We have found our conclusions on proﬁts and worker welfare (separately) to be quite robust to diﬀerent
assumptions. However, across a range of counterfactuals that we have considered using our model (including for work
outside of this paper), we found total welfare to depend more closely on particular assumptions made. That some
counterfactuals may not lead to unambiguous changes in total welfare is not surprising, given our model allows for
multiple market failures, including private information about taste for the job and shocks; potentially biased beliefs;
quitting externalities; and monopsony power in the training market.


                                                          19
costlessly leave the job if they ﬁnd it to be non-lucrative or unsatisfying.29


         Why may the ﬁrm not have been optimizing to start with? For the ﬁrm we study,

proﬁts were increased by adopting a training contract versus having no contract. However, ad-

ditional attempts at optimization toward picking a better contract produced more modest gains.

Some readers may be tempted to ask the question of why might the ﬁrm may not have been opti-

mizing in the ﬁrst place. A simple explanation is that the use of training contracts may be thought

of as a management practice, for which technological adoption is not immediate, as explored in

Bloom et al. (2016). That ﬁrms may gradually learn about successful human resource management

practices is a common theme in the personnel economics literature. For a recent example, see

Friebel et al. (2017), where adoption of a particular management practice (namely, a shop-level

bonus) led to signiﬁcant improvements in worker performance.



6        Conclusion

Given signiﬁcant concern about under-investment, understanding what makes training proﬁtable

for ﬁrms is critical both for economic theory and for policy. This paper explores the role of

commonly-used contracts that ﬁne workers for quitting after training.

         Using plausibly exogenous contractual variation created by the staggered introduction of

training contracts across training schools within a ﬁrm, we show that implementing a training

contract reduced quitting by around 15%. The impacts on quitting are evidence across diﬀerent

research designs, including diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence and event study analysis, and are strongest when

workers are nearing the end of their contract. These impacts appear to be driven by making

employees less likely to quit, as opposed to selecting better employees, though we caveat that our

analysis faces the challenge that individuals are observed only under one contract; thus, we cannot

control for individual ﬁxed eﬀects to employ a common test of selection vs. incentive eﬀects of

contracts. Simulating the contract changes in a structural model, we show that observed quit

impacts are in line with simulated predictions; that the time path of quits exhibits aspects of
    29
    One important feature of the structural model and counterfactual simulations is that the quality of new workers is
not aﬀected by which training contracts are used. This is consistent with our empirical results in Section 4.2 that the
observed contracts do not appear to have signiﬁcantly aﬀected worker quality. It could be the case that a suﬃciently
punitive training contract would aﬀect worker quality, but that the observed contracts do not rise to this level.



                                                          20
optimization (for the 12-month contract but not the 18-month contract); and that the contracts

signiﬁcantly increase ﬁrm proﬁts from training and decrease worker welfare.

       While we ﬁnd that the two contracts reduced worker welfare relative to not having a contract

at this ﬁrm, this does not imply that the existence of training contracts reduces worker welfare (e.g.,

that worker welfare would increase if training contracts were banned). If training contracts were

not available, it is possible that ﬁrms would not be willing to make as much investment in worker

training, possibly limiting the number of drivers that could go into trucking. Furthermore, our

analysis of proﬁts and welfare is a “partial equilibrium” analysis for one particular ﬁrm, and does

not analyze what happens if all ﬁrms went from having no contract to having training contracts.

Future research with data on multiple ﬁrms is needed to address such issues.30 Still, our analysis

shows that training contracts can play a signiﬁcant role for proﬁts and welfare within one ﬁrm.

       Although we focus on a single industry, training contracts are used in many jobs, both other

blue-collar jobs (e.g., mechanics and electricians) and high-skill jobs (e.g., pilots, accountants, and

stockbrokers). Future work should examine whether the impacts of training contracts are similar.

For example, one might imagine that workers in high-skill jobs may be more adept at renegotiating

contracts compared to workers in lower-skill jobs. As such, training contracts may be thought to

have less of an impact in those settings.

       Finally, future work may wish to examine how training contracts may interact with other

contracts used by ﬁrms, as well as heterogeneity in the types of workers that are most aﬀected by

training contracts. Firms already use a variety of contractual devices to reduce employee turnover,

such as employee stock options (Oyer and Schaefer, 2005) and deferred compensation schemes.

Would training contracts serve as complements or substitutes with these sorts of contracts? Turning

to types of workers, our study found interesting results that worker responses for one of the two

training contracts seemed to diﬀer from those predicted by dynamic optimization. Could it be

that worker responsiveness to training contracts varies with cognitive ability (or could even aﬀect

selection along cognitive ability)? While there is growing research in public ﬁnance that labor

supply (e.g., Liebman and Zeckhauser, 2004) and consumer demand (e.g., Ito, 2014) exhibit aspects
  30
    There are other questions that might be explored with data on multiple ﬁrms. For example, with data on multiple
ﬁrms (along with plausibly exogenous contractual variation), researchers could study if there is a relation between
training contract usage/structure and the quality of training provided. Still, by studying employee turnover and
ﬁrm proﬁts from training, our paper provides an important step in understanding how training contracts aﬀect the
incentive of ﬁrms to make training investments.


                                                        21
of limited rationality in responding to contracts, such insights may also be fruitfully applied to

personnel economics. In addition, the worker overconﬁdence documented by Hoﬀman and Burks

(2017) could have important interactions with the eﬀectiveness of training contracts. We hope that

such issues are explored in future research.




                                               22
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steﬀen Pischke, “Why Do Firms Train? Theory And Evidence,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (1), 78–118.
   and , “Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect Labour Markets,” Economic Journal, 1999a,
  109 (453), F112–42.
Akerlof, George A, “Labor contracts as partial gift exchange,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 1982, 97 (4), 543–569.
Ariely, Dan, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec, ““Coherent arbitrariness”: Stable
 demand curves without stable preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 73–
 106.
Autor, David H., “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills Training?,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1409–1448.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard, “Contractibility And Asset Ownership: On-
 Board Computers and Governance In U. S. Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004,
 119 (4), 1443–1479.
Balasubramanian, Natarajan, Jin Woo Chang, Mariko Sakakibara, Jagadeesh
 Sivadasan, and Evan P. Starr, “Locked In? The Enforceability of Covenants Not to Compete
 and the Careers of High-Tech Workers,” 2017. Working paper, University of Michigan.
Baron, James and David Kreps, Strategic Human Resources: Frameworks for General Man-
 agers, New York, NY, 1999.
Barron, John M., Mark C. Berger, and Dan A. Black, “Do Workers Pay for On-The-Job
 Training?,” Journal of Human Resources, 1999, 34 (2), 235–252.
Becker, Gary, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, Chicago, IL: University of
 Chicago Press, 1964.
Belzer, Michael, Sweatshops on Wheels: Winners and Losers in Trucking Deregulation, Oxford
 University Press, 2000.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raﬀaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “Management as a Technology?,”
  Working Paper 22327, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2016.
BLS, “Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010-11: Truck Drivers and
 Driver/Sales Workers,” 2010.
Brunello, Giorgio and Alfredo Medio, “An explanation of international diﬀerences in education
 and workplace training,” European Economic Review, 2001, 45 (2), 307–322.
Burks, Stephen V., Bo Cowgill, Mitchell Hoﬀman, and Michael Housman, “The Value
 of Hiring through Employee Referrals,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 805–839.
  , Jeﬀrey Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, Kristen Monaco, Kay Porter, and Aldo Rusti-
  chini, “Using Behavioral Economic Field Experiments at a Firm: The Context and Design of
  the Truckers and Turnover Project,” in “The Analysis of Firms and Employees: Quantitative
  and Qualitative Approaches” 2008.

                                              23
Cappelli, Peter, “Why Do Employers Pay for College?,” Journal of Econometrics, 2004, 121
 (1-2), 213–241.

Card, David and Dean R. Hyslop, “Estimating the Eﬀects of a Time-Limited Earnings Subsidy
 for Welfare-Leavers,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (6), 1723–1770.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre and Bernard Salanie, “Testing Contract Theory: A Survey of Some
 Recent Work,” in L. Hansen M. Dewatripont and S. Turnovsky, eds., Advances in Economics
 and Econometrics, 2003.

Corgnet, Brice, Joaquı́n Gómez-Miñambres, and Roberto Hernán-Gonzalez, “Goal set-
 ting and monetary incentives: When large stakes are not enough,” Management Science, 2015,
 61 (12), 2926–2944.

Dustmann, Christian and Uta Schoenberg, “What Makes Firm-Based Vocational Training
 Schemes Successful? The Role of Commitment,” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 2012, 4 (2), 36–61.

Friebel, Guido, Matthias Heinz, Miriam Krüger, and Nick Zubanov, “Team incentives
  and performance: Evidence from a retail chain,” 2017. Working paper.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
 Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” 2002. NBER Working Paper.

Hoﬀman, Mitchell and Stephen Burks, “Worker Overconﬁdence: Field Evidence and Impli-
 cations for Employee Turnover and Returns from Training,” 2017. Working paper, University of
 Toronto.

Hubbard, Thomas N., “Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-Board Computers and
 Capacity Utilization in Trucking,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1328–1353.

Ito, Koichiro, “Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
  electricity pricing,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537–563.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy,
  1979, 87 (5), 972–90.

   and Yaw Nyarko, “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,” Econometrica, 1996,
  64 (6), 1299–1310.

Keane, Michael P and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Exploring the usefulness of a nonrandom holdout
 sample for model validation: Welfare eﬀects on female behavior,” International Economic Review,
 2007, 48 (4), 1351–1378.

Kraus, Anthony W., “Repayment Agreements for Employee Training Costs,” Labor Law Journal,
 1993, 44 (1), 49–55.

  , “Employee Agreements for Repayment of Training Costs: The Emerging Case Law,” Labor Law
  Journal, 2008, pp. 213–226.

Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw, “Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by Doing?,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S2), S217–S254.



                                              24
Lazear, Edward P., “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  1990, 105 (3), 699–726.

  , “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (5), 1346–1361.

Liebman, Jeﬀrey B and Richard J Zeckhauser, “Schmeduling,” 2004. Working paper, Har-
  vard University.

Lynch, Lisa M., “The Economics of Youth Training in the United States,” Economic Journal,
  1993, 103 (420), 1292–302.

MacLeod, Bentley W, “Reputations, relationships, and contract enforcement,” Journal of eco-
 nomic literature, 2007, 45 (3), 595–628.

Madrian, Brigitte C., “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There Evi-
 dence of Job-Lock?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (1), 27–54.

Manchester, Colleen, “Investment in General Human Capital and Turnover Intention,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 2010, 100 (2), 209–13.

  , “How Does General Training Increase Retention? Examination Using Tuition Reimbursement
  Programs,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2012, 65 (4), 951–974.

Maniadis, Zacharias, Fabio Tufano, and John A List, “One swallow doesn’t make a summer:
 New evidence on anchoring eﬀects,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (1), 277–290.

Marx, Matt, Deborah Strumsky, and Lee Fleming, “Mobility, skills, and the Michigan
 non-compete experiment,” Management Science, 2009, 55 (6), 875–889.

Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman, “Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law and the Labor
 Market in Nineteenth Century Industrial Britain,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1),
 107–144.

  , Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang, “Monopsony Power in Migrant Labor Markets: Evidence
  from the United Arab Emirates,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (6), 1735 – 1792.

Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer, “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All Employees?:
 An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2005, 76
 (1), 99–133.

Peterson, Jonathan, “Employee Bonding and Turnover Eﬃciency,” 2010. Mimeo, Cornell Uni-
 versity.

Pigou, Arthur C., Wealth and Welfare, London: Macmillan, 1912.

Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in
 Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling
 and Fertility,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1384–1417.




                                            25
                                       Figure 1: Training Contracts and the Hazard of Quitting




                                                               .03    .02
                                                      Hazard of Quitting
                                                     .01       0
                                                                            0    20        40     52                   60       80    100
                                                                                                Weeks



                                                                                      (a) No Contract
                     .03




                                                                                                               .03
                            .02




                                                                                                                      .02
            Hazard of Quitting




                                                                                                      Hazard of Quitting
           .01




                                                                                                     .01
                     0




                                                                                                               0




                                  0   20     40     52                 60       80       100                                0    20     40     52    60   80   100
                                                  Weeks                                                                                      Weeks



                                      (b) 12-month Contract                                                                     (c) 18-month Contract

Notes: These ﬁgures plot the quitting hazard under the 3 contractual regimes, using drivers in the Firm A full
sample. It focuses only on quits (ﬁres are ignored). An Epanechnikov kernel is used. The bandwidth is 4 weeks for
the no contract regime, 2 weeks for the 12-month contract regime, and 3 weeks for the 18 month contract regime. In
each panel, the x-axis is driver tenure in weeks. The sample size is withheld to protect ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, but is
much larger than 5,000 drivers.




                                                                                                26
                      Figure 2: The Impact of Training Contracts on Quitting by Quarter of Tenure (with 95%
                                                      Conﬁdence Intervals)




                                                                                   .004
             .004




                                                                                             0
    Coefficient estimate




                                                                        Coefficient estimate
                                                                                  -.004
                  0




                                                                        -.008
 -.004




                                                                                   -.012
                           1   2   3     4           5     6   7   8                             1   2   3     4           5     6   7   8
                                       Quarter of tenure                                                     Quarter of tenure



                               (a) 12 Month Contract                                                 (b) 18 Month Contract

Notes: This ﬁgure plots the estimated eﬀect of the two training contracts on quitting at diﬀerent tenure levels. The
solid line denotes the coeﬃcient estimate, with the dotted lines denoting the 95% conﬁdence interval. The coeﬃcients
are from an OLS regression of quitting (0 or 1) for a driver in a given week on training contract-quarter of tenure
interactions and controls. The controls are the same as in column 2 of Table 2 except we also include week of
tenure dummies (in place of the baseline hazard function included in the Cox model in Table 2). Standard errors
are clustered at the school-week of hire level. The two ﬁgures are based on one regression, with panel (a) plotting
interactions of the 12-month contract and diﬀerent quarters of tenure, and with panel (b) doing the same with respect
to the 18-month contract.




                                                                       27
Figure 3: Event Studies: The Impact of Training Contracts on Quitting, Comparing Before and
                After the Contract Changes (with 95% Conﬁdence Intervals)
            .005




                                                                                                      .01
                      0
 Coefficient estimate




                                                                                            Coefficient estimate
                                                                                                              0
         -.005




                                                                                           -.01
            -.01
            -.015




                                                                                                      -.02
                          -2   -1   0      1         2        3        4      5   6   7                            -7   -6   -5   -4    -3       -2     -1      0    1   2   3   4
                                        Quarter relative to contract change                                                        Quarter relative to contract change


                          (a) Move from No Contract to 12m                                                         (b) Move from 12m Contract to 18m
                          Contract, Quitting in Weeks 40-52                                                         Contract, Quitting in Weeks 53-78

Notes: The solid line denotes the coeﬃcient estimate, with the dotted lines denoting the 95% conﬁdence interval.
Panel (a) analyzes quitting in weeks 40-52 before and after the change to the 12-month contract whereas panel (b)
analyzes quitting in weeks 53-78 before and after the change to the 18-month contract. The x-axis denotes “event
time,” reﬂecting the contracts being changed at diﬀerent training schools at diﬀerent times. Each “quarter” refers to
the workers hired in a 3-month block. Quarter 0 is the ﬁrst quarter after the introduction of each training contract.
Each of the two panels reﬂects a diﬀerent regression (see equation 1 in the main text), where the control variables
(separate from the event time dummies) are the same as in column 2 of Table 2 except we also include week of
tenure dummies (in place of the baseline hazard function included in the Cox model in Table 2). Standard errors are
clustered at the school-week of hire level. For panel (a), the plotted coeﬃcient for “-2” is an indicator for event time
equal to “-3” or to “-2.” We combine them together to increase power. Beyond the event time coeﬃcients plotted,
we also include a dummy for event time greater than or equal to 8. Panel (a) excludes one training school that never
gets the 12-month contract. For panel (b), beyond the event time dummies plotted, we also include a dummy for
event time -8 or less, as well as a dummy for event time of 5 or greater. The number of quarters before and after
the event varies between the two contracts due to limits on the number of quarters of data available before or after
contract changes. Panel (b) includes one training school that transitioned directly from no contract to the 18-month
contract, but the ﬁgure is very similar if that training school is removed. For that school, the “event” is the change
from no contract to the 18-month contract.




                                                                                          28
     Figure 4: Simulated Retention Under the Three Contracts using the Structural Model




Notes: This ﬁgure analyzes the ability of the structural model from Hoﬀman and Burks (2017) to make
out-of-sample predictions. The model is estimated oﬀ of 699 drivers under the 12-month contract. We simulate
40,000 drivers in each simulation.




                                                      29
                               Figure 5: The Impact of Training Contracts on Quitting by Quarter of Tenure using the
                                                                 Simulated Data

                                                                                         .005
               .01      .005




                                                                                Coefficient estimate
     Coefficient estimate




                                                                                                  0
              0




                                                                              -.005
 -.005         -.01




                                                                                         -.01




                               1    2    3     4           5     6   7   8                             1   2   3     4           5     6   7   8
                                             Quarter of tenure                                                     Quarter of tenure



                                     (a) 12 Month Contract                                                 (b) 18 Month Contract

Notes: This ﬁgure is similar to Figure 2. The diﬀerence is that we use the simulated data (also shown in Figure 4)
instead of the actual data. Because the sample size is arbitrary here, no standard errors are shown. Because the data
are simulated, there are no additional control variables used.




                                                                             30
                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                        Variable                 Mean
                                        Female                    0.09
                                        Black                     0.19
                                        Hispanic                  0.04
                                        Age                        37
                                        Married                   0.38
                                        No contract               0.10
                                        12-month contract         0.71
                                        18-month contract         0.19
                                        Number of workers          N
Notes: The sample is drawn from trained drivers at Firm A from 2002 to 2009. The exact number of drivers, N , is
withheld to protect the conﬁdentiality of the ﬁrm, N >> 5, 000. See Appendix A.3 for more details on data and
sample construction.




                                                       31
                                     Table 2: Impact of the Training Contracts on Quitting – Cox Model, Diﬀ-in-Diﬀ

                                                             (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)
                   12m contract                          -0.141***     -0.140***     -0.143***      -0.146***     -0.146***      -0.202***     -0.207***
                                                           (0.046)       (0.046)       (0.049)        (0.050)       (0.047)       (0.050)       (0.054)
                   18m contract                           -0.148**      -0.150**      -0.151**       -0.148**      -0.151**      -0.234***     -0.242***
                                                           (0.064)       (0.065)       (0.068)        (0.068)       (0.065)       (0.075)       (0.079)
                   Average miles to date                                             -0.090***      -0.090***                                  -0.090***
                   (in hundreds of miles)                                              (0.002)        (0.002)                                   (0.002)
                   Quarter-Year FE                          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                   Month-Year of hire FE                    Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                   Training School FE                       Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                   Control for state unemp rate             No             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                   Demographic controls                     No             No            No            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
                   School-speciﬁc time trends               No             No            No            No             No            Yes           Yes
     Notes: An observation is a driver-week. The regressions are Cox proportional hazard models, with coeﬃcients reported and standard errors clustered by




32
     school-week of hire in parentheses. It focuses only on quits (ﬁres are ignored). Driver tenure is controlled for non-parametrically. The “state unemp rate” refers
     to the annual unemployment rate in a driver’s state of residence in the current year. Beyond the controls listed, all regressions include work type controls, as
     well as dummies for the roughly 2-3 week “transition periods” in between contract phase-in at a school and the ﬁrst group of trainees graduating CDL training
     with the new training contract at the school. Demographic controls are controls for gender, race, marital status, and age. Average miles to date is a driver’s
     average weekly productivity to date over positive mile weeks and is given in terms of hundreds of miles driven per week; its value is set to 0 if the driver has not
     had any positive mile weeks to that date (and we also include a dummy variable to indicate average miles to date being missing in those circumstances). The
     “school-speciﬁc time trends” are training school-speciﬁc linear time trends in month-year of hire. The coeﬃcients can be interpreted as approximate percentage
     changes in quitting, e.g., column (1) indicates the contracts reduced quitting by about 14 and 15 percent. The sample size is withheld to protect ﬁrm
     conﬁdentiality, but is much larger than 100, 000 driver-weeks. The sample is consistent across columns. For further details on the data, see Appendix A.3. *
     signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%
                      Table 3: Training Contracts have Limited Selection Eﬀects



 Panel A: Selection on Productivity
 Sample:                          All Weeks             Trim 5/95%
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
 12m contract                  -11.55       -9.21       5.39        6.16
                              (21.69)     (21.88)     (14.51)     (14.42)
 18m contract                  -23.45      -22.71       1.16        0.56
                              (26.60)     (26.93)     (17.86)     (17.90)
 Demographic Controls            No         Yes         No         Yes

 Panel B: Selection on Characteristics
                (1)     (2)       (3)                   (4)           (5)
 Dep. Var:     Black Hispanic Female                   Married        Age
 12m contract       -0.010     0.028***      0.001       -0.018      -0.153
                   (0.016)      (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.020)     (0.452)
 18m contract       -0.004       0.015       0.013       0.009       0.387
                   (0.023)      (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.025)     (0.566)

Notes: Standard errors clustered by school-week of hire in parentheses. Panel A reports OLS regressions of
productivity (miles per week) on training contract dummies and controls. In Panel A, an observation is a
driver-week. “Trim 5/95%” refers to trimming the lowest 5% and highest 5% of the miles observations (ignoring all
0 mile weeks). In columns 1 and 3 of Panel A, the controls are the same as in column 2 of Table 2, except that we
control for a 5th order polynomial in week of tenure (in place of the baseline hazard function). Demographic
controls are the same as in Table 2. Panel B reports OLS regressions of driver characteristics on training contract
dummies and controls. In Panel B, an observation is a driver. The regressions include quarter-year of hire ﬁxed
eﬀects, work type controls, school controls, and the annual state unemployment rate at time of hire. The sample
size is withheld to protect ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, but is much larger than 100, 000 driver-weeks in panel (a) and is
much larger than 5,000 drivers in panel (b). * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%




                                                        33
   Table 4: Exogeneity Check: State Unemployment Rates Do Not Predict Training Contract
                                        Changes

                   Dep var:                          Has 12m contract          Has 18m contract
                                                           (1)                       (2)
                   State unemployment rate                  0.002                    -0.010
                                                           (0.005)                  (0.009)
                   R-squared                                0.850                     0.865
Notes: This table examines whether state unemployment rates predict whether drivers have training contracts or
not, in an eﬀort to examine whether training contract changes may have been correlated with labor market
conditions. An observation is a driver. Each column is an OLS linear probability model where the dependent
variable is whether a driver has a 12-month contract (versus no contract) and whether a driver has an 18-month
contract (versus the 12-month contract). Column 1 analyzes drivers with either no contract or the 12-month
contract. Column 2 analyzes drivers with either the 12-month contract or the 18-month contract. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by driver’s state of residence. Both regressions include quarter-year of hire ﬁxed eﬀects,
training school ﬁxed eﬀects, and work type controls. The sample size is withheld to protect ﬁrm conﬁdentiality, but
is much larger than 5,000 drivers. * signiﬁcant at 10%; ** signiﬁcant at 5%; *** signiﬁcant at 1%




      Table 5: Simulated Retention, Proﬁts, and Welfare Under Three Contractual Regimes

       Contractual regime:                                         No contract       12 month      18 month
       Drop in quitting relative to no contract: Cox                                   -0.182        -0.185
       model coeﬃcients estimated on simulated data
       Retention at 20wks                                               0.72            0.79          0.82
       Retention at 40wks                                               0.41            0.56          0.53
       Retention at 60wks                                               0.30            0.43          0.40
       Proﬁts per worker                                               $3,123          $4,907        $5,210
       Welfare per worker                                             $57,933         $54,840       $54,231
Notes: This table presents proﬁts per worker and welfare per worker under the three diﬀerent training contracts
used by Firm A. Proﬁts and welfare are described in Section 5 of the main text, and are detailed further in Hoﬀman
and Burks (2017). We use the structural parameters presented in Appendix Table D2. “Drop in quitting relative to
no contract” is based on a Cox proportional hazard model estimated using simulated data. We simulate 40,000
workers for each of the 3 contractual regimes, simulating each worker for up to 130 weeks each. The Cox coeﬃcients
reported are analogous to those in Table 2. The other numbers (on retention, proﬁts per worker, and welfare per
worker) in the table are based on simulating 3,000 workers for up to 1,300 weeks each. “Retention at 20 weeks”
represents the share of workers remaining with the ﬁrm after 20 weeks. Proﬁts per worker and welfare per worker
are both calculated after 110 weeks.




                                                          34
