                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  CORPORATE CULTURE:
                                EVIDENCE FROM THE FIELD

                                        John R. Graham
                                       Campbell R. Harvey
                                         Jillian Popadak
                                       Shivaram Rajgopal

                                       Working Paper 23255
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23255


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017


We thank CFO magazine, Fuqua's Center on Leadership and Ethics (COLE), and Columbia
Business School External Relations for their partnership in conducting the survey; the results
presented herein do not necessarily reflect their views. We are especially grateful to our research
team of 56 RAs who helped transcribe interviews, discover CXO emails, and send personal
invitations to participants. We thank the following people for providing helpful feedback on the
survey instrument: Sigal Barsade, Charles Calomiris, John Core, Cesare Fracassi, Paul Ingram,
Simi Kedia, Hamid Mehran, Thomas Noone, Susan Ochs, Charles O'Reilly, and Suraj Srinivasan.
We thank Alon Brav, Francois Brochet (discussant), Diego Garcia (discussant), Simon Gervais,
Marina Niessner (discussant), Kelly Shue (discussant), David Yermack (discussant), Luigi
Zingales (discussant), workshop participants at American Finance Association Meetings 2017,
Utah Winter Finance Conference 2017, American Accounting Association Meetings 2016, NBER
Summer Institute 2016, Tel Aviv Finance Conference 2016, CFEA 2016, Mountain Finance
Conference 2016, JAE/FRBNY Conference 2015, and IAES Conference 2015, Duke, UVA, Rice,
Yale, Aalto, Hanken School of Economics, WUSTL, UIC, ISB, Temple, Rutgers, CUNY-Baruch,
and Fordham for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, Jillian Popadak, and Shivaram Rajgopal. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Culture: Evidence from the Field
John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, Jillian Popadak, and Shivaram Rajgopal
NBER Working Paper No. 23255
March 2017
JEL No. D23,G3,G30,K22,M14,O16,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

Does corporate culture matter? Can differences in corporate culture explain why similar firms
diverge with one succeeding and the other failing? To answer these questions, we use a novel
survey and interview-based analysis of 1,348 North American firms. Over half of senior
executives believe that corporate culture is a top-three driver of firm value and 92% believe that
improving their culture would increase their firm's value. Surprisingly, only 16% believe their
culture is where it should be. Executives link culture to ethical choices (compliance, short-
termism), innovation (creativity, taking appropriate risk), and value creation (productivity,
acquisition premia). We assess these links within a framework that implies cultural effectiveness
depends on interactions between cultural values, norms, and formal institutions. Our evidence
suggests that cultural norms are as important as stated values in achieving success.


John R. Graham                                   Jillian Popadak
Duke University                                  Fuqua School of Business
Fuqua School of Business                         100 Fuqua Drive
100 Fuqua Drive                                  Durham, NC 27708-0120
Durham, NC 27708-0120                            jillian.popadak@duke.edu
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu                             Shivaram Rajgopal
                                                 Columbia Business School
Campbell R. Harvey                               3022 Broadway
Duke University                                  New York, NY 10027
Fuqua School of Business                         sr3269@gsb.columbia.edu
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu
   Why do some firms generate great wealth for investors and offer innovative solutions to prob-

lems, while seemingly similar firms are much less successful? Economists have traditionally argued

persistent differences in outcomes across firms emanate from production inputs but recently some

argue that the majority of performance variation across firms is due to unobserved forces within

the firm (Syverson (2011); Backus (2015)). Corporate culture is a difficult-to-observe force within

companies that may explain these differences in performance. In this paper, we seek to empir-

ically address questions related to what is corporate culture, does culture affect firm value and

decision-making, and if so, how?

   Economists who study corporate culture often embed it within the broader literature on cor-

porate institutions (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015b); North (1991)). We follow this

precedent and dichotomize corporate institutions into formal and informal branches (Figure 1).

Formal institutions are tangible and consist of policies such as governance and compensation. In-

formal institutions, which we refer to as corporate culture, are less tangible and consist of cultural

values and norms. Cultural values are ideals employees strive to fulfill, while cultural norms are the

day-to-day practices that reflect these values. For example, having integrity is the cultural value to

strive for, while fostering a “willingness to report unethical outcomes” is a cultural norm or action

that reflects this value. Figure 1 illustrates that the effectiveness of corporate culture depends on

the alignment of and the interaction between values and norms, as well as possible interactions

with formal institutions. These interactions determine the effectiveness of corporate culture which,

in turn, enables successful outcomes. Two primary empirical findings of our paper are that cultural

norms are at least as important as stated cultural values, and that the interaction between values,

norms, and formal institutions explain the effectiveness of a firm’s current culture.

   Despite decades of research arguing for culture’s prominent role in fixing contractual inefficien-

cies (Kreps (1990)) and the many anecdotes that policymakers, executives and the press provide

suggesting corporate culture is very important, empirical research has less to say about culture

with a few notable exceptions (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a)). One reason for limited

empirical research is the absence of large-sample, high-quality data about corporate culture. While

early work suggested that “culture is a complex phenomenon, and we should not rush to measure



                                                  1
things until we understand better what we are measuring” (Schein (1990)), the theory is now rel-

atively mature. For research to progress and to guide policy, it is critical to know which elements

of culture are most important, when, and why.

   One of the purposes of this paper is to gather a large, comprehensive database of corporate

culture that allows us to explore culture in the context of the values, norms, and formal institutions

framework described above. We gather data using a survey of nearly 1,900 chief executive and

financial officers (CEOs and CFOs, referred to interchangeably as executives or managers) across a

wide range of public and private firms; we supplement the survey data with 18 in-depth interviews.

The richness of our data allows us to explore the roles played by cultural values, norms, and formal

institutions in determining the effectiveness of corporate culture, and, in turn, the effect of culture

on three different types of business outcomes: ethics, innovation, and productivity/value.

   Business executives indicate that having an effective corporate culture impacts value: 91%

of executives consider corporate culture to be “very important” or “important” at their firm,

and 79% rank culture as at least a “top 5” factor among all of the things that make their firms

valuable. Cultural fit in merger and acquisition (M&A) deals is so important that 54% of executives

would walk away from a target that is culturally misaligned, while another one-third would require

discounts between 10%–30% of the purchase price of the target. 92% of corporate executives believe

that improving corporate culture would increase firm value.

   Executives also believe that culture influences a wide range of decisions and actions. 85%

believe a poorly implemented, ineffective culture increases the chance that an employee might act

unethically or even illegally. 70% believe effective culture is an important reason their firm takes on

the appropriate amount of investment risk, while 29% indicate that ineffective culture leads them to

take on too little investment risk to achieve their firm’s goals. 53% believe that an effective culture

reduces the tendency of companies to engage in end-of-quarter earnings management practices

(such as delaying valuable projects) to deliver the market’s expected earnings numbers. Among

firms that choose projects that enhance long-term value (over projects that enhance “short-term”

objectives), 80% indicate their firm’s culture influences their choices.

   The rightmost bars in Figure 2 illustrate an interesting feature of the raw data. Only 16% of



                                                  2
respondents indicate their firm’s culture is exactly where it should be, yet 52% indicate their firm’s

culture very closely tracks their stated cultural values. If stating ideal cultural values is all that

matters for having an effective culture, then adhering to stated values should produce an effective

culture. To the contrary, in the evidence presented below we do not find a strong relation between

tracking stated values and business outcomes. We argue that for stated cultural values to have full

impact on business outcomes, they must be complemented by norms that dictate actual behavior

and by formal institutions. Consistent with this argument, we find that norms are at least as

important as the values themselves in driving outcomes, and that formal institutions can either

reinforce or work against these informal corporate institutions.

   More specifically, our econometric investigation into the effects of culture on business outcomes

suggests several important findings. First, for culture to have full impact, values should be comple-

mented by reinforcing norms and by formal institutions. Second, formal institutions and cultural

norms substantially explain the effectiveness of corporate culture. These factors alone explain

almost 36% of the variation in the effectiveness of culture. Third, an effective culture impacts

firm value significantly, and influences many specific examples of innovation and ethical outcomes.

Fourth, we find evidence consistent with an effective culture working by intrinsically motivating

employees to perform and shaping the way their expectations are formed. Finally, given that an

effective culture is positively associated with value creation and economic efficiency, we ask execu-

tives what is preventing their firm’s culture from being effective in practice. 69% blame their firms’

underinvestment in culture.

   To understand the robustness and generalizability of our findings, we conduct a thorough eval-

uation of the quality of the data. To minimize measurement error, we consulted 12 experts to vet

the survey design and administered 20 beta tests prior to launching the survey. Given that the

presentation of questions may bias respondent’s answers, we scramble the order of choices within

questions. Examining correlations across multiple respondents within the same firm, and comparing

survey responses for those firms we also interviewed supports internal validity. We cross-validate

our cultural measures by examining cultural values at an industry level, which produces patterns

that conform to intuition. For a sample of respondents that identified themselves, we match their



                                                  3
survey responses to their publicly available financial data and we find that stronger cultural norms

are significantly associated with higher profitability and Tobin’s Q. Finally, we conduct several tests

to explore the extent of selection in our data. We test for response differences by job title, delay

in survey response (a test for non-response bias), and by comparing characteristics of respondents

with the characteristics of the population from which they are drawn. There is little statistical

difference across these categories, thus we do not find evidence of selection problems. As described

below, we attempt to statistically address a possible “halo effect” (carry-over in judgment from one

question to the next) using the approach used by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a). Finally,

to address potential framing from a “culture” survey, we explore different wording in a follow-on

survey. The results from this follow-on survey are consistent with the findings from our primary

culture survey.

   Our work relates to a number of strands in the literature. First, our findings are consistent

with recent research pointing to the first-order importance of internal company practices for de-

termining productivity and performance (Bloom and Van Reenen (2007); Bloom, Sadun, and Van

Reenen (2012); Martinez et al. (2015)). Second, our research highlights the vital, but underappre-

ciated, role that corporate culture plays in value creation (Hermalin (2001); Guiso, Sapienza, and

Zingales (2006); Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a); Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015b)).

Third, our results suggest that formal institutions such as corporate leadership (Bertrand and

Schoar (2003); Gibbons and Henderson (2013)), incentive compensation (Lazear (2000)), and cor-

porate governance (Shleifer and Vishny (1997); Popadak (2016)) meaningfully interact with the

underlying corporate culture. Fourth, our results indicate culture works by intrinsically motivating

employees, consistent with theory showing trade-offs among systems of incentives within organiza-

tions (Akerlof and Dickens (1982); Gibbons (1998); Bénabou and Tirole (2003)) and the literature

suggesting contract incompleteness depends on the firms’ internal organizations (Macaulay (1963);

Levin (2003)). Finally, our evidence links culture to ethics (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006)),

myopia (Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005); Dichev et al. (2013)), whistle-blowing (Bowen,

Call, and Rajgopal (2010); Dyck, Morse, Zingales (2010)), risk (Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and Stulz

(2012)), and compliance (Kedia, Luo, and Rajgopal (2015)).



                                                  4
         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I introduces the theoretical background

and develops our hypotheses. Section II describes how we gather the data and measure corporate

culture. Section III presents our findings. Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section.

The online appendices contain a copy of the survey, variable definitions, and additional tables.



                                 I.     Theory and Hypotheses

A.        Corporate Culture as an Informal Institution that Affects Firm Performance

         Early research defined corporate culture as an intangible asset designed to meet unforeseen

contingencies as they arise (Kreps (1990)). Culture includes the values and norms widely shared

and strongly held throughout the firm that help employees understand which behaviors are and are

not appropriate (O’Reilly and Chatman (1996)). Recent research embeds this earlier definition of

culture into a broader context of corporate institutions (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015b)).

This definition of corporate culture facilitates our tests connecting culture to business outcomes.

As shown in Figure 1, corporate institutions consist of formal and informal institutions (the latter

is what we refer to as corporate culture). Formal institutions are tangible and consist of corporate

policies like governance and compensation. Corporate culture is less tangible and consists of cultural

values and norms. Cultural values are ideals that employees strive to fulfill, while cultural norms

are the day-to-day practices that attempt to live out these values.1

         Our paper examines if declared cultural values by themselves lead to successful business out-

comes, or if, these values must be complemented by cultural norms that dictate actual behavior

and day-to-day practices. We also test if formal institutions such as compensation policy either

reinforce or work against the effectiveness of cultural values and norms. A novel feature of our sur-

vey instrument is that we separately measure these different elements and their effects on business

outcomes. The rest of this section puts these basic ideas into the broader literature and develops

our testable hypotheses.

         We begin by connecting the elements in Figure 1 to business outcomes. Both formal institutions
     1
     Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a) give the example of impeccable customer service being a value, while the
associated norm would be lived out by employees exhibiting a day-to-day positive attitude towards customers.



                                                        5
and corporate culture relate to business outcomes through the incentive structures that they provide

(North (1991)). Formal and informal influences can motivate employees in different ways. Formal

institutions such as compensation contracts provide pecuniary rewards or extrinsic motivation while,

in contrast, culture creates a desire to perform a task for its own sake, that is, culture provides

intrinsic motivation. The distinction between extrinsic and intrinsic motivation is important in

distinguishing when the effects of corporate culture on business outcomes may be most evident.

Given that employees face choices that cannot fully be regulated ex ante (i.e., incomplete contracts),

the intrinsic motivation provided by culture is likely to have its strongest effects when such choices

arise. One way to think of this is that if you applied the exact same formal inputs (technology,

contracts, etc.) to two similar firms and two different outputs were to result, the difference in

output is likely attributable to culture. This echoes arguments from Gibbons and Henderson

(2013) suggesting differences in firm performance stem from actions that cannot be specified in

advance, so research should focus on workplace interactions (i.e., relational contracts) to explain

such differences.

     The values and norms that comprise culture guide employees’ actions, especially when they

face choices that cannot fully be regulated ex ante, and this in turn impacts business outcomes.

Culture influences employees’ actions in the firm and outside the firm (i.e., with customers and

suppliers). Firms that invest in culture try to promote understanding of their cultures, and one

way employees are judged is by their diligence in applying the cultural values and norms in their

actions. The reason that cultural values and norms may influence business outcomes is that they

reduce employees’ moral hazard as it arises. We expand upon the theoretical links from cultural

values and norms to firm performance in more detail in the next subsection.


B.    Determinants of an Effective Culture: Values and Norms

     The previous subsection describes how culture may lead to superior business outcomes relative

to what the same production inputs, technology, and formal institutions would deliver at another

firm. But not all cultures will be equally effective in producing superior business results. We refer

to an “effective culture” as one that promotes the behaviors needed to successfully execute the



                                                  6
firm’s strategies and achieve its goals. We now explore the theoretical reasons that not all firms

have effective cultures, given that an effective culture is beneficial for firm performance. To begin,

we focus on the role played by cultural values and norms. Later, we focus on formal institutions

and more traditional frictions such as implementation costs and agency considerations.

   The following example contrasts effective and ineffective cultures, highlighting the roles played

by cultural values and norms in affecting corporate performance.

Banking example: Compliance is a desired business outcome for two hypothetical large financial
institutions. Both banks state integrity as one of their cultural values. Leadership at the first
bank promotes the integrity value by establishing check-the-box practices with the goal of “getting
through the day without being indicted.” The second bank promotes integrity by establishing an
intent of “never compromise,” a spirit of “honor your word,” and a willingness to speak up when
others violate their word. The cultural norm at either bank could lead to a desired compliance
outcome in many situations. However, given that compliance outcomes often result from choices
employees make when they face unforeseen contingencies, developing norms that best achieve the
integrity value in those instances is when culture has its greatest impact. The norms established
at the first bank frame the integrity value in terms of extrinsic legal factors rather than intrinsic
motivation, and this may not be effective when employees are not in a standard check-the-box
situation. In contrast, the norms at the second bank present the choice employees must make to
live out the integrity value in a way that may lead to an effective culture in dynamic situations.

   We look to previous theoretical research to determine which cultural values and norms generate

an effective culture. In the broadest sense, theory suggests more than one combination of cultural

values and norms can lead to the same desired business outcomes (Crémer (1993)). To test this

view, we examine cultural values and norms in aggregate and their relationships with an effective

culture. Alternatively, some theories that apply broadly across business outcomes focus on how

culture influences employees’ behavior and actions. The idea is that employees’ behaviors are

acquired through conditioning, and conditioning occurs through interaction with the corporate

culture. The aspects of behavior these theories center on are intrinsic motivation and expectation

formation. To test this view, we examine the specific cultural values and norms these theories

suggest positively influence employee behavior and, in turn, an effective culture.

   One way that theory suggests culture works is by intrinsically motivating employees. Bénabou

and Tirole (2003) show intrinsic motivation increases when employees feel empowered. In their

theory, employee empowerment involves both demonstrating confidence in the employee and dele-

gating control of a task to an employee. To show confidence in the employee implies that a cultural


                                                  7
norm of trust2 is present in day-to-day interactions between employees. To delegate tasks sug-

gest coordination is evident in the daily environment. Second, the theory shows empowerment is

especially important for increasing the intrinsic motivation associated with difficult tasks. Tasks re-

quiring creative problem-solving are among the most difficult that employees face. Making progress

on difficult tasks implies a cultural norm of personal creativity and the ability to create ideas,

connections, or alternatives organically will be present in employees’ day-to-day work lives.

Third, the theory shows battles for dominance decrease intrinsic motivation. These clashes reduce

employees’ self-confidence and lower their desire to complete a task. For an executive to establish

among employees that such battles for dominance are undesirable implies collaboration must be

raised to the level of an ideal or cultural value.

      Another strand of theory suggests culture aligns expectations (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales

(2006)). Kreps (1990) first argued for such a framework by suggesting “culture works in unforeseen

events by giving hierarchical inferiors an idea before the event how the organization will react.”

Subsequent theory formalizes this idea by modeling culture as an alignment of expectations (e.g.,

Lazear (1999); Akerlof and Kranton (2005); Van den Steen (2010)) and showing that aligned

expectations produce consistent actions in unforeseen events. In these models because agents

are heterogeneous and the payoffs that they assign to outcomes differ, culture serves to facilitate

the actions preferred by the firm when not all actions can be contracted in advance. Aligning

expectations implies that a cultural norm of consistent and predictable actions is present in

employees’ day-to-day actions. Second, these theories suggest that a culture where employees have

aligned expectations makes firms more efficient. Aligned expectations simplify choices and remove

delays to action such as spending time in meetings building consensus. Thus, a culture that works

through aligned expectations exhibits a cultural norm of urgency when employees work.

      The discussion above leads to several hypotheses. First, it is a combination of cultural values and

their associated norms that produce an effective culture. Second, an effective culture is positively

associated with firm performance. A natural corollary of these hypotheses is that selecting values in

isolation, even when the values are advertised and promoted, will not be as effective as a combination
  2
      Key cultural values and norms discussed below link back to the bolded words and phrases.




                                                         8
of aligned values and norms in generating firm outcomes. Put another way, stated culture alone

is not what affects outcomes, rather the culture needs to be effective to impact outcomes. These

hypotheses and corollary can be tested in two steps: The first step explores whether business

outcomes are associated with an effective culture; the second step explores the combination of

values, norms, and formal institutions that are associated with an effective culture.

     Our next set of hypotheses explore how an effective culture works. Given that some theory

suggests more than one combination of cultural values and norms can lead to the desired business

outcome, in our empirical analyses, we explore the extent to which values and norms broadly affect

outcomes. Then, we turn to testing theory that suggests specific cultural values and norms alter

employees’ behavior and actions in a way that produces a more effective culture. We hypothe-

size that the cultural values and norms associated stronger intrinsic motivation and expectation

alignment are associated with an effective culture. The specific cultural values and norms include:

collaboration, trust, coordination, organic idea creation, consistency and predictability of action,

and the urgency with which employees work.


C.    Other Determinants of an Effective Culture

     Formal institutions such as corporate governance may complement and/or substitute for corpo-

rate culture when it comes to firm outcomes. As illustrated in Figure 1, an effective culture depends

on the alignment of and the interaction between the values, norms, and formal institutions. For-

mal institutions may have their own independent effects on outcomes or they may indirectly affect

outcomes through their impact on culture.

     In our empirical analyses, we explore five formal institutions that can interact with corporate

culture: corporate governance, corporate leadership, the finance function, hiring-firing-promotion,

and incentive compensation. Formal institutions may play an important role in supporting values

and developing norms and, ultimately, in the effectiveness of the culture. Given the various possible

effects and interactions of formal institutions, we explore their broad influence rather than make

specific predictions for specific institutions.

     Theoretically, the relationships between culture and formal institutions are ambiguous. For



                                                  9
example, consider the interaction between incentive compensation and culture as discussed in Lazear

(1995) and Akerlof and Kranton (2005). On one hand, if firms through culture are able to inculcate

employees with intrinsic motivation, then culture would flatten the optimal wage schedule. This

suggests culture and incentive compensation are substitutes. On the other hand, if culture via

increased intrinsic motivation reduces employees’ effort costs, then compensation could be used to

further motivate employees and thus complement the effects of culture.

     Finally, we note that other frictions such as implementation, learning costs, the endowment of

human capital, agency problems and industry considerations play a role in determining whether a

firm has an effective culture. For example, learning how best to communicate cultural values and

promote the development of norms that embody the values may take time. Ineffective cultures

may be attractive to some leaders because the status quo involves less effort than changing to and

managing an effective culture. We try to account for these forces in our econometric specifications

through the use of control variables.



 II.       Measuring and Identifying the Effects of Corporate Culture

     In this section, we discuss how we quantify the cultural values and cultural norms that underlie

corporate culture. Given that we measure corporate culture and its effects based on a survey,

we also discuss data reliability and other econometric issues associated with data gathered from

surveys.


A.     Interview and Survey Methods

     To measure corporate culture, we began by interviewing 18 corporate executives, mostly CFOs

and CEOs. Given the potentially sensitive nature of these interviews and to encourage frank

discussion, we promised the executives anonymity. With the interviewee’s permission, we recorded

and transcribed each interview to ensure accuracy in quotations. We began the interviews on

October 22, 2014 and concluded them on April 3, 2015. To learn about culture in a variety of

settings, we interviewed executives that lead public and private firms, those in early and late lifecycle

stages, conglomerates, singularly-focused firms, and holding companies. Some executives compared

                                                   10
and contrasted their experience at multiple firms. Overall, the current and past employment of

the executives comprise a set of firms that contribute meaningfully to the U.S. economy and reflect

about 20% of the market capitalization of the NYSE plus NASDAQ. The average executive’s current

position was with a firm that is much larger (mean sales of $47 billion), has more leverage, greater

profitability, lower sales growth, and higher credit ratings than the typical Compustat firm.

      We began each interview with open-ended questions such as, “What, in your view, is corporate

culture?” and “How would you describe the corporate culture at your firm?”3 This allowed us to

initially capture broad themes and then we narrowed the focus as the interview proceeded, without

leading the interviewee by our presenting predetermined definitions of corporate culture. We also

used interviews to identify under-researched topics and as input to develop our survey instrument.

All but one of the executives that we contacted agreed to be interviewed (and he told us, “read my

book!”). The interviews occurred over the phone or in-person and vary in length, lasting from 40

to 90 minutes. The executives appeared to be forthcoming in their responses.

      We incorporated the knowledge gained about corporate culture from the interviews into the

design of our survey instrument. After beta-testing and modifying the instrument, we sent survey

invitations via email to a diverse sample of corporate executives. We used two key databases

of email addresses of CFOs supplied by (i) a list of CFO email addresses the Fuqua School of

Business at Duke University maintains for their quarterly survey; and (ii) a list of CEO and

CFO email addresses from among the alumni of the Columbia Business School. In total, we sent

requests to approximately 5,668 email addresses from these two sources and received 762 responses

(representing a 13.4% response rate). This is a higher response rate than in previous corporate field

studies (Graham and Harvey (2001)). We supplemented the primary email lists with emails from

external sources such as CFO magazine, from which we collected an additional 1,136 responses.

We include the survey details as well as a copy of the survey instrument in Appendix A.
  3
      We conduct interviews according to the scientific practices described in Sudman and Bradburn (1983).




                                                         11
B.        Corporate Culture Measures

         In total, we collected 1,898 responses. We eliminate responses from participants located outside

the United States and Canada to attenuate effects of possibly confounding influences from national

cultures. Similarly, we remove respondents working for the government and non-profits because we

are primarily interested in the relation between culture and company outcomes, and government

and non-profit objectives may not be consistent with value maximization. Finally, we remove

responses that do not fill out the first question of the survey. Applying these filters produces 1,348

observations from North American executives at public and private firms.

         To assess the generalizeability of our findings, we benchmark the demographics from our public

firms to Compustat firms. These results are available in Appendix Table C.I. Our public firm

survey respondents work for larger firms with more employees and sales revenue. These firms are

also more likely to report an after-tax profit but they have similar leverage and return on equity.

         We use the survey questions to define our key variables, which include cultural values, cultural

norms, and formal institutions. In addition, we use the survey to define our key dependent variables,

which include firm outcomes related to ethics, innovation, and productivity and firm value. Finally,

we use the survey to define intermediate outcomes such as how well the firm tracks its stated cultural

values and how effective the firm’s current culture is.

         We begin the survey with an open-ended question asking respondents to briefly describe their

firm’s current culture. We hand-code to categorize the 1,348 written responses into seven individual

cultural values.4 The first six hand-coded cultural values align with the principal components of

cultural values as determined by O’Reilly, Chatman, and Caldwell (1991) and confirmed in their

follow-up research O’Reilly et al. (2014). The seventh cultural value we label as “community,”

which reflects the notion of caring for the community through social responsibility, good citizenship,

respect and diversity. Adding this seventh value allows us to fully map to the values identified by

Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a) in their study of popularly advertised corporate values. We

also hand-code responses to the open-ended subpart of Q14 to supplement the information from
     4
    90% of respondents describe their current culture as a values-based culture with 85% of respondents listing
specific cultural values. 30% of respondents describe their culture with positive and negative adjectives (e.g., good
and healthy vs. toxic and stressful). 9% describe their culture as currently changing and 7% explicitly indicate that
their culture is a mix of different subcultures.


                                                         12
Q1. Q14 states “Please provide a specific example of how culture affects X,” where X is various

business outcomes (e.g., productivity). We code these written answers to identify the existence of

any of same seven cultural values as in Q1.

   Panel A of Table I provides descriptive statistics (the mean, standard deviation, and median)

for individual cultural values as well as for an aggregate measure (i.e., the mean of the individual

values). We also create an aggregate variable to later test if cultural values broadly affect firm per-

formance. The most commonly listed values are community, results-orientation, and collaboration.

The cultural values variables are coded from -1.0 to 1.0 to reflect that an executive might describe

a given value in positive or negative terms. For example, a firm with a strong team-oriented or

cooperative culture receives a score of one for the “collaboration” value, while a firm with a compet-

itive or every-employee-for-himself culture receives a score of negative one for the “collaboration”

value. Firms that do not mention collaboration receive a score of zero. Similarly, a firm that is

innovative or where employees are resourceful in finding solutions when problems arise receives a

score of one for the “adaptability” value, while a firm with a lot of red tape and bureaucracy that

works against adaptability receives a score of negative one for this cultural value. For additional

details on construction and a tabulation of frequently recurring words associated with each value,

please see the variable definitions in Appendix B.

   Our measures of the cultural values are similar to the sample statistics for cultural values

reported in Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a). They analyze cultural values advertised on the

websites of firms that are in Fortune’s “100 Best Companies to Work For” list. Advertised values,

however, are more likely to include aspirational rather than current, actual values. Our measure

of cultural values is more granular in that we specifically ask about the current culture and later

ask about how well the current culture tracks the aspirational culture. A company’s website would

not describe their culture as “non-inclusive, political and backstabbing” or advertise that they

value “noncooperation.” Yet some of our respondents use descriptions like these to indicate their

firm does not value collaboration. We carefully explore the reliability of our measures in the next

subsection.

   Panel B of Table I provides descriptive statistics for the cultural norms as well as for an aggregate



                                                  13
measure (the mean of the norms). The most commonly listed norms are trust, decision-making

that reflects long-term corporate interests, agreement about goals and values, and coordination

among employees. The norms are extracted from survey question 6 which asks “in the context

of your firm’s current culture, please indicate which factors determine the effectiveness of your

culture.” A score of one indicates a key factor that enhances cultural effectiveness, a score of

zero indicates no effect, and a score of negative one indicates a norm that works against culture

being effective. Other norms include urgency with which employees work, employees’ comfort in

suggesting critiques, consistency and predictability of employees’ actions, employees’ willingness to

report compliance risks or unethical behavior, and new ideas develop organically.

   Panel C of Table I provides descriptive statistics for formal institutions, which include corporate

leadership, corporate governance, the finance function, the human resources function, and incentive

compensation. The formal institutions represent responses to question 13 which asks “do the

following items reinforce or work against the effectiveness of your corporate culture?” (Human

resources is part of question 6.) A score of one indicates a formal institution that reinforces an

effective corporate culture, a score of zero indicates no effect, and a score of negative one means it

works against effective culture. Leadership plays a prominent role in determining the effectiveness of

corporate culture: Nearly two-thirds of respondents indicate that leadership reinforces an effective

culture, while nearly one-fifth indicate that their company’s leadership works against the firm’s

corporate culture being effective.

   Panel D of Table I provides descriptive statistics about corporate outcomes grouped by ethics,

innovation, and productivity/value. The responses stem from question 14 which asks, “To what

extent does the corporate culture at your firm affect the following items:” where a score or 4 =

big effect, 3 = moderate effect, 2 = little effect, and 1 = no effect. In addition, we include one

outcome asked as a separate question, “How important is meeting or beating earnings at your

firm?” The ethics outcomes include compliance, tax aggressiveness, quality of financial reporting,

and importance of meeting or beating earnings. The innovation outcomes include creativity and

amount of project risk. The productivity and firm value outcomes include firm value, profitability,

and productivity. The aggregate for all outcomes is the simple average of the ethics, innovation,



                                                 14
and productivity/firm value aggregate outcomes. The survey responses indicate that more than

40% of executives believe corporate culture has a big effect on being compliant, creativity, project

risk, productivity, profitability, and firm value. 60% of public firms say culture affects their desire

to meet or beat EPS targets.


C.    Econometric Issues and Validation of Measures

     Before analyzing the data, we evaluate the quality of the survey responses and consider related

econometric issues. In particular, we examine the extent to which measurement error, selection,

multicollinearity, and the “halo” effect may alter our inferences about the relation between culture

and performance.

     Measurement error. Survey data potentially suffer from multiple sources of measurement

error that could bias toward zero the association of firm outcomes with corporate culture. First,

measurement error in the construction of our data could occur if respondents do not understand

the question. To avoid such errors, 12 individuals including academic experts, regulators, culture

consultants, and one professional expert on survey design vetted the instrument. In addition, we

conducted a beta test of the survey with 20 respondents and modified the wording of a few questions

accordingly. To test for this type of measurement error more explicitly, we compare responses from

individuals that both completed the survey at least six months after they spoke to us at-length in

an interview. We find a strong correlation between the survey responses and interview responses.

Finally, our sample includes repeat observations from 18 firms where more than one corporate

executive responded. While it is hard to make inferences from such a small sample, to the extent

that our survey is truly measuring corporate culture, the repeat responses should correlate. We

find a strong pairwise positive correlation between the multiple responses among the repeat firms.

     A second type of measurement error could occur if unintentionally we omit important cultural

values and norms on the survey. While we attempt to include the cultural values and norms that

theory predicts are most relevant and our interviews were designed to detect anything missing, we

may unintentionally exclude other relevant choices. A potential correction for this type of error

involves studying aggregated results. If the firm’s cultural values and norms are correlated, which



                                                  15
they are in the 16 cultural values and norms that we examine, then our aggregate measures will

serve as representative proxies of the firm’s true cultural values and norms. Appendix Table C.II

shows the correlation matrix for our measures. In addition, respondents are allowed to write in

norms beyond those we list (and the cultural value question is entirely open-ended), and we do not

detect any frequently mentioned choices outside of our seven values and listed norms.

   In addition, we cross-validate our cultural measures by examining the industry breakdown.

Table II shows that the measures of culture that we construct appear to vary intuitively across

industries. For example, high levels of adaptability and the community ideals that millennials

embrace are most evident in technology firms, whereas the cultural values of customer-orientation

is tied most closely with service firms. When we analyze by the firm’s competitive position within

its industry, we see firms that are industry leaders and near-leaders, on average, exhibit significantly

higher scores for cultural values and norms than those firms in the middle of the pack. The revealed

pattern is U-shaped with challengers showing more evidence of values and norms than middle-of-

the-pack firms. To further benchmark our responses to existing research, Appendix Table C.III

and Table C.IV summarize the responses across public and private firms and family and non-

family firms, respectively. We find no difference across measures of culture for public and private

firms but find public firms believe that culture plays less of a role affecting the firms’ choice of

investment risk and creativity, and plays a bigger role in being compliant. We find family firms

and non-family firms exhibit no differences, on average, in measures of culture. Non-family firms,

however, are more likely than family firms to believe culture influences employees’ actions and that

culture has a big effect on firm value.

   A third type of possible measurement error concerns whether the presentation of the questions

could bias respondents’ answers (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001)). One advantage of online

administration is the ability to randomly scramble the order of choices within a question, so as to

mitigate potential order-of-presentation effects. Specifically, the survey scrambles the order of

answers in the questions used to construct our measures of cultural norms (Q6), formal institutions

(Q13), and business outcomes (Q14). We do not detect any effects from question order. In addition,

we include redundant questions about cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions that



                                                  16
rephrase and reframe issues of interest. These additional questions help us to attenuate the effect of

noise attributable to potential respondent behavioral biases. Finally, we include a range of “noise”

controls in all of our regression specifications that attempt to capture the potential for systematic

bias in the survey data. They include the date of survey response, response delay, job title, and

source of email (i.e., Duke, Columbia, CF O magazine, etc.).

   Selection. Selection may alter statistical inferences when data are not gathered via randomiza-

tion or quasi-random assignment. In our context, selection would be present if those who respond

to the survey are those that “drank the kool-aid” on culture and/or those that engage in “cheap

talk” about culture. From a survey design standpoint, we mitigate these concerns with a mix

of questions that elicit hypothetical and real business decisions. Neuroscience research suggests

these two types of questions when asked in isolation activate different parts of the brain. When

the neuroscience researchers switched back and forth between hypothetical and real choices, they

discovered brain activity was stronger in the region associated with real choices, serving to reduce

differences in response (Kang et al. (2011)). Thus, by requiring respondents to switch back and

forth between real and hypothetical decisions, our survey design mitigates selection concerns.

   We also conduct several tests to explore the extent of non-response bias in our data. First,

because one of our email lists includes respondents that regularly participate in the Duke quarterly

survey of CFOs, we compare the responses of executives that routinely respond to that survey to

those that occasionally respond. Appendix Table C.V shows that the culture survey respondents

do not differ statistically from the regular responders. Given that we find no statistically significant

difference across these sampling frames, this suggests minimal selection. Second, we test the time to

response to see if it suggests differences. On one hand, those that respond early to the survey may

be very enthusiastic about the topic of culture. On the other hand, those that respond closer to the

end of the open window may be more negative and want to get their final word in on culture. This

study of responses over time also serves as a classic test of nonresponse bias. Figure 3 shows a bar

graph of the mean response to Question 1 (“how important is corporate culture”) broken down by

the number of days from the initial survey invitation to when the survey is completed. The dashed

blue line shows the mean response across all observations. Unreported joint F -tests indicate that



                                                  17
the responses are statistically indistinguishable across days. Third, we test for response differences

by job title. Because the modal respondent in our survey is a CFO, we compare the responses of

CFOs to CEOs and non-executives. We see CEOs are more positive on the importance of culture

than CFOs, who show no significant difference from non-executives. Appendix Table C.VI details

the responses by job title across all questions. Appendix Table C.VII lists the mean response by

email source (i.e., Duke or Columbia) and shows little statistical difference between the groups. In

conclusion, while selection has the potential to be a problem in our data, we find no evidence that

it is a significant issue. Further, we account for the noise these issues may bring to the data in our

econometric specifications through the use of control variables.

   Multicollinearity. Multicollinearity can limit the validity of statistical inferences when two

or more independent variables are highly correlated. Multicollinearity can inflate variance, leading

researchers to fail to reject the null hypotheses of no effect too often because the standard errors

are large. We test for multicollinearity in our data in two ways. First, we analyze the variance

inflation factors (VIFs) of the 7 cultural values, 9 cultural norms, and 5 formal institutions. The

VIF estimates how much the variance of a coefficient is inflated because of linear dependence with

other explanatory variables. Authorities differ on how high the VIF has to be to constitute a

problem, with an excess of 2.5 for key explanatory variables to an excess of 10 being considered

problematic. Our average VIF is 4 but 6 cultural elements have VIFs greater than 10. Second, we

analyze the eigenvalues in the correlation matrix of the explanatory variables. Eigenvalues close

to 0 indicate a problem and we have 6 eigenvalues less than 0.1. The condition index, which is

the square root of the ratio of largest to smallest eigenvalues, is 16.9 for our data. A value above

10 indicates moderate multicollinearity problems while a value over 20 indicates a severe problem.

A common approach to deal with multicollinearity involves aggregating variables to reduce the

number of highly correlated variables, a technique we employ in our main analysis. The approach

of using the mean to aggregate across many variables has been used successfully in prior field studies

(e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen (2007); Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012)). In additional tests,

we also employ model selection techniques such as Ridge Regression (Hoerl and Kennard (1970))

and LASSO (Tibshirani (1996)). We use both of these approaches with the goal of understanding



                                                 18
the stability of our findings across a variety of statistical assumptions.

     Causality. Causal inference is not possible in a single cross-section of data without an instru-

ment. Without claiming causality, we describe the associations that we uncover with our data,

emphasizing those that are significant at the 1% level and robust across specifications.

     Halo effect. The “halo effect” can arise when there is carry-over in judgment from one survey

question to the next. For example, a respondent’s sentiment from answering question one may

lead her to answer question two in a different way than if she answered question two in isolation.

This halo effect could manifest itself econometrically as classical measurement error and lead to

attenuation bias in the coefficient estimate. Classical measurement error occurs, if for example, an

executive’s response to question two is always δ more positive when her answer to question one

is positive. In this sense, measurement error produces an errors-in-variables problem. To address

this potential problem, we include as a control the response to a question that, though possibly

containing the halo effect, in theory is orthogonal to the questions about the firm’s underlying true

culture. We note that Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a) adopt a similar procedure to address

the potential for a halo effect in their study of cultural values. Specifically, we use Q11, which is a

hypothetical question about a potential M&A deal. It is an ideal control to absorb the halo effect

because the response to Q11 will be correlated with the respondent’s bias if the responder is biased.

In contrast, Q11 elicits a response about a hypothetical firm that has “an effective, strong” culture,

yet not all respondents work at firms with “an effective, strong” culture. By disconnecting from

the firm’s underlying true culture, this addresses the halo effect because this response will not have

the same systematic correlation with the firm’s underlying true culture.



               III.    Corporate Culture and Firm Performance

A.    Firm value, risk, and ethics.

     We now explore in detail the value effects of corporate culture and how culture affects employee

actions. Table III summarizes the four survey questions linking culture to firm value. The first

question (Q2), “how important is corporate culture at your firm?” reveals that 91% of survey



                                                  19
respondents consider corporate culture to be “very important” or “important” at their firms. This

result is corroborated by responses to the next question (Q3),“in terms of all of the things that

make your firm valuable, where would you place corporate culture?” 54% of respondents consider

culture to be among the “top 3” factors affecting firm value and 79% of respondents rank culture as

at least a “top 5” contributor. In another question (Q4c), 92% of executives believe that improving

corporate culture would increase their firm’s value.

   Our interviews help to explain why so many executives believe culture is important for firm

value. As one interviewee said, “culture can be described as foundational. It is the most important

thing because in some ways it can influence your ability to come to solutions to all the unknown

problems and challenges that you will face from inception to growth.” Another executive echoed

that, “culture is the foundation of all companies, and can make or break the success of a company.”

   The final question (Q11) presented in Table III explores value effects in a hypothetical setting:

“You work at a firm with an effective, strong culture. You are evaluating two acquisition targets,

A and B. Both of these targets would bring the same strategic and operational benefits if acquired,

and the targets are identical in all dimensions except corporate culture. Company A’s culture is

very aligned with your firm’s culture, whereas company B’s culture is not at all aligned. Relative to

how much you would offer for A, how much less would you offer for company B due to the culture

misalignment?”

   We find cultural fit in M&A deals is so important that 54% of executives would walk away from

culturally misaligned target, while another 23% of respondents would discount the offer price for

the culturally misaligned target by 20% or more. At least in the M&A context, this indicates that

the valuation effect of culture is large. This is consistent with Van den Steen (2010b) economic

theory of the costs and benefits of corporate culture and the effects of “culture clash” in mergers

and acquisitions.

   The interviews offer insight into why executives would walk away from acquisitions lacking

cultural fit: “we would test for cultural fit. If the gap is wide enough it does not matter if it is a

great price. We won’t move forward.” Another manager put it this way: “I would definitely pay

more for the company whose culture is closer. Less friction and assimilation cost, we can get it



                                                 20
all done easier, faster and at lower cost.” When we asked how cultural fit is tested, one executive

responded, “we had a checklist set of questions that we would ask about the elements of the culture

and we would compare them with the key elements of our culture. For example, we would look for

strong focus on customer, high levels of integrity, open door communication and so on ... among

a list of 10-12 items.” For this firm, a deal would be abandoned for targets scoring low on the

checklist.

   While transactions involving the boundary of the firm highlight the value of culture, theory indi-

cates that corporate culture also affects firm value via routine corporate actions. To understand the

variety of actions potentially impacted by culture, Table IV summarizes six survey questions that

link culture to employees’ actions. They explore risk-taking, short-termism, ethics, and earnings

management.

   The first question (Q7) in Table IV,“Do you think your company takes the right amount of risk

in its investments to achieve its goals?” reveals that that 60% believe that their firms take on the

“right amount of risk,” 29% believe their firms take “too little risk,” and 11% believe that their

firms take “too much risk.” In a follow-up question (Q7b), we asked respondents whether their

culture was a “very important,” “important,” “somewhat important,” or “not a reason” that their

firm takes on that amount of risk. 55% of respondents think culture plays an important or very

important role in their risk decisions. While a strong positive association between risk decisions

and culture (Q7) could be attributable to a third common factor, the follow-up question (Q7b)

suggests a direct link between culture and actions. (Later, we connect the willingness to take on

risky investments to corporate innovation.)

   The next question (Q8) in Table IV examines the role of culture in long-term vs. short-term

decision-making. This hypothetical question asks respondents to choose between two otherwise

identical projects with a five year duration. Project A has a greater NPV but reports negative

cash flows for the first two years, whereas B reports positive cash flows throughout the duration.

A surprising 41% of respondents said they would choose the NPV-inferior project. In a follow-up

question (Q8b), four-out-of-five of the 59% who choose the project with the greater NPV say culture

plays a role in their preference for the greater NPV project.



                                                 21
   Theory predicts that culture is likely to have its strongest effect over actions that cannot properly

be regulated ex ante. To explore this possibility, we ask whether an ineffective culture can lead

to unethical behavior (Q10): “do you think having a poorly implemented/ineffective culture at a

company increases the chances that an employee would do something unethical (or even illegal)?”

Table IV shows that 85% of respondents indicate that “yes”, ineffective corporate culture can lead

to unethical behavior.

   The final question (Q12) in Table IV explores end-of-quarter earnings management: “sometimes

companies engage in end-of-quarter practices such as delaying valuable projects in order to hit

market expected earnings. How likely is it that an effective corporate culture would reduce the

chance that such actions are taken?” 56% of executives believe that it is very likely or extremely

likely that an effective corporate culture would reduce real earnings management. Only 19% of

respondents believe that an effective culture would not reduce real earnings management.

   The interviews highlight specific channels that link corporate culture to firm performance. First,

culture enhances firm performance because it enables superior execution: “Culture is very important

because it allows you to execute. Culture is like the tendons and ligaments that hold the body

together and allow it to be healthy as a body and execute daily.” Second, culture enhances firm

performance through reduced agency costs. “When corporate culture is working at its best, it

reduces dramatically the agency costs within an organization because you have an invisible hand

at work inside of each of the employees that helps to guide their decisions and judgments in a way

that the overall corporation would desire it to be.”

   Third, executives highlight that culture can circumvent mistakes in a way that other executive

actions, formal institutions, or corporate assets cannot. Many executives believe culture contributes

more to firm value than strategy does. For example, a company performs better with a strong

culture and weak strategy than the other way around: “culture helps even if you don’t have a great

strategy and you’re not communicating well because culture helps tremendously to make sure that

you are continuing to do the right things for the company in the long run.” Another executive

says that culture adds more to market value than the finance function. He believes “a good finance

function can contribute 20% in added market value if it’s done right and that a strong culture can



                                                  22
add 20-30% to market value.”


B.    Regression evidence that links cultural values and norms to business outcomes.

     The responses in the previous two tables indicate executives believe that corporate culture

affects firm value and corporate decisions. We now use regression analysis to explore whether firm

value and performance are tied to effective corporate culture and if so, whether the channel by

which this occurs is via cultural values, cultural norms, and/or formal institutions (as discussed in

Section I).

     We start by exploring the channels by which specific values and norms affect specific outcomes.

Following the banking example introduced in Section I, we focus on BeingCompliant as a specific

ethics outcome. Examining the values and norms that define corporate culture in this setting also

helps to benchmark our data to prior studies that have looked at trust or integrity as sources of value

for firm (Shleifer and Summers (1988); Edmans (2011); Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a)).

Panel A of Table V presents results from regressing BeingCompliant on explanatory variables that

include all of the cultural values, norms, and formal institutions, plus various control variables.

Consistent with theory and intuition, we find significant evidence that firms with an integrity value

accompanied by cultural norms that express integrity (willingness to report unethical behavior,

trust among employees, etc.) are likely to have a cultural effect that is significantly greater for

compliance.5 These simple findings give us confidence in our data. But unlike prior studies, we are

able to look at multiple specific business outcomes. To provide a sense of the comprehensiveness

of our data, Panel B focuses on a different outcome – that of creativity – as a second example.

     Panel B in Table V shows results from regressing the Creativity outcome on the full set of

cultural values, norms, and formal institutions as well as various control variables. We present the

coefficient estimates for the values and norms prior research indicates may tie to creative outcomes

(Dessein and Santos (2006); Bénabou, Ticchi, and Vindigni (2015)). We find a significantly positive

association between creativity and the adaptability value (as expected) and a negative association
   5
     With 16 values and norms and with multiple specifications, we should expect some of the coefficients to be
“significant” by chance (see Harvey, Liu, Zhu (2016)) for the effect of data mining on statistical inference). To mitigate
this problem, we focus on results significant at the 1% level as well as results that are robust across specifications.




                                                           23
with a results-oriented value. Said differently, this is consistent with firms that embrace the ability

to change to fit new circumstances fostering creativity, while promoting bottom-line results may

reduce creativity. The norms that are associated with creativity are employee comfort in suggesting

critiques and new ideas develop organically. Organic idea creation is strongly associated with

creativity. The specifications in Table V include a host of control variables. In particular, column

(2) attempts to correct for the potential error-in-variables problem that could be introduced via

the halo effect. Controlling for the halo effect weakens the results slightly.

   Overall Table V links specific business outcomes to specific cultural values and norms, lending

confidence to the underlying connections in the data. We now investigate the connections more

broadly: do cultural values and norms affect business outcomes? We use aggregate variables to

address this question.

   In Table VI, we use OLS regressions with aggregate dependent variables that measure business

outcomes broadly which, as described in Section II, helps to improve statistical inference by reducing

data dimensionality. The dependent variable in column (1) measures an aggregation of all outcomes,

while in columns (2) through (4) the dependent variables separately aggregate, respectively, ethical,

innovation, and productivity/value outcomes (see Appendix B for variable definitions). The key

explanatory variables are aggregate measures of cultural values and cultural norms. As additional

explanatory variables, we include formal institutions, noise controls, demographic controls, and

additional question controls.

   As we report in Panel A of Table VI, cultural norms are an important channel by which corporate

culture affects business outcomes. The coefficient estimates for aggregate cultural norms are positive

and significant at the 1% level in all columns except for ethics outcomes. The economic magnitude

of the point estimate is similar across all, innovation, and productivity/value outcomes. In contrast

to the cultural norms results, there is little evidence in Panel A that cultural values enhance business

outcomes. The statistical evidence is consistent with the theoretical prediction that having cultural

values is a necessary but not sufficient condition for maximum corporate performance.

   In Panel B of Table VI, we test for complementarity between selected cultural values and the

norms that express them on a day-to-day basis more explicitly by allowing for values to interact



                                                  24
with norms. The evidence supports the implication that the norms that express and reinforce the

selected cultural values enhance performance. The coefficient estimate on the interaction term is

positive and significant at the 1% level in all columns. The coefficients on the cultural norms term

also remain positive and significant at the 1% level in all columns. These findings are consistent

with the conclusion that broadly speaking cultural values and norms have an important impact on

business outcomes. Moreover, the results support our argument that selecting cultural values in

isolation are not as effective as when the day-to-day living of those values (that is, cultural norms)

are functioning properly.


C.    Regression evidence on cultural effectiveness.

     The previous section established a link between cultural values and norms and business out-

comes. In this section, we explore more explicitly whether the effectiveness of corporate culture

is what influences business outcomes, as described in Section I. Specifically, we investigate our

proposed two-step process for corporate culture to be associated with business outcomes. First,

cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions combine to create an effective culture. Sec-

ond, effective culture relates to business outcomes. In Table VII we analyze these two steps. In

Panel A, we use OLS regressions with dependent variables that measure aggregate business out-

comes and the key explanatory variable being whether a firm has an effective corporate culture.

We find that having an effective corporate culture is associated with ethics, productivity/value,

and overall aggregate outcomes. Next, we attempt to explain an effective corporate culture with

cultural values and norms.

     In Panel B Table VII, we regress survey responses to whether a respondent firm has an effective

culture on aggregate values, norms, and formal institutions. Column (1) shows that as a stand-

alone variable, aggregate values are positively associated with the effectiveness of corporate culture.

Columns (2) and (3) show similar results for cultural norms and formal institutions, respectively.

Column (4) includes values, norms, and formal institutions in the same specification; cultural

values lose economic and statistical significance but norms and formal institutions remain significant

and positively associated with effectiveness. Together our aggregate measure of cultural values,



                                                  25
norms, and formal institutions without any other controls explains 35% of the variation in cultural

effectiveness, consistent with their importance. Finally, in column (5), we include values, norms,

and formal institutions as stand-alone variables, and we also include formal institutions separately

interacted with values and norms. The idea is that formal institutions such as governance may

reinforce or work against the values and norms. While neither coefficient is significant, the negative

signs are consistent with formal institutions working more as substitutes than complements with

cultural values and norms.

   Cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions influence desired business outcomes. In

Table VIII, we explore specific channels that tie cultural values and norms to cultural effectiveness

using disaggregated cultural measures. Specifically, we test if the cultural values and norms that

theory suggests provide stronger intrinsic motivation and expectation alignment are also associated

with the effectiveness of corporate culture. The specific cultural values and norms suggested by

theory are: collaboration, trust, coordination, organic idea creation, consistency and predictability

of action, and the urgency with which employees work.

   Our approach in Table VIII uses model selection techniques to help isolate the important cultural

values and norms. Specifically, we focus on Ridge Regression (Hoerl and Kennard (1970)) and

LASSO (Tibshirani (1996)). Both methods start by regressing whether a firm’s current culture is

effective on all the cultural values, norms, and formal institutions. In comparison to OLS, however,

each of these methods reduces the variability of coefficient estimates by shrinking some coefficient

estimates with penalties. In Ridge Regression, the “penalty” applies to the sum of the squares of the

coefficients. This means Ridge Regression shrinks the coefficients of highly correlated explanatory

variables equally towards zero. In contrast to the highly correlated variables, the explanatory

variables that account for more of the variation in the data do not shrink toward zero. The only

difference between Ridge Regression and LASSO is that the “penalty” in LASSO applies to the sum

of the absolute values of the coefficients. Both methods help to isolate the important explanatory

variables and to reduce the prediction error of the model. Yet neither method diminishes the fact

that multicollinearity inflates the standard errors (Efron et al. (2004)). Hence, for the purposes of

interpretation, the focus should be on those explanatory variables that are selected as important



                                                 26
rather than the statistical significance of a single coefficient estimate.

     Table VIII shows that many of the cultural values and norms past theory has focused on

(and described in Section I) have a strong association with cultural effectiveness. Column (1)

shows the Ridge Regression results and Column (2) shows the LASSO results. Ridge Regression

produces a parsimonious model; it reduces the number of cultural values from 7 to 1 (collaboration)

and the number of cultural norms from 9 to 3 (organic idea creation, the urgency with which

employees work, and the consistency and predictability of action). LASSO regression produces a

more inclusive model; it reduces the number of cultural values from 7 to 5 and the number of cultural

norms from 9 to 6. LASSO includes two of the cultural variables associated with culture working

through intrinsic motivation (trust and coordination among employees) that Ridge Regression

does not include. Both models report the cultural attributes of collaboration and organic idea

creation as being important and highly statistically significant. The importance of these attributes

supports the conclusion that an effective culture works by intrinsically motivating employees. The

cultural attributes of consistency and predictability of action and the urgency with which employees

work are also significant and important. Their importance indicates culture also works through

expectation formation. Overall, the model selection techniques reveal that the cultural values and

norms shown to meaningfully explain cultural effectiveness closely parallel research that suggests

culture works through intrinsic motivation (Bénabou and Tirole (2003)) and expectation formation

(Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006)).


D.    Robustness checks

     The inferences from our regressions rely on the reasonableness of the variables we construct.

We check how robust our inferences are by considering various alternative constructions. First,

to understand the extent to which having a survey about “culture” primed respondents to make

culture seem extra important, we included a single question about value creation on the 2016Q3

Duke quarterly CFO survey that had culture as one choice among many. Specifically, we asked “Of

all the things that contribute to long-term firm value, for my firm I rank the following items as a

‘Top 3 Value Driver.”’ Based on 484 responses, 47.9% of respondents listed culture in the Top 3.



                                                   27
The confidence interval on this mean response puts it within the range of the 53.5% elicited in the

culture survey. In addition, of all of the choices, culture was the most popular with strategic plan

coming in second at 39.7%. These results are in Appendix Table C.VIII.

   Next, given that our main inferences come from regressing survey data on survey data, we

explore the out-of-sample predictive power of our two-step connection linking an effective corporate

culture to business outcomes. Specifically, we reproduce Table VII using a 10-fold cross-validation

procedure (Efron (2004)). This procedure randomly partitions the data into 10 subsamples. Of the

10 subsamples, a single subsample is retained as the validation data for testing the model and the

remaining 9 subsamples are used as training data. This procedure is then repeated 10 times, with

each subsample used exactly once as the validation data. Inference is then based on an average

of the 10 out-of-sample tests of the two-step connection. We evaluate both the stability of our

coefficient estimates as well as the predictive power of two-step connection out-of-sample. Our

coefficient estimates and inferences remain stable. Our two-step procedure also performs well out

of sample. For the first step from effectiveness to outcomes, the mean absolute percentage error

is only 12% for all outcomes. For the second step, we find the cultural values, norms, and formal

institutions that determine cultural effectiveness have a mean absolute percentage error of 17%.

We report these findings in Appendix Table C.IX.

   Next, given that we hand-code the written responses to the open-ended Q1/Q14 into cultural

values, we analyze two alternative cuts of the data to ease concerns about our coding. First, we

only look at the subsample of 600 respondents that say in Q4 their current corporate culture very

closely tracks their stated firm values and in Q4b say their culture is close to where it should be.

Focusing on this subsample mitigates the concern that the cultural values written in the open-

ended responses are not the firm’s actual cultural values. Second, we stop using our open-ended

measures of cultural values. Instead, we examine survey questions that ask about the alignment of

the firm’s cultural values to its actual culture, Q4 and Q4d. We report these findings in Appendix

Table C.X and Table C.XI, respectively. Consistent with our previous findings, across both tests

we see weak statistical evidence that stated cultural values in isolation matter for performance but

cultural norms remain significant.



                                                28
     Finally, given that the preamble to Q14 (which we use to measure business outcomes) states “on

this question, we’d like to learn about the effect of corporate culture,” the Q14 responses may reflect

the slope between outcomes and culture rather than the outcome level. The slope is a functional

transformation of the level, so the sample moments needed to test the null hypotheses of the slope

being equal to zero are available. We, however, cannot test whether the non-zero slope has a

positive or negative sign (for a detailed discussion see Appendix D). To try and ascertain if the sign

is negative or positive, we explore the relation between values, norms, and business outcomes using

externally verifiable data. Specifically, using a sample of respondents that identified themselves,

we match their survey responses to their publicly available financial data. This sample is limited

to 189 firms, so to reduce noise we look at these outcomes in a single year and averaged over

2, 3, 4, and 5 years, respectively. The results show cultural norms are positively associated with

Tobin’s Q and profitability. We report these findings in Appendix Table C.XII. Finally, we examine

the connection between cultural values and norms using business outcomes that are not part of

Q14. Instead, we use the responses to the survey questions about the value of corporate culture

(Table III). We include these findings in Appendix Table C.XIII. We observe the cultural norms

are significantly and positively associated with these alternative business outcomes while cultural

values are not. This robustness check is consistent with our finding that at a broad level, a firm

needs norms that reinforce the selected cultural values to enhance performance.


E.    Economic Implications

     If cultural effectiveness is positively associated with many business outcomes and 92% of exec-

utives believe improving culture would increase firm value, why do so many executives report that

their culture is ineffective in practice? Are companies underinvesting in culture? Did the current

CEO inherit an ineffective culture from his predecessor that cannot be changed? Do shareholders

underappreciate the value of an effective culture? Are other firm policies and procedures preventing

employees from adhering to the aspirational culture?

     To provide insight into ways to ameliorate an ineffective culture, Table IX summarizes three

additional survey questions. The first question (Q5), “which of the following have been most



                                                  29
influential in setting your firm’s current culture? [check up to 4]” reveals leadership and markets

are the two most influential factors in setting the culture. Among different potential leaders, the

current CEO (55%), the owner (32%), the founder (30%), and past CEOs (18%) are identified

as responsible for shaping the current culture. Formal institutions such as corporate governance

(12%) and incentive compensation (12%) are not perceived as creators of the firm’s current culture.

We also note non-management employees were not thought to be influential (13%). These results

largely corroborates theory suggesting that culture is set by leadership (Hermalin (2013)). The

results about the market participants are consistent with prior empirical research suggesting the

marketplace may influence executives investment in culture (Edmans (2011); Guiso, Sapienza, and

Zingales (2015a)) and the core cultural values that leaders promote (Popadak (2016)).

   The next question (Q4d) “what is preventing your firm’s culture from being exactly where it

should be?” again highlights the importance of leadership. 69% believe “leadership needs to invest

more time in the culture.” Cultural norms also play an important role, with 48% citing norms that

produce inefficient workplace interactions as preventing an effective culture. Finally, 39% believe

cultural values are misaligned with business needs and 38% believe firm policies prevent the culture

from being exactly where it should be. This survey question reinforces our regression evidence that

the interactions between values, norms, and formal institutions explain cultural effectiveness.

   The final question in Table IX explores the role of formal institutions in more detail. Question

(Q13a/b) asks “what are the most important ways incentive compensation/the finance function

works against your corporate culture?” To reduce the time required to complete the survey, we

randomly selected approximately 20% of respondents to answer the question about incentive com-

pensation and another 20% to answer about the finance function. The results in the table are for

firms at which the finance function (or, separately, the incentive compensation) works against the

effectiveness of the culture. Respondents indicate the finance function may subvert the effectiveness

of the firm’s culture by focusing employees too much on short-term objectives (56%) and imper-

fect metrics (27%). Respondents believe incentive compensation works against the effectiveness

of culture by attracting/retaining the wrong type of people to the firm (47%), focusing employees

too much on short-term objectives (27%), and encouraging insufficient risk-taking (26%). Taken



                                                 30
together, these questions demonstrate that a multitude of factors can undermine the effectiveness of

culture. Given these factors have important economic consequences for value creation and economic

efficiency suggests that designing and implementing mechanisms to help leadership align cultural

values, norms, and formal institutions would be beneficial.



                                     IV.     Conclusion

   Corporate culture is arguably the most under-researched value driver among the important

contributors to firm performance. The first contribution of our field study is to quantify the value

of culture and its influence on employee decisions. 91% of executives believe culture is important

to their firms and 79% place culture among the top 3 or the top 5 value drivers of their company.

54% of executives would just walk away from an acquisition target that is a poor cultural fit

while another 33% would require discounts between 10%-30% of the purchase price of the target.

Culture influences a wide range of financial decisions such as investment and risk-taking. For

example, 41% of executives do not choose to maximize NPV when the NPV-superior investment

requires short-term challenges (negative cash flows) and 80% indicate this short-termism is driven

by culture. Similarly, 61% believe culture is an important force behind their firm’s chosen level of

investment risk. Culture influences actions that are hard to contract on, such as ethical decisions.

An overwhelming 85% of executives believe an ineffective culture increases the chances that an

employee might act unethically or even illegally.

   A second contribution of our field study is to provide data infrastructure for the analysis of

culture across firms. Despite many theoretical advances, the empirical literature on corporate

culture is still developing. We gather a large, comprehensive database of survey responses and

use the questions to construct measures of corporate culture (values and cultural norms), firm

outcomes for three general categories (ethics, innovation, and productivity/firm value), and formal

institutions (e.g., governance, compensation). A key finding of our paper is that stated cultural

values, even among firms that track those values, do not by themselves guarantee a successful

outcome. Rather, cultural values must be complemented by cultural norms that dictate actual

behavior. We also find evidence that formal institutions can either reinforce or substitute for

                                                31
cultural values and norms.

   While economists are increasingly aware of the importance of corporate culture (e.g., Bloom,

Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012); Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015a)), limited empirical work

exists on the topic, in part because it is difficult to measure. Before we started this project,

we thought culture might be too amorphous to quantify. After interviewing CEOs and CFOs,

we heard loudly and repeatedly how important culture is, notably from CFOs who are typically

the numbers people and those one might expect to be suspicious of hard-to-quantify aspects of

the business environment. We believe that our paper conveys a powerful message that corporate

culture does matter, a lot. We are aware that our study is just a first cut at this very difficult but

important problem. We also fully realize that causal inference is not possible in a one-shot survey.

Nevertheless, we believe that the magnitude of the topic means it deserves substantial research

going forward and we hope our paper helps build a bridge to enable such future work.

   There are many future directions for research on corporate culture. One may be studying in

detail when formal institutions substitute for and when they complement the existent cultural values

and norms. This could involve running field experiments that vary compensation or governance.

Another direction might explore why 92% of executive believe improving culture would increase firm

value yet they also indicate that they significantly underinvest in culture. Recent work suggests

incorporating informal measures into formal contracts may help (Gibbons and Kaplan (2015)),

but more theoretical and empirical work is needed to identify factors that contribute to successful

cultural change as well as what tools investors and executives could use to gauge the effectiveness

of a firm’s culture.



                                       REFERENCES
Akerlof, G., W. Dickens, 1982, The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, American
  Economic Review 72, 307–331.

Akerlof, G., and R. Kranton, 2005, Identity and the Economics of Organizations, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 19, 9–32.

Backus, M., 2015, Why is Productivity Correlated with Competition?, Columbia University Work-
  ing Paper.


                                                 32
Benabou, R., D. Ticchi, and A. Vindigni, 2015, Religion and Innovation, American Economic
  Review 105, 346–351.

Benabou, R., and J. Tirole, 2003, Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation, Review of Economic Studies
  70, 489–520.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan, 2001, Do People Mean What They Say? Implications for
  Subjective Survey Data, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 91, 67–72.

Bertrand, M., and A. Schoar, 2003, Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm Policies,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, 2007, Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
  Firms and Countries, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1351–1408.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, 2012, The Organization of Firms Across Countries, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1663–1705.

Bowen, R., A. Call and S. Rajgopal, 2010, Financial Whistle-Blowing: Target Firm Characteristics
  and Economic Consequences. The Accounting Review July, 1239–1271.

Crémer, J., 1993, Corporate Culture and Shared Knowledge, Industrial Corporate Change 2, 351–
  386.

Dessein, W., and T. Santos, 2006. Adaptive Organizations, Journal of Political Economy 114,
  956–995.

Dichev, I., J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, 2013. Earnings Quality: Evidence from the
  Field, Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 1–33.

Dyck, A., A. Morse, and L. Zingales, 2010, Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud? Journal
 of Finance 65, 2213–2253.

Edmans, A., 2011, Does the Stock Market Fully Value Intangibles: Evidence from Employee Sat-
  isfaction and Equity Prices, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 621–640.

Efron, B., T. Hastie, I. Johnstone, R. Tibshirani, 2004, Least Angle Regression, The Annals of
  Statistics 32, 407-499.

Efron., B. 2004, The Estimation of Prediction Error: Covariance Penalties and Cross-validation.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 99, 619–642.

Fahlenbrach, R., R. Prilmeier, and R. Stulz, 2012, This Time Is the Same: Using Bank Performance
  in 1998 to Explain Bank Performance during the Recent Financial Crisis, Journal of Finance 67,
  2139–2185.

Gibbons, R., 1998, Incentives in Organizations. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 115–32.

Gibbons, R., S. Kaplan, 2015, Formal Measures in Informal Management: Can a Balanced Score-
  card Change a Culture?, American Economic Review 105, 447–51.



                                               33
Gibbons, R., and R. Henderson, 2013, What Do Managers Do? In The Handbook of Organizational
  Economics, ed. R. Gibbons and J. Roberts, 680731. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Graham, J., and C. Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from
  the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.

Graham, J., C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, 2005, The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial
  Reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3–73.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2006, Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?, Journal
 of Economic Perspectives 20, 23–48.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2015a, The Value of Corporate Culture, Journal of Financial
 Economics 117, 60–76.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2015b, Corporate Culture, Societal Culture, and Institu-
 tions, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105, 336–339.

Harvey, C., Liu, Y., and H. Zhu, 2016, . . . and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns, Review of
 Financial Studies 29, 5–68.

Hermalin, B., 2001, Corporate Culture and Economic Theory, in C. Cooper, S. Cartwright, and P.
  Earley, eds., International Handbook of Organizational Culture and Climate. New York: Wiley.

Hermalin, B., 2013, Leadership and Corporate Culture, in R. Gibbons, J. Roberts (eds.), Handbook
  of Organizational Economics, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 432–476.

Hoerl, A. and Kennard, R., 1970, Ridge Regression: Biased Estimation for Nonorthogonal Prob-
 lems, Technometrics 12, 5567.

Kang, M., A. Rangel, M. Camus, and C. Camerer, 2011, Hypothetical and Real Choice Differentially
 Activate Common Valuation Areas, The Journal of Neuroscience 31, 461–468.

Kedia, S., S. Luo and S. Rajgopal, 2015, Culture of Weak Compliance and Financial Reporting
  Risk, Columbia University Working Paper.

Kreps, D., 1990, Corporate Culture and Economic Theory, in J. Alt and K. Shepsle (eds.) Perspec-
  tives on Positive Political Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 90–143.

Lazear, E., 1995, Corporate Culture and Diffusion of Values, In R. Siebert, ed., Trends in Business
  Organization: Do Participation and Cooperation Increase Competitiveness? Tubingen: Mohr.

Lazear, E., 1999, Culture and Language, Journal of Political Economy 107, 95–126.

Lazear, E., 2000, Performance Pay and Productivity, American Economic Review 90, 1346–1361.

Levin, J., 2003, Relational Incentive Contracts. American Economic Review 93, 835–857.

Macaulay, S., 1963, Non Contractual Relations in Business. American Sociological Review 28, 55–70.

North, D., 1991, Institutions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 97–112.


                                                34
Martinez, E., N. Beaulieu, R. Gibbons, P. Pronovost, and T. Wang, 2015, Organizational Culture
 and Performance, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105, 331–335.

O’Reilly, C., J. Chatman, and D. Caldwell, 1991, People and Organizational Culture: A Pro-
  file Comparison Approach to Assessing Person-Organization Fit, The Academy of Management
  Journal 34, 487–516.

O’Reilly, C., and Chatman, J., 1996, Culture as a Social Control: Corporations, Cults and Commit-
  ment. In: B. Staw and L. Cummings (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior 18, Connecticut:
  JAI Press.

O’Reilly, C., J. Chatman, D. Caldwell, and B. Doerr, 2014, The Promise and Problems of Orga-
  nizational Culture: CEO Personality, Culture, and Firm Performance, Group and Organization
  Management 39, 595–625.

Popadak, J., 2016, A Corporate Culture Channel: How Increased Shareholder Governance Reduces
  Firm Value, Duke University Working Paper.

Schein, E., 1990, Organizational Culture, American Psychologist 45, 109–119.

Shleifer, A., Summers, L.,1988, Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers. In: Auerbach, A.(Ed.),
  Corporate Takeovers, Causes, and Consequences, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 33–56.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1997, A Survey of Corporate Governance, The Journal of Finance 52,
  737–783.

Sudman, S. and N. Bradburn, 1983, Asking Questions: A Practical Guide to Questionnaire Design,
  San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

Syverson, C., 2011, What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49, 326–65.

Tibshirani, R., 1996, Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso, Journal of Royal Statistical
  Society 58, 267–288.

Van den Steen, E., 2010a, On the Origin of Shared Beliefs and Corporate Culture, RAND Journal
  of Economics 41, 617–648.

Van den Steen, E., 2010b, Culture Clash: The Costs and Benefits of Homogeneity, Management
  Science 56, 1718–1738.




                                                35
                                                   Corporate Institutions
                               INFORMAL                                                     FORMAL


            Corporate                                                                                            Formal
             Culture                                                                                           Institutions
                                                       Effectiveness of culture
                                                      determined by alignment of
                                                       and interactions between                   Management
 Values                 Norms                         values, norms, and formal                    Practices              Governance
                                                              institutions.
Integrity       Report unethical behavior                                                     Incentive compensation      External
                                                                                                                          (e.g., Board)
Adaptability    Develop new ideas organically                                                 Hiring, firing, promotion
                                                                                                                          Internal
Other           Other
                                                             Outcomes                         Other                       (e.g., Finance)




                                                Compliance      Creativity   Productivity
                                                 (ethics)     (innovation)   & firm value



        Figure 1. Diagram linking corporate culture to outcomes: According to North (1991),
        institutions can be classified as informal and formal. We define corporate culture as an informal
        institution comprised of cultural values and cultural norms. The values and norms characterize
        the structure in place that guides employees’ actions when they face unforeseen contingencies. A
        cultural value represents an ideal state of behavior such as integrity or adaptability. Cultural norms
        are the day-to-day living out of the cultural values via the typical patterns of conduct. An effective
        culture is one that promotes the behaviors needed to successfully execute the firm’s strategies
        and achieve its goals. The effectiveness of culture is determined by alignment of and interactions
        between values, norms, and formal institutions.




                                                                   36
                               60
                 Percent of Survey Responses
                  15         300       45




                                                       No = 1                    2                      3                   Yes = 4

                                                                         Tracks stated values?                   Is Optimal?
                                               Source: 1348 survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms.




Figure 2. How effective is corporate culture in practice? The histogram shows the percent
of responses to Q4 (see Appendix A), “How closely does your current corporate culture track with
your stated firm values?” where 1 = Not at all, 2 = Not very closely, 3 = Somewhat, and 4 =
Very closely and Q4b, “Our firm’s corporate culture:” where 1 = Needs a substantial overhaul, 2
= Needs considerable work to get to where it should be, 3 = Needs some work but is close to where
it should be, and 4 = Is exactly where it should be.” The sample consists of survey responses from
executives at public and private North American firms.




                                                                                        37
                 Average Importance of Corporate Culture
                       1         2    0    3          4




                                                            0         5        10     15       20       25     30     35                 40        45
                                                                               Days from Initial Email to Survey Response
                                                           Source: 1348 survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms.




Figure 3. Reliability of culture measures: The plot shows a histogram of the mean response to
Q2, “How important do you believe corporate culture is at your firm?” where 1 = not important, 2
= somewhat important, 3 = important, 4 = very important. The x-axis represents the delay in days
from when the initial survey invitation is sent to when the survey is filled out. The dashed blue line
shows the mean response across all observations. The responses are statistically indistinguishable
across days. The sample consists of survey responses from executives at public and private North
American firms.




                                                                                                    38
                          Table I Corporate Culture Summary Statistics

This table shows summary statistics of the values (Panel A) and norms (Panel B) that comprise corporate
culture, as well as formal institutions (Panel C). Panel D presents summary statistics on three different types
of business outcomes affected by corporate culture. The sample consists of survey responses from executives
at public and private North American firms. For a detailed description of each variable, see Appendix B.
The survey questions are presented in Appendix A.
      Cultural values from Q1 "Briefly, what words or phrases best describe the current corporate culture at your firm?"
      -1 = Described value is opposite, 0 = No mention of value, 1 = Indicated this value
                                                                      Percent of respondents
      Panel A. Cultural values                         Obs.          -1          0         1        Mean      Std. dev. Median
      Adaptability                                     1348        14%         53%        33%       0.19        0.66       0
      Collaboration                                    1348         9%         58%        33%       0.24        0.60       0
      Community                                        1348         6%         56%        38%       0.31        0.58       0
      Customer-oriented                                1348         1%         77%        23%       0.22        0.43       0
      Detail-oriented                                  1348         2%         82%        15%       0.13        0.40       0
      Integrity                                        1348         2%         69%        29%       0.27        0.49       0
      Results-oriented                                 1348         3%         57%        39%       0.36        0.54       0
      Agg. cultural values                             1348                                         0.25        0.27     0.29

      Cultural norms from Q6, "In the context of your firm's current culture, please indicate which factors determine the
      effectiveness of your culture." -1 = Works against, 0 = No effect, 1 = Key factor
                                                                      Percent of respondents
      Panel B. Cultural norms                           Obs.         -1          0           1       Mean      Std. dev. Median
      Agreement about goals and values                  1348        8%          30%        62%        0.54       0.64       1
      Consistency and predictability of actions         1348        8%          45%        47%        0.39       0.63       0
      Coordination among employees                      1348       10%          23%        67%        0.57       0.66       1
      Decision-making reflects long-term               1348        10%          27%        63%        0.53       0.67       1
      Employees comfort in suggesting critiques        1348        13%          33%        54%        0.42       0.71       1
      New ideas develop organically                    1348         8%          41%        52%        0.44       0.63       1
      Trust among employees                             1348        9%          15%        76%        0.68       0.63       1
      Urgency with which employees work                1348        12%          39%        49%        0.37       0.69       0
      Willingness to report unethical behavior         1348         7%          44%        49%        0.42       0.62       0
      Agg. cultural norms                              1348                                           0.48       0.43     0.56

      Formal institutions from Q6/Q13, "Do the following items reinforce or work against the effectiveness of your corporate
      culture." -1 = Works against, 0 = No impact, 1 = Reinforces
                                                                     Percent of respondents
      Panel C. Formal institutions                     Obs.         -1          0         1        Mean     Std. dev. Median
      Corporate governance                             1348        9%         42%       48%         0.39       0.65        0
      Corporate leadership                             1348       17%         18%       65%         0.48       0.77        1
      Finance function                                 1348        7%         50%       43%         0.36       0.61        0
      Hiring, firing, and promotion                    1348       13%         35%       52%         0.38       0.71        1
      Incentive compensation                           1348       17%         33%       50%         0.32       0.75        0
      Agg. formal institutions                         1348                                         0.39       0.47      0.40

      Firm outcomes extracted from Q14, "To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm affect the following items:"
      1 = No Effect, 2 = Little effect, 3 = Moderate effect 4 = Big effect
                                                                 Percent of respondents
      Panel D. Outcomes Culture Affects Obs.               1           2         3       4        Mean       Std. dev. Median
      Compliance                               1119       9%         14%        30%     47%        3.15        0.97        3
      Tax aggressiveness                       1020      32%         32%        25%     10%        2.14        0.99        2
      Quality of our financial reporting       1118      10%         21%        33%     36%        2.94        0.99        3
      Beat EPS                                  302      11%               29%          60%        3.24        1.03        4
      Aggregate ethics                         1152                                                2.80        0.77      3.00
      Creativity                               1136       2%          9%        32%     57%        3.43        0.76        4
      Willingness to take on risky projects    1129       5%         11%        43%     41%        3.21        0.82        3
      Aggregate innovation                     1150                                                3.32        0.61      3.50
      Firm value                               1124       3%          8%        31%     57%        3.43        0.78        4
      Profitability                            1137       1%          8%        36%     54%        3.44        0.69        4
      Productivity                             1126       1%          8%        29%     62%        3.51        0.70        4
      Agg. productivity & value outcomes 1153                                                      3.46        0.54      3.67
      Agg. all outcomes                        1162                                                3.20        0.46      3.22



                                                                39
                                                       Table II Corporate Culture by Industry

     This table provides descriptive statistics of the values and norms that comprise corporate culture by industry. Columns (1) through (6) display
     the mean response from executives in the specific industries for which we obtain at least 50 responses. Columns (7) through (10) display
     the mean response from executives conditional on their competitive position in the industry. The sample consists of survey responses from
     executives at public and private North American firms. For a detailed description of each variable, see the definitions in Appendix B.
                                                                               Specific Industry                          Competitive Position in Industry
                                                                                                                                Among Middle of
                                                         Finance   Health      Manu.       Retail    Services   Tech.   Leader Leading       Pack Challenger
                                                            (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)     (6)     (7)      (8)         (9)       (10)
     Cultural values (-1 = Described value is opposite, 0 = No mention of value, 1 = Indicated this value)
      Adaptability                                         0.22      0.07       0.07        0.07        0.27    0.39     0.35     0.20     -0.01     0.32
      Collaboration                                        0.28      0.23       0.14        0.12        0.45    0.30     0.33     0.32      0.08     0.28
      Community                                            0.29      0.37       0.31        0.34        0.32    0.49     0.43     0.35      0.24     0.33
      Customer-oriented                                    0.28      0.24       0.19        0.25        0.29    0.17     0.26     0.28      0.15     0.20
      Detail-oriented                                      0.09      0.21       0.12        0.03        0.21    0.10     0.19     0.15      0.09     0.19
      Integrity                                            0.36      0.28       0.19        0.25        0.33    0.27     0.33     0.30      0.19     0.27
      Results-oriented                                     0.42      0.43       0.32        0.33        0.35    0.27     0.43     0.39      0.16     0.38
     Cultural norms (-1 = Works against, 0 = No effect, 1 = Key factor)
40




      Agreement about goals and values                     0.58      0.52       0.52        0.62        0.59    0.52     0.67     0.61      0.40     0.53
      Consistency and predictability of actions            0.45      0.41       0.41        0.28        0.43    0.32     0.46     0.45      0.33     0.38
      Coordination among employees                         0.53      0.64       0.64        0.58        0.72    0.68     0.65     0.67      0.46     0.65
      Decision-making reflects long-term                   0.52      0.55       0.55        0.53        0.61    0.52     0.66     0.60      0.39     0.56
      Employees comfort in suggesting critiques            0.36      0.38       0.38        0.37        0.57    0.57     0.52     0.45      0.28     0.55
      New ideas develop organically                        0.36      0.40       0.40        0.41        0.67    0.53     0.52     0.47      0.28     0.61
      Trust among employees                                0.73      0.67       0.67        0.65        0.77    0.80     0.82     0.75      0.56     0.74
      Urgency with which employees work                    0.31      0.44       0.44        0.40        0.46    0.45     0.43     0.42      0.29     0.45
      Willingness to report unethical behavior             0.58      0.49       0.49        0.33        0.43    0.39     0.52     0.48      0.34     0.41
     Aggregate cultural measures
      Agg. cultural values                                 0.43      0.41       0.41        0.30        0.44    0.42     0.45     0.45      0.23     0.35
      Agg. cultural norms                                  0.21      0.21       0.21        0.14        0.30    0.28     0.28     0.26      0.06     0.25
     Culture in practice (1 = No, 4 = Yes)
      Tracks stated values                                 3.39      3.28       3.28        3.16        3.51    3.38     3.50     3.40      2.90     3.32
      Effective culture                                    2.82      2.70       2.70        2.58        3.02    2.90     2.91     2.87      2.37     2.83
     Observations                                          174       191         191        111         150     105      258      484       227      128
                          Table III The Value of Corporate Culture

This table provides descriptive statistics on the value placed on corporate culture by surveyed executives at
public and private North American firms. The question is listed along with the percentage of responses in
each category. For details on all survey questions, please see Appendix A.

Q2, "How important do you believe corporate culture is at your firm?"
                                              1=            2=         3=          4=
  Obs.      Mean     Std. dev.   Median Not impt. Somewhat            Impt.     Very impt.
    (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)
  1335      3.52       0.77          4       4.2%          4.9%       25.4%      65.5%

Q3, "In terms of all of the things that make your firm valuable, where would you place corporate culture?"
                                                  1=         2=          3=         4=
  Obs.       Mean        Std. dev.   Median Not top 10      Top 10      Top 5      Top 3
    (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
  1345        3.22         1.00          4      10.0%       11.5%       25.0%      53.5%

Q4c, "Do you believe that improving your corporate culture would increase your firm's value?"
                                               0=          1=
  Obs.       Mean      Std. dev.  Median       No          Yes
   (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
  1104       0.92        0.27         1       8.1%        91.9%

Q11, "You work at a firm with an effective, strong culture. You are evaluating two acquisition targets, A and B.
A and B would bring the same strategic and operational benefits if acquired, and the targets are identical in all
dimensions except corporate culture. Company A’s culture is very aligned with your firm’s culture, whereas
company B’s culture is not at all aligned. Relative to how much you would offer for A, how much less would you
offer for company B due to the culture misalignment?"
                                                  0=         1=          2=         3=          4=           5=
   Obs.       Mean     Std. dev.     Median Same amt. 5% discount 10% disc. 20% disc. 30+% disc. No offer
   1000       3.69       1.71           5       10.3%       3.0%       10.5%       13.8%       8.8%         53.6%




                                                       41
                    Table IV Actions Influenced by Corporate Culture

This table provides descriptive statistics on the value placed on corporate culture by surveyed executives
at public and private North American firms. The actual question is listed along with the percentage of
responses in each category. For details on all survey questions, please see Appendix A.

 Q7, "Do you think your company takes the right amount of risk in its investments to achieve its goals?"
                                                              -1 =             0=              1=
      Obs.         Mean       Std. dev.       Median        Too little    Right amount    Too much
      (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)             (7)
     1117          -0.18         0.61             0          28.8%           60.2%          11.0%

 Q7b, "Our corporate culture is a (fill in the blank) reason that our company takes on this amount of risk."
                                                                   1=           2=             3=             4=
     Obs.         Mean           Std. dev.         Median      Not a reason  Somewhat         Impt.        Very impt.
      (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
      860         2.70             1.08               3           19.2%        19.8%          33.0%          28.0%

 Q8, "Suppose your firm is considering two projects A and B:
 ·A and B are very similar in that they require the same capital up front, have the same expected life, and have the
 same probability of failure.
 ·A is more valuable than project B (A has greater NPV)
 ·A generates negative cash flows for the first two years, while B has positive cash flows in all years.
 Assuming all cash flow forecasts are equally accurate, does your firm's culture make it more likely that project A or
 B will be chosen?"
                                                                   0=              1=
      Obs.          Mean          Std. dev.       Median         Project B      Project A
       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
      1025          0.59            0.49              1           40.6%           59.4%

 Q8b, "Does your firm's culture pay a role in the preference for Project A?"
                                                                  0=          1=
     Obs.          Mean         Std. dev.        Median           No          Yes
      (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)
     629           0.80           0.40              1           20.0%        80.0%

 Q10, "Do you think having a poorly implemented/ineffective culture at a company increases the chances that an
 employee would do something unethical (or even illegal)?"
                                                                0=           1=
     Obs.          Mean        Std. dev.      Median            No           Yes
      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
     1126          0.85           0.36            1           15.5%         84.5%

 Q12, "Sometimes companies engage in end-of-quarter practices such as delaying valuable projects in order to hit
 market expected earnings. How likely is it that an effective corporate culture would reduce the chance that such
 actions are taken?"
                                                                  1=              2=           3=              4=
                                                                              Somewhat                    Extremely
      Obs.          Mean        Std. dev.        Median        Not likely       likely     Very likely       likely
       (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)             (8)
      1103           2.55         1.00              3            18.9%          25.6%         36.7%         18.8%
 Q12 limited to only public companies:
       299           2.55         1.01              3            19.7%          24.4%         37.1%         18.7%




                                                          42
                            Table V Values, Norms, and Outcomes

This table presents OLS estimates demonstrating an association between specific values and norms and
firm outcomes. Panel A shows an example ethics outcomes (i.e., being compliant) and Panel B shows
an example innovation outcome (i.e., creativity). In Column (1) and (2), the key explanatory variables
are the displayed values and norms. Additional explanatory variables include all other values, norms, and
formal institutions, noise controls, and demographic controls. Column (2) includes our “halo effect” control
(hypothetical Q11) and additional question controls (Q1, Q4, and Q4b). Standard errors that are robust to
heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under coefficient estimates. All explanatory variables are standardized,
so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the conditional impact from a one-standard-deviation increase
in the explanatory variable. For a detailed description of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix
B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

                                                                    Dependent variable =
                                                                   Being Compliant (Q14)
                      Panel A. Example Ethics Outcome                  (1)          (2)
                      Cultural values
                       Integrity                                     0.20***      0.17***
                                                                      (0.03)       (0.04)
                      Cultural norms
                       Consistency and predictability of actions     0.08**        0.04
                                                                      (0.03)      (0.04)
                       Trust among employees                         0.11***       0.07
                                                                      (0.04)      (0.05)
                       Willingness to report unethical behavior      0.09***      0.08**
                                                                      (0.03)      (0.04)
                      Other Cultural Values & Cultural Norms           Yes         Yes
                      Formal Institution Controls                      Yes         Yes
                      Noise & Demographic Controls                     Yes         Yes
                      Additional Question Controls                      No         Yes
                      "Halo Effect" Specification                       No         Yes
                      Observations                                     1115        937
                      Adjusted R-squared                              23.2%       25.7%

                                                                    Dependent variable =
                                                                      Creativity (Q14)
                      Panel B. Example Innovation Outcome             (1)           (2)
                      Cultural values
                       Adaptability                                  0.07**        0.07*
                                                                     (0.03)       (0.04)
                       Results-oriented                              -0.05*      -0.10***
                                                                     (0.03)       (0.04)
                      Cultural norms
                       Employees comfort in suggesting critiques     0.11***      0.10**
                                                                      (0.04)       (0.04)
                       New ideas develop organically                 0.11***      0.14***
                                                                      (0.04)       (0.04)
                      Other Cultural Values & Cultural Norms           Yes          Yes
                      Formal Institution Controls                      Yes          Yes
                      Noise & Demographic Controls                     Yes          Yes
                      Additional Question Controls                     Yes          Yes
                      "Halo Effect" Specification                       No          Yes
                      Observations                                     1132         949
                      Adjusted R-squared                              21.1%        24.4%



                                                         43
                     Table VI Aggregate Values, Norms, and Outcomes

This table presents OLS estimates connecting the values and norms that comprise corporate culture to firm
outcomes. Column (1) is the aggregate mean for all firm outcomes. The dependent variable in Column
(2), (3), and (4) are, respectively, the aggregate among all ethical outcomes, innovation outcomes, and
productivity/firm value outcomes. The key explanatory variables are the aggregate cultural values and
cultural norms. Additional explanatory variables include noise controls (date, response delay, job title,
and source of email), demographic controls (profitability, employee turnover, CEO turnover, family firm,
ownership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation, revenue,
number of employees, industry, and credit rating), and additional question controls (Q1, Q4, Q4b). Standard
errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under coefficient estimates. All explanatory
variables are standardized, so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the conditional impact from a one-
standard-deviation increase in the explanatory variable. Panel A examines cultural values and norms in
isolation while Panel B allows for an interaction. For a detailed description of each variable, please see the
definitions in Appendix B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

                                                           Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                               Productivity
                                                       All         Ethics        Innovation & Firm Value
      Panel A. No interaction term                     (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
      Aggregate cultural values                       -0.06         0.09           -0.18*          -0.05
                                                     (0.11)        (0.10)          (0.11)         (0.11)
      Aggregate cultural norms                       0.17**         0.08          0.17***        0.13**
                                                     (0.07)        (0.06)          (0.07)         (0.06)
      Noise & Demographic Controls                     Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
      Formal Institution Controls                      Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
      Additional Question Controls                     Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
      Observations                                    1138          1128            1126           1129
      Adjusted R-squared                             19.2%         20.2%           14.3%          15.1%

                                                           Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                               Productivity
                                                       All         Ethics        Innovation & Firm Value
      Panel B. Adding an interaction term              (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
      Aggregate cultural values                       -0.05         0.10            -0.17          -0.04
                                                     (0.11)        (0.10)          (0.11)         (0.11)
      Aggregate cultural norms                      0.24***        0.14**         0.21***        0.18***
                                                     (0.07)        (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.07)
      Agg. cultural values x agg. cultural norms    0.27***        0.23**           0.14          0.19**
                                                     (0.10)        (0.09)          (0.10)         (0.09)
      Noise & Demographic Controls                     Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
      Formal Institution Controls                      Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
      Additional Question Controls                     Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
      Observations                                    1138          1128            1126           1129
      Adjusted R-squared                             19.9%         20.7%           14.5%          15.5%




                                                     44
        Table VII Two-step Connection of Corporate Culture to Outcomes

This table presents OLS estimates connecting an effective culture to firm outcomes in Panel A. Panel B
presents OLS estimates connecting cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions to an effective
culture. In the survey, we define an effective culture as one that promotes the behaviors needed to success-
fully execute the firm’s strategies and achieve its goals. Column (1) of Panel A is the aggregate mean for all
firm outcomes. The dependent variable in Column (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively, the aggregate among all
ethical outcomes, innovation outcomes, and productivity/firm value outcomes. The key explanatory variable
is “current culture is effective?” Additional explanatory variables include noise controls and demographic
controls. In Panel B, Column (1), (2), and (3), the key explanatory variable of interest is aggregate cul-
tural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions, respectively. In Column (4), all explanatory variables
are combined and Column (5) includes their interactions. Additional explanatory variables include noise
controls (date, response delay, job title, and source of email), demographic controls (profitability, employee
turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, ownership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure,
CEO incentive compensation, revenue, number of employees, industry, and credit rating), and additional
question controls (Q1, Q4). Standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under
coefficient estimates. All explanatory variables are standardized, so that the coefficients can be interpreted
as the conditional impact from a one-standard-deviation increase in the explanatory variable. For a detailed
description of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                                       Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                     Productivity &
                                                      All      Ethics     Innovation Firm Value
  Panel A. Effectiveness and outcomes                 (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)
  Current culture is effective?                     0.08**    0.09***        -0.00       0.08**
                                                    (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)
  Noise & Demographic Controls                       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes
  Observations                                       1158       1148         1146         1149
  Adjusted R-squared                                13.3%      15.9%        10.8%        11.2%

                                                           Dependent variable = current culture is effective?
  Panel B. Determinants of effectiveness               (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)
  Aggregate cultural values                         0.21***                                 0.13**           0.12*
                                                     (0.07)                                  (0.07)         (0.07)
  Aggregate cultural norms                                      0.20***                     0.13***        0.12***
                                                                 (0.03)                      (0.03)         (0.04)
  Aggregate formal institutions                                              0.13***        0.08***        0.08***
                                                                              (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.03)
  Agg. cultural values x agg. formal institutions                                                            -0.03
                                                                                                            (0.04)
  Agg. cultural norms x agg. formal institutions                                                             -0.03
                                                                                                            (0.03)
  Noise & Demographic Controls                        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
  Additional Question Controls                        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
  Observations                                        1310        1310         1310           1310           1310
  Adjusted R-squared                                 58.1%       59.1%        59.0%          59.7%          59.7%
  R-squared (excl. noise & demo. controls)           53.9%       54.4%        54.1%          55.9%          55.9%
  R-squared (excl. all controls)                     25.0%       18.2%        22.2%          34.8%          35.9%




                                                        45
                   Table VIII What Determines Cultural Effectiveness?

This table presents estimates connecting a firm’s specific cultural values and norms to an effective culture. In
the survey, we define an effective culture as one that promotes the behaviors needed to successfully execute
the firm’s strategies and achieve its goals. Column (1) presents Ridge Regression estimates. Ridge Regression
is like OLS but shrinks the estimated coefficients towards zero. Such a technique helps with the problem
of picking out the relevant cultural values and norms from a larger set (i.e., variable selection) by pushing
estimates of some coefficients to be exactly zero. Column (2) presents LASSO Regression estimates. LASSO
Regression is another variable selection technique. In each column, additional explanatory variables include
noise controls (date, response delay, job title, and source of email), demographic controls (profitability,
employee turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, ownership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age,
CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation, revenue, number of employees, industry, and credit rating),
and additional question controls (Q1, Q4). Bootstrapped standard errors using 100 replications are in
parentheses under coefficient estimates. All explanatory variables are standardized, so that the coefficients
can be interpreted as the conditional impact from a one-standard-deviation increase in the explanatory
variable. We include all cultural values, norms, and formal institutions in our analysis but only report those
the theoretical literature on intrinsic motivation and expectation formation suggest are most relevant. For
a detailed description of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                                                        Variable Selection Approach
                                                                Ridge Regression          LASSO Regression
      Dependent variable = current culture is effective?               (1)                       (2)
      Cultural Values
       Collaboration                                                0.06***                  0.05***
                                                                     (0.02)                   (0.02)
      Cultural Norms
       New ideas develop organically                                0.04***                   0.04**
                                                                     (0.02)                   (0.02)
       Urgency with which employees work                            0.04***                   0.03**
                                                                     (0.01)                   (0.01)
       Consistency and predictability of actions                    0.04**                     0.02
                                                                     (0.02)                   (0.02)
       Trust among employees                                      Not Selected                 0.02
                                                                                              (0.03)
       Coordination among employees                               Not Selected                 0.02
                                                                                              (0.02)
      Other Cultural Values & Cultural Norms                          Yes                      Yes
      Noise & Demographic Controls                                    Yes                      Yes
      Additional Question Controls                                    Yes                      Yes
      Observations                                                    1310                     1310
      Adjusted R-squared                                             59.2%                    59.4%




                                                           46
                                                  Table IX What Prevents Cultural Effectiveness?

     This table provides descriptive statistics on influential factors in setting a firm’s current culture (Panel A) and in preventing the firm’s culture
     from being effective (Panel B). The sample consists of survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. The
     actual question is listed along with the percentage of responses in each category. The results in the table for Q13a/b are for firms at which
     the finance function (or separately, incentive compensation) work against the effectiveness of the culture. For details on all survey questions,
     please see Appendix A.

      Panel A. Q5, "Which of the following have been most influential in setting your firm's current culture? [Check up to 4]"
                                                                         Freq.      Pct.                                         Freq.   Pct.
                                                                           (1)      (2)                                           (3)     (4)
      Current CEO                                                         743      55% Past CEO                                  240     18%
      Our reputation or image in the marketplace                          478      35% Changing needs of the market              229     17%
      Owners                                                              432      32% Non-management employees                  179     13%
      Founder                                                             410      30% Incentive compensation                    158     12%
      Internal policies and procedures                                    332      25% Board of Directors                        157     12%
      Hard times we experienced                                           268      20% Peer firms                                 45      3%

      Panel B. Q4d, "What is preventing your firm's culture from being exactly where it should be?"
                                                                                                                     -2 =        -1 =    0=      1=        2=
                                                                                                                   Strongly                             Strongly
47




                                                                           Obs.   Mean     Std. dev.    Median     Disagree   Disagree          Agree    Agree
                                                                           (1)     (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)     (7)     (8)       (9)
      Formal Institutions
       Leadership needs to invest more time in the culture                 1130    0.79      1.20          1          6%         11%     13%    36%      33%
       Firm policies work against the intended culture                     1120   -0.04      1.27          0         16%         23%     24%    25%      13%
      Cultural Values and Cultural Norms
       Our cultural values are not fully aligned with our business needs   1125   -0.12      1.32          0         19%         26%     17%    27%      12%
       Our firm has inefficient workplace interactions                     1123    0.20      1.25          0         11%         21%     19%    33%      15%
       Our employees are not fully committed to the culture                1125   -0.03      1.26          0         14%         26%     20%    27%      12%
       Our culture has not caught up with recent business changes          1117    0.24      1.31          0         13%         18%     20%    30%      19%

      Q13a/b, "What are the most important ways incentive compensation/the finance function works against your corporate culture?"
                                                                     Freq.      Pct.                                                            Freq.    Pct.
      Incentive Compensation Works Against                            (1)       (2)   Finance Function Works Against                             (3)      (4)
      Atracts/retains the wrong type of people to the firm           120       47% Focuses employees too much on short-term objectives           186     56%
      Focuses employees too much on short-term objectives             69       27% Focuses employees on imperfect metrics                         90     27%
      Leads to fear of failure and insufficient risk taking           68       26% Finance employees operate in a separate silo                   56     17%
      Appendix A.             Survey Questions and Additional Logistics

   The survey contains 14 main questions, some with sub-parts dependent on the initial answer

selected, and was administered over the Internet. The survey is anonymous and does not require

subjects to disclose their names or their corporate affiliation and is IRB approved at the authors’

home institutions. One advantage of online administration is the ability to randomly scramble

the order of choices within a question, so as to mitigate potential order-of-presentation effects.

Specifically, the survey scrambles the order of answers in questions 4d, 6, 13 and 14. For the

remaining questions, order of sub questions is deemed not to be a first-order issue (demographic

questions, qualitative questions) or there is a natural order to the presented alternatives (e.g., 3, 7

and 11). Participants were allowed to skip questions if they did not want to answer them. That is

why the number of observations varies across questions. Most multiple-choice questions included

a free-text response option, so that survey takers could provide answers that were not explicitly

specified in the question.

   Invitations to take the survey were sent via email to a diverse sample of corporate executives

and invitations were sent in a staggered manner. We emailed an invitation to sub-sections of these

email addresses on two dates (September 15 or September 22, 2015) to take the survey, a reminder

was sent a week or more later to these sub-groups (September 29, October 6, October 20). The

survey closed on October 31, 2015. We supplemented the main email list from Duke’s quarterly

survey and Columbia business school with additional email lists from CFO magazine, the Center

for Leadership and Ethics (COLE) at Duke University, the Fuqua School of Business Board of

Visitors, and Fortune 1000 CEOs and CFOs. Our baseline summary results do not vary whether

we include all of these groups or not.




                                                  48
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




                       Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine
                                Corporate Culture Survey 2015
   Participation in this survey is voluntary. You do not have to answer every question and you can withdraw from participation at any time
   by closing your internet browser. The survey is anonymous and we will only report aggregated data. At the end of the survey, you can
   indicate whether you would like to receive a copy of our report.

    1. Briefly, what words or phrases best describe the current corporate culture at your firm?




    2. How important do you believe corporate culture is at your firm? (choose best option)

                                                                            Somewhat
                              Very important            Important                              Not important           Don't know
                                                                            important




    3. In terms of all of the things that make your firm valuable, where would you place corporate culture? (choose best option)

            Top 3
            Top 5
            Top 10
            Not in Top 10


   4. How closely does your current corporate culture track with your stated firm values?
                                         Very closely           Somewhat            Not very closely           Not at all




    4b. Our firm's corporate culture: (choose best option)

            Is exactly where it should be
            Needs some work but is close to where it should be
            Needs considerable work to get to where it should be
            Needs a substantial overhaul


                                                                            Continue




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                             1/2
                                                                              49
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




    4c. Do you believe that improving your corporate culture would increase your firm's value?

            Yes
            No


    4d. What is preventing your firm's culture from being exactly where it should be?
                                                                                                 Strongly                                Strongly
                                                                                                 disagree                                 agree
                                                                                                     -2          -1             0   +1     +2
   Our cultural values are not fully aligned with our business needs
   Our firm has inefficient workplace interactions (e.g., too much time spent
   building consensus, etc.)
   Our employees are not fully committed to the culture
   Firm policies work against the intended culture (e.g., compensation,
   governance, etc.)
   Leadership needs to invest more time to develop the culture
   Our culture has not caught up with recent changes in the business environment


    Other reasons why your corporate culture is not where it should be:




                                                                            Continue




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                                        1/1
                                                                              50
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




    5. Which of the following have been most influential in setting your firm's current culture? (Check up to 4):

            Peer firms                                                                 Our reputation or image in the marketplace
            Board of Directors                                                         Hard times we experienced
            Owners                                                                     Changing needs of the marketplace
            Non-management employees                                                   Incentive compensation
            Founder                                                                    Internal policies and procedures
            Past CEO                                                                   Other:
            Current CEO




   For the remaining questions, define an effective corporate culture as one that promotes the behaviors needed to successfully
   execute the firm's strategies and achieve its goals.

    6. In the context of your firm's current culture, please indicate which factors determine the effectiveness of your culture.
                                                                               Key factor helping                          Works against our
                                                                                                     Little or no effect
                                                                                 our culture to                              culture being     Don't know
                                                                                                         on culture
                                                                                be more effective                              effective
   Urgency with which employees work
   Coordination among employees
   Trust among employees
   Employees' comfort in suggesting critiques
   Consistency and predictability of employees' actions
   Employees' willingness to report compliance risks or unethical
   behavior
   Hiring, firing, and promotion decisions
   Broad agreement about goals and values
   Decision-making reflects firm's long-term interests
   New ideas develop organically
   Other:


                                                                            Continue




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                                                1/1
                                                                              51
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




    7. Do you think your company takes the right amount of risk in its investments to achieve its goals?

            Yes, right amount of risk
            No, too little risk
            No, too much risk
            Don't know




   8. Suppose your firm is considering two projects A and B.

            •     A and B are very similar in that they require the same capital up front, have the same expected life, and have the
                  same probability of failure.
         •        A is more valuable than project B (A has greater NPV).
         •        A generates negative cash flows for the first two years, while B has positive cash flows in all years.


    Assuming all cash flow forecasts are equally accurate, does your firm's culture make it more likely that project A or B will
    be chosen?

            A
            B
            Not Sure


    Does your firm's culture play a role in your company's preference for project A?

            Yes
            No


    9. The potential for: (choose best option)

            value destruction from ineffective culture is greater than value creation from effective culture
            value destruction from ineffective culture and value creation from effective culture are about the same
            value creation from effective culture is greater than value destruction from ineffective culture


                                                                            Continue




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                           1/1
                                                                              52
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




    10. Do you think having a poorly implemented/ineffective culture at a company increases the chances that an employee
    would do something unethical (or even illegal)?

            Yes
            No




   11. You work at a firm with an effective, strong culture. You are evaluating two acquisition targets, A and B.

             •    A and B would bring the same strategic and operational benefits if acquired, and the targets are identical in all
                  dimensions except corporate culture.
             •    Company A's culture is very aligned with your firm's culture, whereas company B's culture is not at all aligned.


    Relative to how much you would offer for A, how much less would you offer for company B due to the culture
    misalignment? (choose one)

            We would offer the same amount for B as for A
            We would offer 5% less for B
            10% less for B
            20% less for B
            30+% less for B
            We would not make an offer for B
            Don't know


    12. Sometimes companies engage in end-of-quarter practices such as delaying valuable projects in order to hit market
    expected earnings. How likely is it that an effective corporate culture would reduce the chance that such actions are taken?

                                  Extremely likely       Very likely     Somewhat likely          Not likely     Don't know




    13. Do the following items reinforce or work against the effectiveness of your corporate culture:
                                                                       Works
                                                                                      No impact     Reinforces
                                                                       against
   Incentive compensation
   Finance function / department
   Governance/Board of Directors
   Senior management behavior
   Other:



    What are the most important ways incentive compensation works against your corporate culture? [check all that apply]

            Focuses employees too much on short-term objectives
            Leads to fear of failure and insufficient risk taking
            Attracts/retains the wrong type of people to the firm
            Other

http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                          1/2
                                                                                 53
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




   You are almost done! Hang in there!

   On this question, we'd like to learn about the effects of corporate culture

     14. To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm affect the following items:

                                                                                                                                        Don't know or
                                                                       No effect          Little         Moderate          Big effect
                                                                                                                                             NA
     Firm Value
     Profitability
     Quality of our financial reporting
     Creativity
     Tax aggressiveness
     How much debt we use
     Willingness to take on risky projects
     Management of downside risk
     Our rate of growth
     Compliance
     Productivity
     Other:



     Please provide a specific example of how culture affects firm profitability.




     Please provide a specific example of how culture affects management of downside risk.




                                                                            Continue




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                                            1/2
                                                                              54
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015




   Thank you for your help!

   Demographics (Important to complete!)

    1. In your particular industry, how would you characterize your firm's competitive position? (choose best option)

            Market leader
            One of the leading firms
            In the middle of the pack
            Challenger


    2. My company's credit rating is approximately: (e.g., AA-, BBB+, no rating, etc.)

                                  Check here if you do not have a rating, and please estimate what your rating would be.


    3. During the last year, we earned an after-tax profit.

            True
            False


    4. Over the last 3 years, what is your company's approximate:

                    % ROE (e.g., 11%)
                    % Annual growth in revenue (e.g., 8%)
                    % Total debt / total assets (e.g., 25%)


    5. Approximate proportion of your employees that have worked at your firm less than 3 years                                 %


    6. Managers own approximately                          % of my company.


    7. Our employee turnover is                               the industry average.


    8. Our rate of CEO turnover is                              the industry average.


    9a. Ownership (choose one)                           9b. Family (choose one)

            Public                                             Family ownership and operational influence
            Private                                            Family ownership but no operational influence
            Government or non-profit                           No family ownership nor operational influence


    10. How important is meeting or beating quarterly earnings estimates to your company?

                                        Very important     Somewhat important        Not important        Not applicable



http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                        1/3
                                                                              55
6/21/2016                                      Duke University/Columbia University/CFO Magazine Corporate Culture Survey 2015

    11a. Our company is approximately
                                                                             11b. Where is your firm located?
    years old.


    12. What is your job title?

            CEO
            CFO, Treasurer, or similar
            Other:


    13a. CEO Age                        13b. CEO time in job               13c. Percentage of CEO pay that is incentive based (stock, options,
                                                                           bonus):

            < 40                               < 4 years                        None
            40-49                              4-9 years                        1-24%
            50-59                              10-19 years                      25-49%
            60 +                               20 + years                       50-74%
                                                                                75% +


    14. Sales Revenue

            Less than $25 million                                                      $1-$4.9 billion
            $25-$99 million                                                            $5-$9.9 billion
            $100-$499 million                                                          More than $10 billion
            $500-$999 million


    15. Number of Employees

            Fewer than 50                                                              1000-2499
            50-99                                                                      2500-4999
            100-499                                                                    5000-9999
            500-999                                                                    More than 10,000


    16. Industry

            Retail/Wholesale
                                                                                       Public Administration
            Banking/Finance/Insurance/Real Estate
                                                                                       Communication/Media
            Mining/Construction
                                                                                       Technology [Software/Hardware/Biotech]
            Transportation & Public Utilities
                                                                                       Manufacturing
            Energy
                                                                                       Healthcare/Pharmaceutical
            Services, Consulting
                                                                                       Other Industry
            Agriculture, Forestry, & Fishing


    17. How many distinct business segments does your firm have?


                                                                       Click here to finish




http://www.corpculture.org/cgi-bin/survey.pl                                                                                                 2/3
                                                                              56
                       Appendix B.             Variable Definitions

Aggregate ethics outcomes is the mean of the following four components:

  1. Compliance which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: compliance” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

  2. Tax Aggressiveness which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at

     your firm affect the following items: tax aggressiveness” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect,

     3 = moderate effect, and 4 = big effect.

  3. Reporting Quality which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at

     your firm affect the following items: reporting quality” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect,

     3 = moderate effect, and 4 = big effect.

  4. Rescale Beat EPS which is a demographic variable, “How important is meeting or beating

     quarterly earnings estimates to your company?” where 1 = Not important, 2.5 = Somewhat

     important, 4 = Very important. Please note we rescale this question to correspond to the [1,

     4] scale of Q14 variables. Specifically, we transform [-1, 1] scale to -1 = 1, 0 = 2.5, and 1 = 4.

Aggregate innovation outcomes is the mean of the following two components:

  1. Creativity which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: creativity” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

  2. Project Risk which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: project risk” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

Aggregate productivity and firm value outcomes is the mean of the following three compo-

nents:

  1. Firm Value which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: firm value” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

                                                 57
  2. Profitability which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: profitability” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

  3. Productivity which is part of Q14 “To what extent does the corporate culture at your firm

     affect the following items: productivity” where 1 = no effect, 2 = little effect, 3 = moderate

     effect, and 4 = big effect.

Aggregate all outcomes is the mean of the aggregate ethics, aggregate innovation, and aggregate

productivity and firm value outcomes.

   We hand-code to categorize the written responses into seven individual cultural values, when

the respondents wrote descriptions consistent with the following:

Aggregate cultural values is the mean of seven cultural values hand-coded from the open-ended

Q1, “Briefly, what words or phrases best describe the current corporate culture at your firm?”

and the open-ended part of Q14, “Please provide a specific example of how culture affects X.”

Cultural values can take on a score of 1, 0 or -1 where a negative value indicates the antonym.

We hand-code to categorize the written responses into seven individual cultural values, when the

respondents write descriptions consistent with the following:

  1. Adaptability: willing to experiment, fast-moving, quick to take advantage of opportunities,

     taking initiative

  2. Collaboration: team-oriented, supportive, not aggressive, low levels of conflict

  3. Community: respectful of diversity, community, and the environment, inclusive, caring, and

     open

  4. Customer-orientation: listening to customers, being market driven, taking pride in service

  5. Detail-orientation: paying attention to detail, being precise, emphasizing quality, being

     analytical

  6. Integrity: high ethical standards, being honest, accountable

  7. Results-orientation: high expectations for performance, focus on achievement, not easy

     going, not calm



                                                58
Aggregated cultural norms is the mean of the nine cultural norms extracted from the open-

ended Q6, “In the context of your firm’s current culture, please indicate which factors determine

the effectiveness of your culture,” where -1 = Works against our culture being effective , 0 = Little

or no effect on culture, 1 = Key factor helping our culture to be more effective. The individual

cultural norms are:

  1. Agreement about goals and values

  2. Consistency and predictability of actions

  3. Coordination among employees

  4. Decision-making reflects long-term

  5. Employees comfort in suggesting critiques

  6. New ideas develop organically

  7. Trust among employees

  8. Urgency with which employees work

  9. Willingness to report unethical behavior

Aggregate formal institutions is the mean response about the five formal institutions that

are options in Q13/Q6 “Do the following items reinforce or work against the effectiveness of your

corporate culture” where the scale is -1 = Works against, 0 = No impact, and 1 = Reinforces.

  1. Corporate governance

  2. Corporate leadership

  3. Finance function

  4. Hire, fire, promote (Please note this option comes from Q6 “In the context of your firm’s

     current culture, please indicate which factors determine the effectiveness of your culture” but

     has the same scale -1 = Works against, 0 = No impact, and 1 = Key factor)

  5. Incentive compensation


Demographic controls include profitability, employee turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, own-

ership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation, rev-

enue, number of employees, industry, and credit rating. Non-response categorical variables included

                                                 59
as its own category.

Noise controls include date of survey response, response delay from initial email, job title, and

source of email (i.e., Duke, Columbia, CF O magazine)

Addition question controls include controls extracted from Q1, Q4, and Q4b.

  1. Q1 controls are hand-coded from the open-ended response to “Briefly, in words or phrases

      best describe the current corporate culture at your firm?” The controls include an indicator

      for if the response is uninformative (e.g., wrote the definition of culture), for the emotion

      in q1 response (1 = positive emotion, 0 = neutral, -1 = negative emotion), an indicator for

      saying the firm has no culture, the number of values mentioned (this also serves as a proxy

      for length of response), an indicator if the culture is changing, and an indicator if the culture

      is mixed/siloed.

  2. Q4 controls for the response to “How closely does your current corporate culture track with

      your stated firm values?” where 1 = Not at all, 2 = Not very closely, 3 = Somewhat, and 4

      = Very closely”

  3. Q4b controls for the response to “Our firm’s culture:” where 1 = Needs a substantial overhaul,

      2 = Needs considerable work to get to where it should be, 3 = Needs some work but is close

      to where it should be, and 4 = Is exactly where it should be.

Formal institutions controls are either aggregate formal institutions if the regression involves

aggregate independent variables or five different controls, one for each of the formal institutions

(i.e., corporate governance, corporate leadership, finance function, hire, fire, promote, and incentive

compensation) if the regression involves individual independent variables.

“Halo Effect” Specification includes response to Q11, “You work at a firm with an effective,

strong culture. You are evaluating two acquisition targets, A and B. A and B would bring the same

strategic and operational benefits if acquired, and the targets are identical in all dimensions except

corporate culture. Company A’s culture is very aligned with your firm’s culture, whereas company

B’s culture is not at all aligned. Relative to how much you would offer for A, how much less would

you offer for company B due to the culture misalignment?”

                                                  60
Corporate accounting data are from the Compustat-CRSP fundamental annual database. Defini-

tions are as follow.

   Assets = AT

   Credit Rating is a categorical variable that can take on one of three values: investment grade,

high yield, and no rating. SP LT ICRM gives the letter rating. Investment grade requires a rating

of BBB- or higher on S&P scale.

   Debt-to-Assets = (DLC + DLT T )/AT

   Firm Size = log(AT ), in which AT is in real 2010 dollars.

   Investment-to-Capital = ((CAP X − SP P E) − (CAP Xt−1 − SP P Et−1 ))/P P EN Tt−1

   Market Capitalization (MEQ) = P RCC F × CSHO

   Market Value of Assets (M V A) = M EQ + DLC + DLT T + P ST KL − T XDIT C

   Number of Employees = EM P

   Profitability = OIBDP/AT

   Return on Equity = N I/SEQt−1

   Revenue = REV T

   Revenue Growth = REV T /REV Tt−1

   SG&A = XSGA/AT

   Tangibility = P P EN T /AT

   Tobin’s Q = M V A/AT

Management ownership data are from Execucomp. Definitions are as follow.

   CEO Age = P AGE

   CEO Time in Job = (LEF T OF C − BECAM ECEO)/365.25. If the CEO did not leave

office in the calendar year prior to the survey, then LEF T OF C is the date of the survey.

   Management Ownership = SHROW N T OT P CT




                                                61
                              Appendix C.               Additional Tables

                Table C.I Benchmarking Survey Response to Compustat

This table provides descriptive statistics from the survey demographic questions. All Compustat variables
have been coded to match the survey categories. Column (1) summarizes the public firms from the survey
and Column (2) summarizes public firms from Compustat or Execucomp for the most recent fiscal year end
that occurred before the date of the survey (i.e., October 2015). Both samples are limited to North American
firms. For a detailed description of each variable, see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                 Survey                                               Survey
                                 Public     Compustat                                 Public     Compustat
                                  Firms       Public                                   Firms       Public
 Sales Revenue                  (N = 314)     Firms     Number of Employees          (N = 314)     Firms
  1 = Less than $25 million         2%         13%       1 = Fewer than 100              6%         20%
  2 = $25-$99 million               8%         13%       2 = 100-499                    10%         21%
  3 = $100-$499 million            12%         21%       3 = 500-999                     7%         10%
  4 = $500-$999 million            10%         11%       4 = 1000-2499                   8%         13%
  5 = $1-$4.9 billion              26%         19%       5 = 2500-4999                  12%         10%
  6 = $5-$9.9 billion              17%          5%       6 = 5000-9999                  15%          9%
  7 = More than $10 billion        25%         17%       7 = More than 10,000           44%         16%
 Mean                              5.00        3.94     Mean                            5.29        3.68
 T-stat on mean difference        -9.21                 T-stat on mean difference      -12.89

 Credit Rating                                          Profitability
  0 = No Rating or High Yield     87%         87%        0 = No after-tax profit       12%         21%
  1 = Investment Grade            13%         13%        1 = After-tax profit          88%         79%
 Mean                             0.13        0.13      Mean                           0.88        0.79
 T-stat on mean difference        0.11                  T-stat on mean difference      -3.71

 CEO Age                                    Execucomp   CEO Time in Job                          Execucomp
  1 = Less than 40                 1%           2%       1 = Less than 4 years          39%         35%
  2 = 40 - 49                     17%          26%       2 = 4-9 years                  32%         34%
  3 = 50 - 59                     54%          53%       3 = 10-19 years                22%         24%
  4 = 60 or greater               28%          19%       4 = 20 years or more            8%          8%
 Mean                              3.09        2.89     Mean                            1.98        2.05
 T-stat on mean difference        -4.99                 T-stat on mean difference       1.05

 Debt-to-Assets                                         Return on Equity
 Mean                              0.25       0.23      Mean                           0.14         0.12
 T-stat on mean difference        -1.34                 T-stat on mean difference      -1.10

 Revenue Growth                                         Management Ownership                     Execucomp
 Mean                             0.08        0.15      Mean                             9%          3%
 T-stat on mean difference        2.02                  T-stat on mean difference      -16.86




                                                        62
                                    Appendix Table C.II Correlation Matrix among Survey Variables

     This table reports some cross-correlations among the variables in the survey. The sample is limited to survey responses from executives at
     public and private North American firms. For a detailed description of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B.
       Values, Norms, and Formal Institutions           (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)    (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20)
       Cultural values
        (1) Adaptability                                1.00
        (2) Collaboration                               0.21
        (3) Community                                   0.24   0.18
        (4) Customer-oriented                           0.09   0.14   0.08
        (5) Detail-oriented                             0.12   0.08   0.05 0.15
        (6) Integrity                                   0.09   0.15   0.10 0.12 0.15
        (7) Results-oriented                            0.12   0.10   0.10 0.09 0.12 0.11
       Cultural norms
        (8) Agreement about goals and values            0.15   0.23   0.14   0.12   0.10   0.19   0.09
        (9) Consistency and predictability of actions   0.10   0.15   0.06   0.13   0.08   0.15   0.06   0.35
       (10) Coordination among employees                0.19   0.21   0.12   0.13   0.08   0.10   0.11   0.40   0.35
       (11) Decision-making reflects long-term          0.17   0.20   0.14   0.11   0.12   0.14   0.10   0.50   0.34   0.39
       (12) Employees comfort in suggesting critiques   0.22   0.19   0.16   0.12   0.10   0.12   0.10   0.38   0.33   0.45   0.41
       (13) New ideas develop organically               0.23   0.19   0.17   0.12   0.06   0.10   0.04   0.41   0.29   0.38   0.43   0.46
       (14) Trust among employees                       0.21   0.26   0.18   0.12   0.07   0.16   0.10   0.46   0.35   0.62   0.44   0.47 0.38
63




       (15) Urgency with which employees work           0.16   0.12   0.05   0.09   0.08   0.07   0.09   0.23   0.30   0.40   0.27   0.33 0.27 0.41
       (16) Willingness to report unethical behavior    0.10   0.13   0.07   0.11   0.08   0.15   0.08   0.34   0.33   0.29   0.32   0.39 0.29 0.31 0.17
       Formal Institutions
       (17) Corporate governance                        0.15   0.18   0.12   0.14   0.12   0.20   0.09   0.29   0.17   0.21   0.27   0.18   0.15   0.23   0.10   0.24
       (18) Corporate leadership                        0.23   0.29   0.22   0.21   0.20   0.25   0.12   0.35   0.25   0.30   0.34   0.25   0.22   0.36   0.18   0.21   0.51
       (19) Finance function                            0.08   0.11   0.09   0.08   0.06   0.13   0.09   0.14   0.17   0.16   0.15   0.13   0.09   0.16   0.12   0.15   0.35 0.30
       (20) Hire, fire, promote                         0.20   0.18   0.13   0.10   0.10   0.13   0.07   0.41   0.38   0.38   0.51   0.40   0.40   0.46   0.33   0.31   0.20 0.27 0.15
       (21) Incentive compensation                      0.17   0.22   0.12   0.11   0.12   0.14   0.08   0.23   0.20   0.24   0.22   0.22   0.14   0.26   0.22   0.13   0.33 0.46 0.30 0.23
                   Table C.III Corporate Culture by Public Ownership

This table provides descriptive statistics by public ownership. Panel A summarizes the corporate culture
measures. Panel B summarizes the value of corporate culture. Panel C summarizes the actions influenced
by corporate culture. Panel D summarizes business outcomes affected by corporate culture. The sample
consists of survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. The sample consists
of survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. For a detailed description
of each variable, see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                                              Public             Private   T-stat on Public vs.
                                                    Public     Firm    Private    Firm        Private Mean
 Panel A. Cultural Measures                         Firms     Mean     Firms      Mean         Difference
 Q1/Q14 Aggregate cultural values                    314       0.27     743       0.27             -0.27
     Q6 Aggregate cultural norms                     314       0.54     743       0.51             0.98
 Q6/Q13 Aggregate formal institutions                314       0.43     743       0.45             -0.79
     Q4 Tracks stated values                         308       3.31     729       3.32             -0.24
    Q4b Effective culture                            314       2.75     743       2.79             -0.71

 Panel B. The Value of Corporate Culture
     Q2 How important?                                311      3.60     735       3.53            1.40
     Q3 Top issue?                                    314      3.25     742       3.25            0.05
    Q4c Improve culture increases value?              262      0.93     594       0.91            1.08
    Q11 Discount for misaligned culture?              261      3.47     649       3.83            -2.90

 Panel C. Actions Influenced by Corporate Culture
     Q7 Take right amount of investment risk          293     -0.24     676       -0.15           -2.02
    Q7b Culture is reason for investment risk         227     2.74      525       2.69            0.62
     Q8 Choose greater NPV project                    275     0.60      622       0.59            0.29
    Q8b Culture influences NPV project preference     176     0.80      377       0.79            0.43
    Q10 Increases chance do something unethical       298     0.87      712       0.84            1.13
    Q12 Earnings management                           299     2.55      690       2.57            -0.28

 Panel D. Business Outcomes
    Q14 Firm Value                                    301      3.44     722       3.43            0.12
    Q14 Profitability                                 299      3.45     732       3.43            0.50
    Q14 Quality of our financial reporting            302      3.08     716       2.86            3.30
    Q14 Creativity                                    302      3.33     727       3.44            -2.15
    Q14 Tax aggressiveness                            269      2.16     663       2.10            0.86
    Q14 How much debt we use                          277      2.44     691       2.41            0.40
    Q14 Willingness to take on risky projects         304      3.23     723       3.18            0.98
    Q14 Management of downside risk                   297      3.15     715       3.08            1.30
    Q14 Our rate of growth                            296      3.39     728       3.39            -0.05
    Q14 Compliance                                    300      3.32     716       3.05            4.01
    Q14 Productivity                                  298      3.48     724       3.52            -0.72




                                                    64
                    Table C.IV Corporate Culture by Family Ownership

This table provides descriptive statistics by family ownership. Family ownership includes both those with
and without operational influence at their firm. Panel A summarizes the corporate culture measures. Panel
B summarizes the value of corporate culture. Panel C summarizes the actions influenced by corporate
culture. Panel D summarizes business outcomes affected by corporate culture. The sample consists of
survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. The sample consists of survey
responses from executives at public and private North American firms. For a detailed description of each
variable, see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                                             Family    Non-               T-stat on Family vs.
                                                    Family    Firm    family   Non-family Non-family Mean
 Panel A. Cultural Measures                          Firm    Mean     Firms    Firm Mean       Difference
 Q1/Q14 Aggregate cultural values                    429      0.25      358       0.29            1.91
     Q6 Aggregate cultural norms                     429      0.50     358        0.51            0.24
 Q6/Q13 Aggregate formal institutions                429      0.46     358        0.41            -1.29
     Q4 Tracks stated values                         422      3.30     349        3.33            0.44
    Q4b Effective culture                            429      2.73     358        2.81            1.28

 Panel B. The Value of Corporate Culture
     Q2 How important?                               426      3.50     355        3.56            1.12
     Q3 Top issue?                                   429      3.17     357        3.28            1.57
    Q4c Improve culture increases value?             351      0.89     288        0.94            2.10
    Q11 Discount for misaligned culture?             372      3.82     311        3.65            -1.33

 Panel C. Actions Influenced by Corporate Culture
     Q7 Take right amount of investment risk         393     -0.16     332        -0.16           -0.16
    Q7b Culture is reason for investment risk        312      2.70     257        2.69            -0.03
     Q8 Choose greater NPV project                   370      0.59     305        0.59            0.01
    Q8b Culture influences NPV project preference    219      0.78     189        0.81            0.82
    Q10 Increases chance do something unethical      410      0.85     344        0.81            -1.47
    Q12 Earnings management                          401      2.67     333        2.46            -2.93

 Panel D. Business Outcomes
    Q14 Firm Value                                   416      3.36     349        3.50            2.39
    Q14 Profitability                                424      3.46     350        3.39            -1.47
    Q14 Quality of our financial reporting           415      2.91     348        2.86            -0.72
    Q14 Creativity                                   422      3.46     348        3.41            -0.91
    Q14 Tax aggressiveness                           389      2.19     318        2.02            -2.30
    Q14 How much debt we use                         406      2.58     323        2.25            -4.22
    Q14 Willingness to take on risky projects        421      3.21     350        3.15            -1.05
    Q14 Management of downside risk                  416      3.09     345        3.09            0.02
    Q14 Our rate of growth                           424      3.38     344        3.45            1.36
    Q14 Compliance                                   415      3.11     341        3.11            -0.01
    Q14 Productivity                                 418      3.51     347        3.58            1.36




                                                      65
  Table C.V Test of Non-response Bias: Culture Respondents vs. Universe of

                                                 Invited Firms
This table compares the demographic information for people who respond to the culture survey and the
universe of firms invited to participate for which we knew demographic information (those that respond
to the Duke Quarterly CFO survey). Column (1) summarizes responses from those that took the culture
survey. Column (2) summarizes responses from Duke Quarterly CFO survey respondents since 2011 who
we asked to take the culture survey. Industry classifications reflect those used in the Duke Quarterly CFO
survey which is less refined than that used in the culture survey. For a detailed description of each variable,
see the definitions in Appendix B.
                                                           Culture Survey   CFO Survey
                    Panel A. Revenue                        Respondents     Respondents
                     1 = Less than $25 million                  33%            27%
                     2 = $25-$99 million                        24%             25%
                     3 = $100-$499 million                      19%             24%
                     4 = $500-$999 million                       7%              7%
                     5 = $1-$4.9 billion                         8%              8%
                     6 = $5-$9.9 billion                         3%              3%
                     7 = More than $10 billion                   6%              5%
                    Mean                                        2.67            2.74
                    T-stat on mean difference                   0.72

                    Panel B. Number of Employees
                     1 = Fewer than 100                         39%             32%
                     2 = 100-499                                25%             32%
                     3 = 500-999                                10%             11%
                     4 = 1000-2499                               8%              8%
                     5 = 2500-4999                               4%              5%
                     6 = 5000-9999                               4%              3%
                     7 = More than 10,000                        9%              9%
                    Mean                                        2.62            2.71
                    T-stat on mean difference                   0.82

                    Panel C. Credit Rating
                     0 = No rating                             21%              21%
                     1 = High yield                            15%              17%
                     2 = Investment grade                      65%              63%
                    Mean                                       1.44             1.42
                    T-stat on mean difference                  -0.52

                    Panel D. Profitability
                     0 = No after-tax profit                    15%             12%
                     1 = After-tax profit                       85%             88%
                    Mean                                        0.85            0.88
                    T-stat on mean difference                   1.35

                    Panel E. Industry
                     Communication                               2%              3%
                     Energy                                      2%              6%
                     Finance                                    14%             12%
                     Healthcare                                  5%              5%
                     Manufacturing                              23%             26%
                     Mining                                      3%              5%
                     Retail                                     12%             15%
                     Services                                   15%             14%
                     Technology                                  8%              5%
                     Other                                      16%             10%



                                                      66
                                                         Table C.VI Culture Measures By Job Title

     This table provides tests of differences in mean response by job title. Panel A summarizes the corporate culture measures. Panel B summarizes
     the value of corporate culture. Panel C summarizes the actions influenced by corporate culture. Panel D summarizes business outcomes affected
     by corporate culture. The sample consists of survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. The sample consists
     of survey responses from executives at public and private North American firms. For a detailed description of each variable, see the definitions
     in Appendix B.
                                                                                                                  T-stat on T-stat on T-stat on T-stat on Joint F-test
                                                                                                                  CEO vs. CEO vs. CFO vs. CFO vs. for Mean
          Panel A. Cultural Measures                         CEO Obs.   Mean    CFO Obs.   Mean    Otr. Obs. Mean   CFO        Otr.      Otr.   Non-CFO Differences
          Q1/Q14 Aggregate cultural values                     183      0.39      474      0.24      408     0.25   -6.57     -5.75     -0.69     0.54       21.26
              Q6 Aggregate cultural norms                      183      0.69      474      0.49      408     0.49   -5.61     -5.65     0.00      -0.09      17.02
          Q6/Q13 Aggregate formal institutions                 183      0.65      474      0.44      408     0.36   -5.50     -7.06     2.35      -3.05      24.05
              Q4 Tracks stated values                          180      3.77      462      3.22      403     3.23   -7.75     -7.51     -0.09     2.09       30.68
             Q4b Effective culture                             183      3.08      474      2.67      408     2.75   -5.75     -4.61     -1.38     2.08       15.91

          Panel B. The Value of Corporate Culture
              Q2 How important?                                183      3.76      467      3.49      404     3.52    -4.19     -3.73    -0.45      1.00        8.64
              Q3 Top issue?                                    182      3.63      474      3.15      408     3.19    -5.83     -5.33    -0.63      1.92       17.20
             Q4c Improve culture increases value?              140      0.93      397      0.91      327     0.91    -0.53     -0.51    0.00       0.46        0.15
             Q11 Discount for misaligned culture?              167      4.22      426      3.67      323     3.55    -3.74     -4.24    0.92       0.23        9.22
67




          Panel C. Actions Influenced by Corporate Culture
              Q7 Take right amount of investment risk          171      -0.18     441      -0.11     366     -0.25    1.24     -1.31    3.16      -2.90       5.24
             Q7b Culture is reason for investment risk         120      2.83      365       2.61     275      2.78   -1.95     -0.41    -1.99     2.19        2.99
              Q8 Choose greater NPV project                    153      0.66      412       0.63     342      0.52   -0.64     -2.91    3.08      -1.98       6.47
             Q8b Culture influences NPV project preference     103      0.83      266       0.77     188      0.80   -1.07     -0.56    -0.60     1.35        0.61
             Q10 Increases chance do something unethical       177      0.87      452       0.85     388      0.84   -0.66     -0.84    0.27      -0.31       0.36
             Q12 Earnings management                           167      2.68      448       2.56     382      2.52   -1.27     -1.74    0.64      -0.20       1.49

          Panel D. Business Outcomes
             Q14 Our rate of growth                            178      3.60      465      3.37      389     3.44    -3.26     -2.31    -1.36     2.01         5.49
             Q14 Profitability                                 180      3.51      467      3.43      394     3.42    -1.29     -1.42    0.20      0.40         1.06
             Q14 Productivity                                  173      2.95      466      2.89      388     2.97    -0.76     0.14     -1.18     1.54         0.76
             Q14 How much debt we use                          179      3.57      463      3.37      397     3.39    -2.95     -2.65    -0.37     1.94         4.58
             Q14 Quality of our financial reporting            165      1.97      454      2.02      324     2.34     0.62     3.98     -4.51     3.35        12.66
             Q14 Creativity                                    170      2.19      460      2.42      347     2.54     2.36     3.51     -1.62     0.95         6.07
             Q14 Management of downside risk                   178      3.17      463      3.16      396     3.27    -0.26     1.25     -2.01     1.99         2.12
             Q14 Willingness to take on risky projects         176      3.07      464      3.06      380     3.18    -0.08     1.46     -2.02     1.95         2.26
             Q14 Firm Value                                    180      3.39      467      3.40      387     3.42     0.21     0.40     -0.27     -0.27        0.09
             Q14 Tax aggressiveness                            176      3.26      467      2.99      383     3.25    -3.07     -0.19    -3.69     4.51         8.82
             Q14 Compliance                                    174      3.54      466      3.49      391     3.52    -0.82     -0.25    -0.71     0.93         0.44
                      Table C.VII Culture Measures By Email Source

This table provides tests of differences in mean response for the main sample of Duke and Columbia alumni.
Panel A summarizes the corporate culture measures. Panel B summarizes the value of corporate culture.
Panel C summarizes the actions influenced by corporate culture. Panel D summarizes business outcomes
affected by corporate culture. The sample consists of survey responses from executives at public and private
North American firms. The sample consists of survey responses from executives at public and private North
American firms. For a detailed description of each variable, see the definitions in Appendix B.

                                                             Duke               Columbia T-stat on Duke vs.
                                                    Duke     Firm    Columbia     Firm    Columbia Mean
 Panel A. Cultural Measures                         Firms    Mean     Firms      Mean        Difference
 Q1/Q14 Aggregate cultural values                    446     0.24      137        0.28           1.52
     Q6 Aggregate cultural norms                     446     0.48      137        0.52           0.97
 Q6/Q13 Aggregate formal institutions                446     0.41      137        0.43           0.51
     Q4 Tracks stated values                         436     3.33      134        3.46           1.54
    Q4b Effective culture                            446     2.78      137        2.85           0.93

 Panel B. The Value of Corporate Culture
     Q2 How important?                               441     3.50      135        3.69          2.66
     Q3 Top issue?                                   445     3.18      136        3.44          2.73
    Q4c Improve culture increases value?             359     0.91      111        0.88          -0.69
    Q11 Discount for misaligned culture?             356     3.60       97        3.55          -0.27

 Panel C. Actions Influenced by Corporate Culture
     Q7 Take right amount of investment risk         389     -0.18     111        -0.11         1.07
    Q7b Culture is reason for investment risk        313     2.78       82         2.65         -0.97
     Q8 Choose greater NPV project                   370     0.61       96         0.66         0.91
    Q8b Culture influences NPV project preference    232     0.79       65         0.82         0.39
    Q10 Increases chance do something unethical      398     0.86      108         0.82         -0.98
    Q12 Earnings management                          392     2.52      105         2.38         -1.27

 Panel D. Business Outcomes
    Q14 Firm Value                                   393     3.34      110        3.47          1.46
    Q14 Profitability                                396     3.43      110        3.34          -1.23
    Q14 Quality of our financial reporting           391     2.87      110        2.76          -0.99
    Q14 Creativity                                   389     3.38      112        3.60          2.68
    Q14 Tax aggressiveness                           369     2.12       98        1.82          -2.76
    Q14 How much debt we use                         379     2.49      102        2.13          -3.05
    Q14 Willingness to take on risky projects        393     3.22      109        3.17          -0.67
    Q14 Management of downside risk                  395     3.12      107        3.17          0.55
    Q14 Our rate of growth                           392     3.38      110        3.39          0.17
    Q14 Compliance                                   392     3.08      107        3.08          0.02
    Q14 Productivity                                 396     3.44      108        3.56          1.56




                                                    68
    Table C.VIII External Validation: Culture Question on Quarterly Survey

This table presents the response to a one-off culture question included on the 2016Q3 Duke Quarterly CFO
Global Business Outlook survey. The question provides responses consistent with culture survey Q3, “In
terms of all things that make your firm valuable, where would you place corporate culture?” where answers
include Top 3, Top 5, Top 10, or Not in Top 10. Column (1) reports the results from the Quarterly Survey
and Column (2) summarizes from most important to least important the findings from the culture survey.

                 CFO Quarterly Survey Question, "Of all the things that contribute to long-
                 term firm value, for my firm I rank the following items as a:"
                                             CFO Quarterly Survey, Culture Survey Q3, Top
                                               Top 3 Value Driver          3 Value Driver
                                                        (1)                      (2)
                 Corporate Culture                    47.9%                    53.5%
                 Strategic Plan                       39.7%
                 Operating Plan                       39.0%
                 CEO                                  37.4%
                 Marketing                            20.5%
                 Production Process                   19.0%
                 Finance Function                     17.6%
                 Incentive Compensation               14.3%
                 Regulatory Environment               14.0%
                 Human Resources                      11.4%
                 Governance/Board                      8.9%
                 Other                                 8.0%
                 Obs.                                   484                     1348




                                                     69
      Table C.IX Robustness: Cross-fold Validation of Two-step Connection

This table presents OLS estimates from a 10-fold cross-validation procedure connecting an effective culture
to firm outcomes in Panel A, and connecting cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions to an
effective culture in Panel B. The 10-fold cross-validation procedure randomly partitions the data into 10
subsamples. Of the 10 subsamples, a single subsample is retained as the validation data for testing the
model and the remaining 9 subsamples are used as training data. This procedure is then repeated 10 times,
with each subsample used exactly once as the validation data. The reported statistics are an average of the
10 tests of the model. The mean absolute percentage error measures how close the model predicted values
are to the actual outcomes as a percentage deviation from the actual outcome. In Panel A, Column (1) is the
aggregate mean for all firm outcomes. The dependent variable in Column (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively,
the aggregate among all ethical outcomes, innovation outcomes, and productivity/firm value outcomes. The
key explanatory variable is “current culture is effective?” Additional explanatory variables include noise
controls and demographic controls. In Panel B, Column (1), (2), and (3), the key explanatory variable of
interest is aggregate cultural values, cultural norms, and formal institutions, respectively. In Column (4),
all explanatory variables are combined and Column (5) includes their interactions. Additional explanatory
variables include noise controls (date, response delay, job title, and source of email), demographic controls
(profitability, employee turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, ownership (public vs. private), firm location,
CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation, revenue, number of employees, industry, and credit
rating), and additional question controls (Q1, Q4). For a detailed description of each variable, please see the
definitions in Appendix B.

                                                         Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                       Productivity &
                                                       All       Ethics     Innovation Firm Value
  Panel A. Effectiveness and outcomes                  (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
  Current culture is effective?                      0.08**     0.09**        0.000         0.07*
                                                     (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)
  Cross-validation: Mean Absolute Percentage Error    12%         24%          16%           13%
  Noise & Demographic Controls                        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
  Observations                                        1158        1148         1146          1149
  Adjusted R-squared                                 13.3%       15.9%        10.8%         11.2%

                                                            Dependent variable = current culture is effective?
  Panel B. Determinants of effectiveness                (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)
  Aggregate cultural values                          0.20***                                  0.12*            0.10
                                                      (0.07)                                  (0.07)          (0.07)
  Aggregate cultural norms                                       0.19***                     0.13***         0.12***
                                                                  (0.03)                      (0.04)          (0.04)
  Aggregate formal institutions                                               0.13***        0.08***         0.08***
                                                                               (0.02)         (0.03)          (0.03)
  Agg. cultural values x agg. formal institutions                                                              -0.03
                                                                                                              (0.05)
  Agg. cultural norms x agg. formal institutions                                                               -0.03
                                                                                                              (0.03)
  Cross-validation: Mean Absolute Percentage Error     17%         17%          17%            17%             21%
  Noise & Demographic Controls                         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
  Additional Question Controls                         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
  Observations                                         1310        1310         1310           1310            1310
  Adjusted R-squared                                  58.1%       59.1%        59.0%          59.7%           59.7%




                                                      70
      Table C.X Robustness: Subsample of Firms that Track Stated Values

This table presents OLS estimates connecting the values and norms that comprise corporate culture to
firm outcomes. Instead of using the full sample of firms, we only use firms that indicate in Q4 that they
very closely track their stated values and in Q4b say that their culture is either exactly where it should be
or close to where it should be. Column (1) is the aggregate mean for all firm outcomes. The dependent
variable in Column (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively, the aggregate among all ethical outcomes, innovation
outcomes, and productivity/firm value outcomes. The key explanatory variables are the aggregate cultural
values and cultural norms. Additional explanatory variables include noise controls (date, response delay,
job title, and source of email), demographic controls (profitability, employee turnover, CEO turnover, family
firm, ownership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation,
revenue, number of employees, industry, and credit rating), and additional question controls (Q1 and Q4b).
Standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under coefficient estimates. Panel
A examines cultural values and norms in isolation while Panel B allows for an interaction. For a detailed
description of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively.

                                                                    Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                                       Productivity &
                                                               All          Ethics        Innovation    Firm Value
                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)
    Aggregate cultural values                                  0.31         0.43*             -0.04         0.27
                                                              (0.22)        (0.24)           (0.24)        (0.24)
    Aggregate cultural norms                                 0.43***         0.18           0.41***       0.40***
                                                              (0.13)        (0.12)           (0.14)        (0.14)
    Noise & Demographic Controls                               Yes           Yes               Yes          Yes
    Formal Institution Controls                                Yes           Yes               Yes          Yes
    Additional Question Controls                               Yes           Yes               Yes          Yes
    Obs. (Sample limited to firms that very closely track
    stated values (Q4) and have a culture that is at least
    close to where it should be (Q4b))                        575            570            572            573
    Adjusted R-squared                                       32.5%          33.6%          24.8%          27.5%




                                                             71
         Table C.XI Robustness: Alternative Definitions of Cultural Values

This table presents OLS estimates connecting cultural values to firm outcomes. Column (1) is the aggregate
mean for all firm outcomes. The dependent variable in Column (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively, the
aggregate among all ethical outcomes, innovation outcomes, and productivity/firm value outcomes. Instead
of using aggregate cultural values as the key explanatory variable, we examine the responses to question Q4
“how closely does your current corporate culture track with your stated firm values” and Q4d “our cultural
values are fully aligned with our business needs.” Additional explanatory variables include noise controls
(date, response delay, job title, and source of email) and demographic controls (profitability, employee
turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, ownership (public vs. private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure,
CEO incentive compensation, revenue, number of employees, industry, and credit rating). Standard errors
that are robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under coefficient estimates. For a detailed description
of each variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%, 5%, and
10%, respectively.

                                                                  Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                                Productivity &
                                                                All       Ethics     Innovation Firm Value
      Panel A. Alternative cultural values measure #1           (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
      Current culture tracks stated values? (Q4)               0.06       0.07*         -0.01        0.08**
                                                              (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)
      Noise & Demographic Controls                             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
      Observations                                             1138        1128         1126          1129
      Adjusted R-squared                                      13.6%       16.0%        11.1%         11.6%

                                                                  Dependent variable = Aggregate outcome
                                                                                                Productivity &
                                                                All       Ethics     Innovation Firm Value
      Panel B. Alternative cultural values measure #2           (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)
      Cultural values align with business needs? (Q4d)         -0.00       0.04        -0.09**        0.01
                                                              (0.04)      (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)
      Noise & Demographic Controls                              Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
      Observations                                              955        949           945          946
      Adjusted R-squared                                      14.6%       17.4%         12.5%        12.5%




                                                         72
                Table C.XII Robustness: External Validation of Outcomes

This table provides a robustness check of our OLS estimates connecting the values and norms that comprise
corporate culture to firm outcomes. Instead of using the items in Q14 as our outcome variables, we use
publicly available financial data to examine the extent to which culture influences business outcomes. In
Panel A, the dependent variables are, respectively, the three-year average of profitability and Tobin’s Q.
In Panel B, the dependent variables are, respectively, the five-year average of profitability and Tobin’s Q.
The key explanatory variables are the aggregate cultural values and cultural norms. Additional explanatory
variables include aggregate formal institutions, noise controls (date, response delay, job title, and source of
email), firm-level controls (firm size, number of employees, investment-to-capital, tangibility, and SG&A),
and additional question controls (Q1, Q4, Q4b). Standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity are in
parentheses under coefficient estimates. For a detailed description of each variable, please see the definitions
in Appendix B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

                                            Survey year    2-year avg.   3-year avg.   4-year avg.   5-year avg.
      Panel A. Tobin's Q                        (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
      Aggregate cultural values                0.30           0.44          0.16          0.44            0.07
                                              (0.39)         (0.33)        (0.41)        (0.31)          (0.31)
      Aggregate cultural norms                 0.25           0.29         0.40**        0.39**          0.39**
                                              (0.21)         (0.21)        (0.19)        (0.18)          (0.18)
      Firm and Industry Controls               Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Noise Controls                           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Formal Institution Controls              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Additional Survey Question Controls      Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Industry Fixed Effects                   Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Observations                              189           189           189           189             189
      Adjusted R-squared                      45.0%          48.1%         48.5%         49.6%           50.1%

                                            Survey year    2-year avg.   3-year avg.   4-year avg.   5-year avg.
      Panel B. Profitability                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (4)
      Aggregate cultural values                0.18           -0.02         0.01          -0.01           -0.07
                                              (0.38)         (0.35)        (0.35)        (0.34)          (0.33)
      Aggregate cultural norms                 0.23           0.29*         0.29*         0.33*          0.38**
                                              (0.20)         (0.18)        (0.17)        (0.18)          (0.17)
      Firm-level Controls                      Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Noise Controls                           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Formal Institution Controls              Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Additional Survey Question Controls      Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Industry Fixed Effects                   Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Observations                              189            189           189           189             189
      Adjusted R-squared                      56.2%          59.0%         59.8%         60.2%           59.4%




                                                          73
              Table C.XIII Robustness: Internal Validation of Outcomes

This table provides a robustness check of our OLS estimates connecting the values and norms that comprise
corporate culture to firm outcomes. Instead of using the items in Q14 as our outcome variables, we examine
the responses to our direct questions about the “value of corporate culture” reported in Table III. The depen-
dent variables are, respectively, Q2, Q3, Q4c, and the mean response to those three questions standardized
to have the same scale. The key explanatory variables are the aggregate cultural values and cultural norms.
Additional explanatory variables include noise controls (date, response delay, job title, and source of email),
demographic controls (profitability, employee turnover, CEO turnover, family firm, ownership (public vs.
private), firm location, CEO age, CEO tenure, CEO incentive compensation, revenue, number of employees,
industry, and credit rating), and additional question controls (Q1, Q4, Q4b). Standard errors that are ro-
bust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses under coefficient estimates. For a detailed description of each
variable, please see the definitions in Appendix B. ***, ** and * indicate p-values of 1%, 5%, and 10%,
respectively.

                                                  Dependent variable = Value of culture from Q2, Q3, and Q4c
                                                                                                  Agg. value
                                                      Q2              Q3               Q4c         questions
    Alternative Dependent Variable for Outcomes       (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
    Aggregate cultural values                        -0.08           0.11             -0.01           -0.04
                                                    (0.11)          (0.09)           (0.09)          (0.07)
    Aggregate cultural norms                        0.11*          0.20***            0.02          0.12***
                                                    (0.06)          (0.05)           (0.05)          (0.04)
    Noise & Demographic Controls                      Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
    Formal Institution Controls                       Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
    Additional Question Controls                      Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
    Observations                                     1297            1307             1075            1310
    Adjusted R-squared                             28.5%            39.9%            11.4%           33.8%




                                                      74
                    Appendix D.            Culture and Firm Value

   Given that the preamble to Q14 (which we use to measure business outcomes) states “on this

question, we’d like to learn about the effect of corporate culture,” our respondents may be telling

us about the slope between outcomes and culture rather than the outcome level. This appendix

assesses what can and cannot be learned from analyzing these data. We use firm value as an

example of a business outcome but the results generalize across responses: “Does culture affect

firm value?” Let V represent value, C represent culture, and β represent the effect of culture on

expected firm value. Assume this conditional expectation takes the standard linear form:


                                           E[V |C] = Cβ                                        (D.1)


   We are interested in the null hypothesis:

H0 : Culture does not affect firm value, i.e. E[V |C] = 0 ⇔ β = 0.

   The standard test for this null hypothesis would be observing data vectors V and C for many

firms, and solving for β as the least squares estimator for the regression:


                                     V = E[V |C] +  = Cβ +                                   (D.2)


where the least squares estimator of β is given by β OLS = (C 0 C)−1 C 0 V . And we can use the mean

(E[β OLS |C] = β) and variance (V ar[β OLS |C] = (C 0 C)−1 V ar(OLS ) where OLS = V − Cβ OLS are

the regression residuals) of this estimator to test the null hypothesis that the true β is equal to

zero. Under the standard identification condition E[|C] = 0, then E[V |C] = 0 ⇔ β = 0.

   In our case, we do not have data on firm value V , but we have data from the question “To what

extent does the culture at your firm affect firm value?” to test whether the effect β is nonzero. The

potential responses are: “0 = No effect,” “1 = Little effect,” “2 = Moderate effect,” and “3 = Big

effect.” There are two ways we can use this:

  1. First, we can use it directly. We can create an indicator variable representing a selection

     other than “0 = No effect.” That is, we have data of the indicator 1{β6=0} . Let β := α1{β6=0}

                                                 75
       where α 6= 0 is a (constant) scale of β.6 Then it is clear that β = 0 ⇔ 1{β6=0} = 0. So we can

       test the original null hypothesis directly by testing the equivalent null hypothesis:

       H0 : Culture does not affect firm value, i.e. 1{β6=0} = 0.

       This test can be done directly with two pieces of data, using the mean (E[1{β6=0} ]) and

       variance (V ar[1{β6=0} ]). The results of the direct test are included below. The direct tests

       reject the null hypotheses that culture has no effect on business outcomes at a significance

       level of 1% for all business outcomes.
                                 Direct Test of H 0:  = 0                  1{ ≠ 0}
                                 Being Compliant                           0.92***
                                                                            (0.01)
                                 Creativity                                0.98***
                                                                            (0.00)
                                 Firm Value                                0.97***
                                                                            (0.00)
                                 How much debt we use                      0.80***
                                                                            (0.01)
                                 Management of downside risk               0.96***
                                                                            (0.01)
                                 Our rate of growth                        0.98***
                                                                            (0.00)
                                 Productivity                              0.99***
                                                                            (0.00)
                                 Profitability                             0.99***
                                                                            (0.00)
                                 Quality of our financial reporting        0.91***
                                                                            (0.01)
                                 Tax aggressiveness                        0.76***
                                                                            (0.01)
                                 Willingness to take on risky projects     0.96***
                                                                            (0.01)


   2. Second, we could extend the idea above to the full range of survey values and make inferences

       that incorporate additional data and controls for noise, as we do in the body of the paper.

       One reason to do this would be to determine whether the null hypothesis holds after a

       survey respondent’s perception of their own culture or other observable explanatory variables

       have been accounted for. To understand how to interpret such tests, consider a proof of
   6
    That α is nonzero is without loss of generality; the functional form here and the linear form above are not. This
proof generalizes to other reasonable functional forms, but for simplicity the setup here seems sufficient.



                                                             76
unbiasedness for an OLS estimator under the standard identification condition E[|C] = 0.

We have E[β̂] = E[(C 0 C)−1 C 0 V ] = (C 0 C)−1 C 0 E[V ] = (C 0 C)−1 C 0 Cβ = β. If in our case, we

have E[V ] = Cθ rather than E[V ] = Cβ, when θ = β, tests of the original null hypothesis

go through exactly. If θ = αβ where α 6= 0 is a (constant) scale of β, then E[V ] = Cαβ and

E[β̂] = αβ. Again the original null hypothesis can be tested. In this case, however, alternative

hypotheses cannot be tested because respondents did not report a sign for the effect. For

example, [Ha :] Culture positively affects firm value, (i.e. E[V |C] > 0 is not testable.) Hence,

the appropriate interpretation of the conditional tests is that they reject the null hypotheses

that culture has no effect on business outcomes.




                                             77
