                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL REDISTRIBUTIONS FROM A CARBON TAX
                             AND REBATE

                                        Julie Anne Cronin
                                          Don Fullerton
                                         Steven E. Sexton

                                       Working Paper 23250
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23250


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We thank Aparna Mathur, Janet McCubbin, Gilbert Metcalf, Adele Morris, Ian Parry, David
Weisbach, and participants at two NBER workshops for helpful comments and suggestions.
Views contained herein are the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or positions of the
U.S. Department of the Treasury. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Julie Anne Cronin, Don Fullerton, and Steven E. Sexton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical and Horizontal Redistributions from a Carbon Tax and Rebate
Julie Anne Cronin, Don Fullerton, and Steven E. Sexton
NBER Working Paper No. 23250
March 2017
JEL No. H22,H23,Q48,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

Because electricity is a higher fraction of spending for those with low income, carbon taxes are
believed to be regressive. Many argue, however, that their revenues can be used to offset the
regressivity. We assess these claims by employing data on 322,000 families in the U.S.
Treasury’s Distribution Model to study vertical redistributions between rich and poor, as well as
horizontal redistributions among families with common incomes but heterogeneous energy
intensity of consumption (different home heating and cooling demands). Accounting for the
statutory indexing of transfers, and measuring impacts on annual consumption as a proxy for
permanent income, we find that the carbon tax burden is progressive, rising across deciles as a
fraction of consumption. The rebate of revenue via transfers makes it even more progressive. In
every decile, the standard deviation of the change in consumption as a fraction of consumption
varies around 1% or 2% and is larger than the average burden (about 0.7%). When existing
transfer programs are used to rebate revenue, the tax and rebate together increase that variation to
more than 3% within each decile. The average family in the poorest decile gets a net tax cut of
about 1% of consumption, but 44% of them get a net tax increase. Relative to no rebate, every
type of rebate we consider increases this variation within most deciles.

Julie Anne Cronin                                Steven E. Sexton
Department of the Treasury                       Sanford School of Public Policy
julieanne.cronin@treasury.gov                    201 Science Drive, 184 Rubinstein Hall
                                                 Duke University
Don Fullerton                                    Durham, NC 27708
Department of Finance                            steven.sexton@duke.edu
University of Illinois
515 East Gregory Drive, BIF Box#30 (MC520)
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu
       A market-based pricing policy such as a carbon tax or tradable permit program can
reduce emissions at less cost than commonly-employed mandates like a renewable-fuel standard
or energy efficiency standard (Goulder and Parry, 2008; Aldy et al. 2010). Despite their greater
efficiency, however, carbon pricing has found little favor among U.S. policy makers for a variety
of reasons. They may not trust the market to allocate resources efficiently, and they may place
more value on objectives other than efficiency. Policymakers may also fear the distributional
consequences of carbon pricing, particularly its oft-assumed regressivity. Indeed, carbon pricing
likely raises the price of electricity and other carbon-intensive goods that constitute relatively
high fractions of low-income family budgets (Metcalf 2009; Grainger and Kolstad 2010).
       In response, economists point out that measured regressivity depends on how household
income is defined and measured; on the consumer and producer shares of tax incidence; and on
other features of policies. Moreover, they note that distributional objectives can be preserved by
complimentary changes to government taxes and transfers. In the U.S., regressivity of a carbon
tax can be neutralized by increasing progressivity of income taxes or use of the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC). As Mankiw (2009) observed, “Economists in the Treasury Department are
fully capable of designing a package of tax hikes and tax cuts that together internalize
externalities and leave the overall distribution of the tax burden approximately unchanged.”
       While vertical redistributions between high- and low-income groups can perhaps be
avoided by changes in tax and transfer programs, horizontal redistributions between families of
comparable incomes may be more problematic. Because of heterogeneity of income sources and
expenditures, any package of reforms is likely to create winners and losers within each income
group. Retired workers’ losses from a carbon tax are not offset by an expanded EITC or reduced
income tax. Even if retirees could be compensated by expansion of social security benefits, poor
families in harsh climates still bear a higher carbon tax burden than families of similar means
residing in temperate areas with less energy use for home temperature control. Ineluctably, any
attempt to target rebates to those who spend more on energy may implicitly encourage use of
energy, diminishing efficiency of the carbon tax.
       This paper assesses the capacity of existing transfer mechanisms to mitigate vertical and
horizontal redistributions following the imposition of an energy tax. To do so, we account for the
ways families vary—both within and across income groups—in their energy use, tax liability,
and transfer program participation (see Blonz et al., 2011). We show the extent to which income-
targeted transfers undercompensate some families and overcompensate others. In particular, we
                                                         -2-

find that the average tax change in a decile conceals considerable heterogeneity within it.
Because of large tax cuts for a minority of families, some reforms that produce average tax
reductions across most deciles nevertheless yield small tax increases to majorities in each decile.
         Economists have engaged in vociferous debate about the merits of horizontal equity as a
policy criterion. Our intent is not to resolve this normative debate but only to report the extent of
such redistributions. Policymakers may want to know if a reform introduces large gains and
losses within income groups, as some may view these horizontal redistributions as capricious.
And though disparate effects of a carbon tax may be viewed as consequences of household
choices, additional disparity may arise from the use of the revenues to increase transfers. 1
         Poterba (1991) first demonstrated the expected disparate effects of energy taxes across
households of similar means by documenting variation in their gasoline expenditures. Rausch, et
al. (2011) have estimated variation in carbon tax burdens within income groups, but they did not
look at effects of transfers intended to offset those burdens. To our knowledge, no scholarly
research explores the extent to which both vertical and horizontal redistributions can be
mitigated by reforms to tax and transfer programs.
         One explanation for this omission is the absence of a publicly accessible dataset that
provides the necessary information to evaluate the horizontal redistributions from income-
targeted reforms. For a large sample of households, the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CEX) provides sufficient detail on purchases of various commodities whose prices are
differentially affected by a carbon tax. However, it does not include detailed and verified
information on income sources, taxes paid, and transfers received. Public-use tax returns are
available with sufficient income and tax information, but they include scant information on
transfers and expenditures. 2 Fortunately for our purposes, however, the U.S. Treasury in their
Distribution Model (TDM) has undertaken extensive imputations to construct a dataset with the
necessary heterogeneity across a large, representative sample of families of differing
expenditures, sources of income, taxes paid, and transfers received.

1
  We focus on horizontal redistributions from differences in spending patterns and transfer receipts, but we note that
a new policy can substantially affect returns to durable goods investments, like homes or automobiles, or it may
affect employment or wages. Potential impacts of carbon pricing on the coal industry and Appalachian communities
built around the coal industry have figured centrally in recent U.S. elections, as have impacts on relatively energy-
intensive suburban communities (e.g., Glaeser and Kahn 2010, Stone 2015, Ummel 2016, Cass 2016).
2
  The National Bureau of Economic Research maintains a TAXSIM model that uses anonymized samples of
Treasury tax returns. These data exclude very high earners and do not include the high-fidelity imputations of non-
standard income that the Treasury Distribution Model incorporates. See http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/.
                                                         -3-

           Our project uses the U.S. Treasury’s merged file of 300,000 tax returns plus 22,000 non-
filer “information returns” that captures those whose income is below the tax filing threshold. 3
This information permits the estimation of consumption for some of the poorest individuals.
Analysis proceeds with an exact match of the social security number associated with each of
these 322,000 returns to their social security benefits received and payroll taxes paid. Each return
is also matched to a record of a similar family in the CEX, whose expenditure shares are
attributed to the tax return family, with further imputations for transfer program participation and
receipts (e.g. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, TANF, and Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, SNAP). The next step is to calculate the effect of a carbon tax on the market
price of each consumption good. 4 These price effects imply changes in the expenditures of each
family, which are used to assess burden. The change in each family’s burden is also calculated
for each of three mechanisms for recycling carbon tax revenues. To the extent that revenue
rebating mechanisms prevent extreme or capricious burdens, policymakers can take advantage of
the efficiency afforded by market-based policies like taxes that minimize the cost of reducing
carbon emissions without sacrificing distributional objectives.
           We calculate and show the effects of (1) a carbon tax by itself and (2) a carbon tax with
all net revenue returned by a per capita rebate. 5 We also show (3) a carbon tax with all revenue
returned by a 5.9% increase in the EITC and all existing transfers, and (4) a carbon tax with half
of revenue returned by a cut in the payroll tax and half returned through an increase in social
security benefits. For all such reforms, we show effects across deciles and within each decile.
           This analysis is limited in various ways. First, it ignores changes in factor prices and
quantities consumed. Focus instead centers on household diversity in consumption of energy-
intensive goods and in transfers received. Others study general equilibrium impacts on factor
prices and consumption quantities, but usually with a limited number of household groups. The

3
  Treasury’s Distribution Model uses only non-dependent returns. The analysis below applies a weight to each
return, where weights vary from 1 to 1,000. The resulting weighted dataset represents 172 million U.S. families.
4
    See similar methods in Metcalf (2009), Grainger and Kolstad (2010), or Mathur and Morris (2014).
5
  “The newly formed Climate Leadership Council — which includes James A. Baker, Henry Paulson, George P.
Shultz, Marty Feldstein and Greg Mankiw — is proposing elimination of nearly all of the Obama administration’s
climate policies in exchange for a rising carbon tax that starts at $40 per ton, and is returned in the form of a
quarterly check from the Social Security Administration to every American.” We take that to mean per capita rebate.
See https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2017/02/07/senior-republican-leaders-propose-
replacing-obamas-climate-plans-with-a-carbon-
tax/?postshare=621486571915785&tid=ss_tw&utm_term=.ecdad205b56a.
                                                 -4-

purpose of the present study is to shift from a limited number of household types to analysis of
322,000 families, which is accomplished only by limiting the analysis in other ways.
       Second, we have one year’s cross-section of data on consumption spending and transfer
receipts, not a panel or other means to construct a long-run measure of well-being. Annual
income is a poor measure of well-being, as low-income groups may include not only the
perennially poor but also the young who will earn more later, the elderly who earned more
earlier, and those with volatile income who are observed in a bad year. Instead, we rely upon
annual consumption, to account for consumption smoothing (Poterba, 1989). Consumption is far
from a perfect measure of permanent income, not least because of borrowing constraints and
information problems, but it is better than annual income as a measure of family well-being.
       Third, a broad carbon tax is analyzed at a single rate on all carbon emissions, not a tax on
electricity or other sector’s emissions that some may contend is more plausible in the U.S.
Consideration of a broad tax has the advantage that it limits the sheer number of different
calculations. In articulating conceptual issues regarding vertical and horizontal redistributions,
this analysis suggests future research to understand both vertical and horizontal effects from a
host of detailed proposals such as the U.S. Clean Power Plan.
       Fourth, the merged dataset does not include information on each family’s geographic
location, housing and appliance vintages, or commuting distance to work—characteristics
thought to affect exposure to carbon taxes. Thus, we cannot analyze compensation schemes tied
to household characteristics other than income sources and transfer recipiency. Nevertheless, the
final section of this paper discusses redistribution and efficiency implications of family-specific
compensation schemes based on these family characteristics.
       Notwithstanding these limitations, this analysis yields three key findings. First, despite
the fact that electricity constitutes a high fraction of spending for poor families, our analysis
finds that a U.S. carbon tax is progressive, not regressive as commonly assumed. In fact, its
progressivity is a necessary consequence of the following four basic points: (1) once
consumption is adopted as the measure of well-being, then a uniform consumption tax is not
regressive but perfectly proportional; (2) as shown below, an aggregation of the various carbon-
intensive goods is not clearly concentrated in high or low consumption deciles, which, with the
first point, makes a carbon tax nearly proportional; (3) transfers in the U.S. are indexed to correct
for increases in commodity prices that would accompany a carbon tax; and (4) transfers are a
                                                         -5-

larger fraction of income for lower deciles. 6
         A second key finding is that the generally-ignored horizontal redistributions are much
larger than the commonly-studied vertical redistributions. This result follows readily from the
fact that the carbon tax is progressive but not very progressive. The average burden rises from
only 0.45 percent of consumption in the poorest decile to 0.80 percent of consumption in the
richest decile. In contrast, heterogeneity of consumption within any decile is larger. Intuitively,
any decile may contain some families that live in moderate climates along the coasts and other
families that are dependent upon electricity-powered air conditioning in the summer and fossil-
fueled heat in the winter.
         Third, any of the three mechanisms we study to rebate carbon tax revenues causes
horizontal redistributions that are larger than those imposed by the carbon tax, itself. Family size,
and, thus, per capita rebates vary within all deciles, but this variation is a larger fraction of
consumption for those in low consumption deciles. Similarly, transfer receipts are a large
fraction of income for the average family in poor deciles, but some families in those deciles
receive small transfers or no transfers at all. Thus, a uniform increase in all existing transfers
overcompensates some poor families for their carbon tax burden and provides no compensation
to other poor families for their carbon tax burden.
         The first section below reviews existing literature on the distributional impacts of carbon
taxes and on the policy interest in vertical and horizontal equity. Section 2 describes the data and
methods used to simulate carbon taxes and rebate programs. Section 3 discusses measures of
income and reports summary statistics. Section 4 describes simulations, while section 5 shows
distributional impacts. Section 6 considers policy implications of this analysis and alternative
rebate schemes whose formal analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.

    1. Overview of Distributional Effects of Carbon Policies and Rebates

Conventional wisdom holds that carbon pricing programs like tradable permits or carbon taxes
burden the poor relative to the rich (e.g., Metcalf, 2009; Grainger and Kolstad, 2010; Rausch, et
al. 2011; Williams et al. 2015). Consumer expenditure data from the U.S. and many European
countries demonstrate that poor households devote greater shares of incomes to energy purchases

6
 Others discuss these points and show how they can help make the carbon tax progressive. See e.g. Fullerton et al.
(2012) and Parry (2015), who also compares these effects for the U.S. and other countries. Our main contributions
here are that we combine all four points within detailed calculations from the Treasury model for the U.S., and that
we provide the first calculations of horizontal effects.
                                                      -6-

than do others (Pizer and Sexton 2016, Flues and Thomas 2015). Yet, recent literature shows that
such distributional concerns may be misplaced or at least exaggerated. Measures of regressivity
are diminished when evaluated according to lifetime income or permanent income, or a proxy
such as annual expenditures. In contrast, annual incomes fluctuate with spells of unemployment,
changes in health status and family conditions, other shocks, and well-known lifecycle effects in
earnings and savings (Poterba 1989, Bull et al. 1994, Hasset et al. 2009, Sterner 2012).
According to the permanent income hypothesis of Friedman (1957), the smoothing of household
consumption over time implies that annual consumption is better than annual income as a proxy
for permanent income. For this reason, carbon tax regressivity can be exaggerated when using
annual income rather than annual total consumption to classify families from rich to poor.
        The vertical redistributions that do attend the introduction of carbon taxes can be
diminished by complimentary reforms of tax and transfer programs that utilize carbon tax
revenues. Mathur and Morris (2014), Dinan (2012), and Metcalf (1999, 2009) consider how to
offset regressivity using existing tax code and transfer programs or lump sum rebates. By
refunding merely 11% of revenues, for example, the poorest quintile of households can be fully
compensated—on average—for the added cost of a $15 per ton tax on carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions (Mathur and Morris 2014). Metcalf (2009) develops a revenue-neutral tax reform
package that raises $88 billion from a $15 tax per ton of CO2 emissions and returns the revenue
through an EITC of up to $560 per worker. However, such revenue recycling for the sake of
equity comes at the cost of foregone economic efficiency of the tax. Efficiency would dictate that
carbon tax revenues be used to reduce the most distorting taxes, which tend to be progressive. 7
Carbon tax regressivity can be exacerbated rather than ameliorated by efficient reductions in
progressive taxes like those on personal income, corporate income, and capital income.
        When the distributional impacts of many and various tax and expenditure programs are
evaluated, attention is focused on vertical impacts with little attention to horizontal impacts. For
carbon pricing, considerable variations in burdens are caused by household heterogeneity in
income sources, transfer program recipiency, and energy demands. Pizer and Sexton (2016)
observe that variation in energy consumption within income groups generally exceeds variation
across income groups in the U.S., Mexico, and United Kingdom. In the U.S., some of the poorest

7
 See Bovenberg and de Mooij, 1994; Carbone, et al., 2013; Cramton and Kerr, 2002; Fullerton and Metcalf, 2001;
Goulder, 1995, 2002; Bovenberg and Goulder, 2002; Goulder et al. 1999; Parry, 1995; Parry and Bento, 2000.
                                                        -7-

households devote nearly 20% of total spending to electricity, while other poor households incur
no direct electricity expenses at all (i.e., when electricity is included in rent). Overall, variation is
induced by differences in household size, home ownership status, climate, electricity generating
infrastructure, home size and vintage, vehicle miles travelled, and energy efficiency of durable
goods, among other characteristics. This household heterogeneity introduces carbon tax burden
differences that cannot be fully overcome without direct efficiency implications.
        While differences in energy use lead to disparity in carbon tax burdens among otherwise
similar households, Williams et al. (2015) found in a general equilibrium setting that variation in
carbon tax burdens depends on how carbon tax revenues are rebated. This heterogeneity from
income sources such as transfers is potentially easier to remedy, because of income reporting
requirements and opportunities to target refunds according to income sources. Nevertheless, this
targeting can be complicated by variation within an income group’s benefit eligibility, take-up
rates, and actual receipts. Only 32% of families in our lowest decile receive the EITC benefits. 8
Alternatively, carbon tax burdens might be offset by use of programs like Medicare, SNAP, and
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC). However,
recipients of these programs are a minority of families in all income groups. Only 19% of the
poorest U.S. families receive SNAP benefits, while 16% receive social security income. 9
        High rates of payroll tax liability and of social security recipiency among most income
groups suggest that a combination of payroll tax reductions and expanded social security benefits
could offset carbon tax burdens for nearly all but the poorest families. But horizontal
redistributions among the poorest families may prove particularly difficult to remedy. Among the
poorest families, 27% neither incur payroll tax liabilities nor receive social security benefits.
Thus, the design of a carbon tax that avoids horizontal redistributions—particularly among the
lowest-income families—is not straightforward.
        While policy interest in vertical equity follows directly from the concept of diminishing

8
 On EITC participation, see Eissa and Hoynes (2011). Benefit recipiency rates here are based on our U.S. Treasury
data. Only 19% of families in the lowest decile receive SNAP benefits, while 16% receive Supplemental Security
Income. Incomplete take-up rates observed across transfer programs are attributed to welfare stigma, transaction
costs, and imperfect information (Currie 2006). Others estimate that $6.7 million each year goes unclaimed by those
eligible (Barghava and Dayanand 2015). Estimates of Unemployment Insurance take-up range from 53% to 71%
(Anderson and Meyer 1997).
9
  SNAP and social security benefits are included in the Treasury’s cash income measure. Recipients will therefore
be ranked higher than otherwise similar non-recipients. In Treasury’s model, 46% of families in the second-lowest
income decile receive either SNAP or social security benefits, compared to 33% in the lowest income decile.
                                                -8-

marginal utility of income within the utilitarian social welfare framework (e.g., Bentham, 1802),
the theoretic foundation for horizontal equity is less straightforward and is subject to debate
among economists. Sidgwick (1874) argued that horizontal equity can be the ultimate principle
of distributive justice. And as Simons (1950) noted, “it is generally agreed that taxes should bear
similarly upon all people in similar circumstances,” which we might understand to mean people
of similar means. The notion that equals should be treated equally by policy has intuitive appeal
and popularity among economists (Atkinson and Stiglitz 1980, Stiglitz 1982).
       Yet Stiglitz (1982) showed that horizontal equity does not derive from the social welfare
or utilitarian criterion; it may even contravene conventional welfare maximization and
countermand the Pareto principle. This critique is shared by Kaplow (2000). Pursuit of horizontal
equity may require reduction of some individual welfares to achieve common outcomes, and it
may give preference for common outcomes over those in which individual welfare levels are
higher but heterogeneous. Kaplow (1989, 1992, 1995, 2000) argues that preference for the
original or ex ante outcomes over post-tax outcomes is morally arbitrary. He also contends that
horizontal equity is trivially satisfied whenever vertical equity is satisfied “because whatever
reasons motivate a particular treatment of one individual will require the same treatment of
another individual who is equal in all relevant respects” (Kaplow 1989, p. 143).
       By Kaplow’s definition of equals “in all relevant respects,” a carbon tax would preserve
horizontal equity by treating equally all households with identical incomes, income sources, and
consumption. Nevertheless, it would impose heterogeneous burdens on households of similar
means. It is these disparities that impelled Musgrave (1959) to contend that the normative
underpinnings of horizontal equity and vertical equity are one and the same.
       The primacy of horizontal equity as a normative rule, Musgrave (1990) asserted, is
derived from distributive justice theories ranging from Lockean “entitlement” to Rawlsian
“fairness.” Indeed, the “benefit principle” of taxation would equate taxes among households of
comparable incomes and common tastes, because of their common valuations of the marginal
unit of a public good. Likewise, under an “ability to pay” principle, common taxation of
individuals with equal incomes would also prevail. And horizontal equity also holds under the
neo-utilitarian and Rawlsian approaches to distribution decisions where each person decides
principles of justice “from behind the veil of ignorance,” without knowing his or her own
endowments. In some ways, the basis for vertical equity is less firmly rooted across distributive
justice theories (Musgrave 1990), and far more contentious (Auerbach and Hassett 2002).
                                                          -9-

           Stiglitz (1982) reconciled horizontal equity with welfare maximization by broadening the
definition of social welfare. Auerbach and Hassett (2002) also give it independent normative
content using a theory that society cares more about differential treatment among proximal
individuals in the income distribution than it cares about inequality across the entire distribution.
With different welfare weights applied to deviations in “local” income versus deviations in
“global” income, horizontal equity becomes a distinct component of inequality aversion.
           Here, we distinguish two concepts of horizontal equity. Most of the debate above is about
the concern that levels of tax burdens may differ for families with the same income. A different
possible concern is that changes in tax burdens might be viewed as arbitrary—and therefore
unfair— windfall gains and losses to families with the same income. We do not try to resolve
these philosophical questions. Instead, we aim only to show what are the vertical and horizontal
redistributions caused by alternative carbon tax and rebate reform packages.

       2. Treasury’s Distribution Model

The Office of Tax Analysis of the U.S. Department of the Treasury has constructed a dataset and
model that we refer to as Treasury’s Distribution Model (TDM). We use it to estimate impacts of
a U.S. carbon tax and of alternative rebate mechanisms. In this section, we describe the model in
four main steps (summarized here, and described further below). 10 First, the TDM uses 300,000
individual income tax returns and 22,000 information returns for a total of 322,000 families
(weighted to represent a population of 172 million families). Each family’s annual consumption
spending is calculated as cash income minus income taxes, payroll taxes, and an estimate of
savings. Second, each tax family is matched to a similar family in the CEX data, and that CEX
family’s expenditure shares for 33 consumption categories are applied to the total expenditures
of the tax family to calculate expenditures on each category of goods. Third, the direct and
indirect impacts of a carbon tax on each of 389 commodity prices is estimated using a partial
equilibrium, input-output model. And finally, these price changes are used to compute post-
carbon-tax expenditures. 11 Expenditures change only because of a commodity price changes,

10
     See Cronin (forthcoming) for a complete description of Treasury’s Distribution Model.
11
  Distributional effects could be measured by money-metric utility, or the trapezoid loss in consume surplus.
Because our aim is to explore distributional consequences of a carbon tax rather than efficiency implications or
deadweight loss, we focus on first-order effects rather than second-order effects of behavioral responses that may
include households and firms substituting away from energy-intensive consumption and input-use. Accounting for
such substitutions would be analytically costly, as it would require many more elasticity assumptions. Nonetheless,
such behavioral responses can bear on the regressivity of carbon taxes, as in West and Williams (2004).
                                                         -10-

while quantities are assumed to be unchanged. 12
         Our use of individual tax returns mitigates measurement error in family consumption, and
it affords reliable determinations of tax liability, both of which are important for our tax reform
simulations. Still, the data are imperfect, and various categories of income and consumption must
be imputed as is explained in this section. The accuracy of these imputations, however, is likely
superior to other approaches because of the richness of Treasury data.
         Each family’s total consumption in 2017 is calculated for a stratified random sample of
300,000 individual non-dependent income tax returns drawn from among 143 million returns
filed for 2010. 13 These returns are supplemented with tax records for 22,000 similarly sampled
non-deceased non-filers using “information returns”. These information returns include Forms
W-2 filed by employers and various Forms 1099, including those filed by the Social Security
Administration to report benefits. Tax families are generated from these individual information
returns based on filing status in previous years, age, targets for the non-filing population from the
Social Security Administration, and targets for non-filing family structure based on Census.
Together, these income tax and information returns are used to generate tax records for a
population of 334 million people, or 172 million families, 28 million of whom do not file an
individual income tax return. 14 The base file is for 2010 but is extrapolated to 2017 conditional
on expected population size, national income, inflation, employment, and interest rates.
         By employing individual tax returns and information returns for non-filers, this approach
benefits from reliable reporting of most income. However, because some income is untaxed and
some is unreported, a full measure of family welfare requires imputation of some income

12
 Note two points here. First, each of the 389 commodity categories for which the price rises due to the carbon tax
must be mapped into the 33 consumption categories for each family. Second, the assumption that quantities are fixed
might not matter much for overall regressivity if actual demand elasticities are similar across deciles. If demand is
more price-inelastic for poor families than for rich ones, however, then burdens can be more regressive than
measured here (West and Williams, 2004).
13
  Our unit of analysis is the tax family. Each tax family includes the taxpayer, his or her spouse (if married), and
any dependents living in the household or away at college. Tax families outnumber households, because some
households include more than one tax family. An analysis based on households will rank two-family households
higher in the income distribution than each single-family household, all else equal.
14
   The tax sample has two components: first is a random sample of social security number (SSN), and second is an
oversample of high-income returns and returns with certain low-probability characteristics such as negative income
or a high number of capital gains transactions. Oversampled strata receive lower weights. The highest-income
returns have a weight of one (all are included in the sample). Treasury uses the same sample design to choose non-
filers from information returns filed on individuals who do not file an income tax return. If an individual with one of
the random SSN ending-digits receives a W2 or a 1099 but does not file an income tax return because they are
below the filing threshold, then they are included in the sample. Weights are adjusted in the extrapolation to hit
population and family structure targets from Social Security Administration data and Census data.
                                                           -11-

sources. 15 Imputed “cash income” includes such employer-provided fringe benefits as military
service allowances, transportation and education benefits, as well as employer contributions to
health and life insurance policies. 16 Medical Expenditure Survey data and administrative records
of the Department of Health and Human Services are used to impute Medicare, Medicaid and
workers’ compensation health benefits. The Current Population Survey (CPS) is used to impute
transfer benefits, including those from SNAP, WIC, TANF, and Low Income Home Energy
Assistance Program (LIHEAP). 17 Savings and dis-savings are imputed from the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). 18
           For each of these simulated tax families, consumption is computed as cash income less
tax payments and savings (or dissaving), where cash income includes wages and salaries, net
income from a business or farm, taxable and tax-exempt interest, dividends, rental income,
realized capital gains, cash or near-cash transfers from government, distributed retirement
benefits, and employer fringe benefits. It is assumed that family consumption is equal to at least
half of the federal poverty level corresponding to their family size. Families whose estimated
consumption falls short of this threshold are assumed to finance this minimum consumption from
unmeasured transfers or debt financing. This assumption has the effect of increasing the average
consumption of the poorest 10% of families by almost 50%.

15
   The assignment of the non-tax-based income items is subject to greater measurement error than the tax-based
items but, to the extent possible, Treasury uses the tax data to make informed imputations. For example, military
allowances are only allocated to taxpayers that are in the military. And, qualifying for welfare assistance in the
imputations depends on having taxable income and demographic characteristics on a tax return that are consistent
with each welfare program’s requirements. See Cronin (forthcoming) for a complete description of the income
imputations in the TDM.
16
  Some readers might like to see a measure of family economic income that includes accrued but unrealized
income, evaded income unreported on the tax returns, and imputed net rent of owner-occupied housing. In earlier
models, Treasury used a broader Haig-Simons type economic income measure called Family Economic Income
(FEI) (Cronin, 1999). Accrued and unreported income, however, are difficult to attribute accurately across families,
and the FEI concept was more difficult for the general users of distribution tables to understand. As a result,
Treasury began using cash income to rank families. Family economic income may be larger, but the rankings of
families by cash income are similar to rankings by some estimates of economic income.
17
  For each transfer program, the TDM uses CPS data and a logistic regression to estimate the probability that a
family in the tax data would receive a particular transfer (e.g., SNAP). Regressors in the logistic equation include
age of the primary taxpayer, filing status, number of children under 18, AGI, and interest income. Tax families are
then sorted into cells based on filing status, annual AGI, and the presence of children. Within each cell, families are
ranked by their probability of program participation, and the families with the highest likelihood of participation are
selected as participants (where the total number of participants within a cell is targeted to the CPS in the initial
imputation). Transfer levels are then randomly matched between the CPS cells and the tax data cells. All
imputations are done at 2010 levels and then extrapolated to 2017 for the distribution model. Participation and levels
are adjusted to match expected participation and budget outlays for each program.
18
     Forty savings rates are imputed that vary by marital status, age, and income.
                                                          -12-

           In order to estimate carbon tax burdens across families, each family is matched to a
record of the CEX that reports expenditures across 33 categories of goods, the prices of which
change with the introduction of a carbon tax. The match is based on cells in the CEX defined by
marital status, five age categories, five categories of family size, and 18 expenditure ranks (from
lowest 5% to top 10%). These distinctions yield 900 combinations or cells to which CEX records
belong – and to which tax families are assigned. Only CEX records from 2010-2012 that include
four quarters of expenditures are employed, yielding 4,943 records that match to 704 of the CEX
cells; no CEX records match any of the remaining 196 cells. 19 The median CEX cell includes
four CEX records, though some contain as many as 99 CEX records. Each tax family is
randomly assigned to a CEX expenditure record from its corresponding CEX cell. For tax
families whose characteristics match to an empty CEX cell, expenditure records are selected
from among those of the next lowest expenditure rank. This nearest neighbor match is employed
in fewer than 1% of records. The tax family’s total expenditures are then allocated among the 33
categories by assuming that the tax family has the same expenditure shares as the family in the
matched CEX record. To these imputed expenditures are added consumption from employer
fringe benefits that cover costs not reported in the CEX, including transportation and education
benefits, as well as employer-paid child care and insurance benefits. Addition of this fringe
consumption most substantially increases consumption in the health category, which rises from
8% of total out-of-pocket expenditures to 17% of total consumption.
           Treasury’s model is based on tax data, and most income items have third-party
verification. This verification reduces income measurement error that may arise from self-
reporting bias in survey data. It is also not subject to measurement errors from top coding, or
small sample size like some publicly available data.
           The carbon tax burden for each family is readily calculated, given its consumption
amount and the calculated price changes for each of the 33 consumption goods. To obtain the
partial equilibrium price changes induced by a $25 per ton carbon tax, Treasury employs an
input-output model to compute the price change for each consumption good according to the
price changes in the intermediate inputs for each consumption category. 20 The carbon tax

19
  Budget shares may be different today than they were during 2010-2012, the period over which we measure family
budget shares. For example, budget shares may change because of changes in relative prices. The current version of
the model that we employ does not incorporate more recent budget share data.
20
     See, e.g., Fullerton (1996), Metcalf (1999, 2009), Hassett et al. (2009), and Mathur and Morris (2014).
                                                            -13-

directly impacts the price of fuels, according to their carbon intensities. Using estimates of
carbon intensity from the U.S. Energy Information Administration and the Environmental
Protection Agency, we calculate that a $25 tax per metric ton of carbon would increase the price
of coal by 133%. Petroleum prices rise by 27%, and natural gas prices by 44% (see Table 1).
These price increases are greater than the price increases estimated in Metcalf (2007) and used
by Hassett et al. (2009) for a $15 tax per metric ton of carbon. Metcalf (2007) estimates that a
$15 tax per metric ton of carbon would increase the price of coal by 91%, the price of petroleum
by 13% and the price of natural gas by 6% relative to average prices in 2005. The much higher
44% price increase for natural gas in our analysis is the result of both a higher carbon tax rate
and a much lower price for natural gas in our more recent year (expected to continue into
2017). 21
           Because these fuels are intermediate inputs in the production of most other consumption
goods, these estimated fuel price increases induce price increases in other products according to
their fuel intensities. To determine these indirect price changes, the Treasury model employs the
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis’s 2007 benchmark input-output tables. These tables, the most
recent available, show how much of each commodity is produced by each of 389 industries and
how much of each commodity is consumed in production by each industry. The fuel price
increases are applied at the extraction level for oil and gas and at the mining level for coal. When
the price increases are initially applied, firms in the 389 industries pass all of their costs along to
the purchaser. 22 This assumption results in commodity price increases across the 389 industries,
which leads to another round of price hikes. 23 Treasury iterates on this process (using the 389
industry input-output tables) until the price changes being observed are sufficiently small. At this
point, to obtain the final purchaser price of the commodity, they apply margins for

21
   The Henry Hub natural gas spot price was $13.05 per million Btu in December 2005 but is projected to be only
$2.95 in 2017.
22
  The pass-forward assumption is standard in the literature, though some research has demonstrated that perceived
regressivity varies according to whether policy costs are passed forward to consumers or passed backward to factors
of production (e.g., Hassett, et al. 2009, or Parry et al. 2015). Also, note that much of the power sector is still subject
to price regulation, and the marginal fuels determining prices can be different from the baseload fuels. In the short
run, depending on its phase-in, a new carbon tax may displace some workers, such as coal miners, and it may be
capitalized into certain stock prices or land prices. Thus, during the transition, the carbon tax is not all passed
forward to consumers but instead borne by particular human or physical capital owners. While substantial short run
burdens are imposed on some families, our calculations here can only consider the long run steady state.
23
     In fact, Treasury splits oil and gas in the Benchmark I-O table, so they are actually using 390 industries.
                                                         -14-

transportation, retail, and wholesale trade. 24 The price changes for the 389 commodities are then
mapped to changes in the 33 consumption goods defined in the CEX and imputed to the TDM. 25
Our calculated price changes from the carbon tax are reported in the last column of Table 2
(while earlier columns show the corresponding price changes calculated in previous studies).
Most indirect price increases are less than 1%. The greatest indirect price changes for non-energy
outputs are for mass transit (4.6%) and air transportation (5.5%). The table uses bold for the four
carbon-intensive consumer goods with the largest percentage price increases: electricity (9.0%),
natural gas (14.8%), home heating oil (14.5%), and gasoline (14.8%).

     3. Measures of Income and Summary Statistics

In order to measure distributional effects across income groups, we need to choose a measure of
“income” to rank families and divide them into deciles. The most common measure employed in
many studies over past decades is a measure of annual income (preferably a more inclusive
measure than taxable income). Yet annual income is not a good measure of who is doing well or
poorly. Each group is an aggregation of very dissimilar individuals, many of whom are only
temporarily in that annual income decile. Generally, annual income is affected by stage of the
lifecycle, changes to unemployment, health, and family conditions. If those with positive income
shocks save more of annual income than those with negative income shocks, then classification
by annual income exaggerates the regressivity of energy taxes that raise commodity prices
(Poterba, 1989; Bull, et al., 1994, Sterner, 2012).
         In contrast, under the Permanent Income Hypothesis (Friedman, 1957), annual
consumption is less sensitive to shocks and exhibits less severe life-cycle patterns. 26 Therefore a
more meaningful measure of well-being might be a measure such as permanent income or

24
  These margins are provided by BEA as part of the input-output tables, and the prices for these margins also
increase with the imposition of the carbon tax. For example, a $100 spent on a particular good at producer prices
might translate to $120 for a final purchaser when retail and transportation costs are added. The price increases for
that good and the margins are separately estimated and, then, aggregated to obtain the final purchasing price.
25
  The mapping from the BEA’s Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) to the CEX is based on a concordance
between the PCE and CEX categories as provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The latest available BLS
concordance uses the PCE 2002 benchmark, but Treasury updated its mapping to the 2007 benchmark and had to
make adjustments to map consumption categories not included in the CEX (health consumption in particular).
26
  Bull, et al. (1994) observe in U.S. CEX data that consumption closely follows income, exhibiting a “marked
hump-shaped pattern” over lifetimes, rather than remaining relatively flat as posited by the Permanent Income
Hypothesis. Therefore, they account for energy tax incidence on lifetime consumption by adjusting current
household consumption to reflect the typical lifetime consumption profiles for similar households.
                                                        -15-

lifetime income. Yet, such measures can be very difficult to estimate. 27
         Here, we have only one year of data for each tax family, but even these data can provide
a reasonable proxy for lifetime income. Suppose that each household does consider its expected
future annual incomes, that it employs a present-value budget constraint to choose current annual
consumption, and that annual consumption exhibits diminishing marginal utility. Under these
conditions, Poterba (1991) points out that households will choose a smooth consumption pattern
that reflects permanent income. As a consequence, annual consumption is a good proxy for
permanent income, or at least it is better than annual income as a proxy for permanent income. 28
         Therefore, in our analysis of distributional impacts, we choose to stratify families
according to total annual consumption rather than annual income. In fact, except in Table 5, we
do not classify families by annual income at all.
         For families classified into annual consumption deciles, the TDM’s distribution of
income and consumption at 2017 levels is reported in Table 3. In total, consumption is equal to
70% of income. The ten percent of families with the highest annual consumption accrue 44.3%
of total cash income and consume 36% of all goods and services. The poorest 10% of families by
that measure have only 1% of income and consume 1.8% of all goods and services. Cash
incomes are more skewed toward the rich than are consumption levels, because high-income
families bear greater tax burdens and save more than low-income families.
         Table 4 reports mean consumption shares for each decile of total consumption and each
consumption category. The greatest consumption shares for all deciles are in food, housing, and
health. Consumption shares for health decline markedly across deciles, from 32% for the poorest
ten percent of families to 10% for the richest families. Total food consumption shares vary less,
from 14% for the poorest families to 10% for the richest families. Interestingly, mass transit
constitutes less than 1% of expenditures across deciles. Expenditures on the most energy-
intensive goods comprise in total less than 11% of overall consumption across deciles (including
the four goods in bold that had the largest price increases in Table 2, namely electricity, natural

27
  Fullerton and Rogers (1994) and other studies calculate tax incidence using overlapping-generations models of
households classified by an estimate of lifetime income – the present value of all wage income plus inheritances.
The measure can be estimated for different households using as many years as possible from the Panel Survey of
Income Dynamics (PSID). Hassett, et al. (2009) develop a measure of lifetime income following Bull, et al. (1994).
28
  Standard Treasury distributional analyses classify families by annual income as measured in the first year of the
budget period (Cronin, forthcoming). Such analysis is consistent with measuring tax burdens over the short budget
period when the individual income tax code itself is intended to address the cyclical nature of income. Thus, in
Treasury’s analyses, families who are temporarily poor are treated the same as those who are permanently poor.
                                                        -16-

gas, home heating oil, and gasoline). As observed in other studies, electricity shares diminish
with income. As reported in Table 4, they do so only modestly, from 4.1% to 2.9%. The other
three most energy-intensive goods have no discernable pattern or have shares that increase from
the poorer to the richer deciles. For example, gasoline expenditure shares increase from the first
to the eighth decile, reflecting the ability of higher income groups to afford personal vehicle
travel. Overall, the expenditure share for any reasonable aggregation of energy-intensive goods is
roughly flat across consumption deciles.

     4. Calculations for Policy Alternatives

We proceed to simulate a carbon tax with no rebate and a carbon tax with three revenue-neutral
types of rebate. All simulations include an illustrative $100 billion carbon tax, 29 and commodity
prices rise relative to factor incomes to cover firms’ extra costs of purchasing energy inputs and
other energy-intensive intermediate inputs. 30 We assume that the government uses some of the
$100 billion revenue to index government transfer programs for those price increases. 31 On
average, over 90% of transfer income is indexed in the U.S. The share of transfers that are
indexed is lowest for the lowest-income decile and highest for the highest-income decile
(Fullerton, et al., 2012). In addition, all simulations index tax parameters to the rising cost of
consumption. Indexing of income taxes and transfer programs require government expenditures
of $15.5 billion and $8.1 billion, respectively.
         The remaining $76.4 billion in carbon tax revenues is an overall burden, or it is used

29
  We scale the price changes for a $25 per metric ton tax to a $100 billion revenue total. This carbon tax
corresponds to roughly a 1% increase in the price level, assuming no change in quantities consumed. Horowitz et al.
(2017) estimate that a $49 per metric ton tax in 2019 would raise net revenues of $194 billion. Our scaling is
roughly consistent with that estimate.
30
  Standard Treasury analysis assumes no changes in the price level, as is consistent with revenue estimating
assumptions. Instead, the tax is passed back to factor incomes, and relative prices adjust. Carbon-intensive goods
become relatively more expensive, and less carbon-intensive goods become relatively less expensive. On a present
value basis, without bequests, the two methods are theoretically equivalent. In both cases, transfer income is largely
held harmless (and we assume 100% held harmless). When the tax is passed forward, transfer income is indexed for
the price level increase; when the tax is passed back onto factor incomes, transfer income is unaffected.
31
   We abstract from monetary policy. Whether output prices rise or factor incomes fall can be equivalent, depending
on what happens to real transfers and bequests. Essentially, we assume that all transfers are indexed for inflation
when those energy-intensive product prices rise, so that transfer income is held harmless in real terms. Such
indexing is statutorily required for SNAP, Social Security benefits, workers’ compensation, and veteran benefits.
Other transfers are not indexed automatically, but legislation can be reasonably assumed to keep all real transfers
constant. Although transfer income is then unchanged in real terms, transfer recipients who consume relatively
carbon-intensive commodities still bear a burden from relative price changes due to the carbon tax. And conversely,
transfer recipients who consume relatively few carbon-intensive commodities will face lower burdens.
                                                             -17-

according to one of the three rebate scenarios meant to represent attempts to offset the perceived
or actual regressivity of the carbon tax. In effect, we ask: what if policymakers decide to offset
the regressivity of the carbon tax by using the revenue to help low-income families cover the
extra cost of commodities that constitute a relatively high fraction of low-income family budgets.
We assume that all of this remaining $76.4 billion of revenue is: (1) a burden of the carbon tax
with no rebate; (2) used to fund a lump-sum rebate equal to $229 per person; (3) used to fund a
proportional increase in all transfer program generosity; or (4) used in equal proportions to
reduce payroll taxes and to increase social security benefits.
            The carbon tax alone might be expected to have a regressive incidence, but we show how
this vertical redistribution depends on assumptions. To offset perceived regressivity, many
discuss a refundable tax credit per person that functions as a lump-sum rebate (see footnote 5).
Because the tax credit is a per capita rebate, larger families receive larger payments that may
affect horizontal redistribution. The fixed magnitude of the per capita rebate also ensures that
this form of revenue recycling will diminish any regressivity of the carbon tax.
            A hypothetical lump-sum rebate has been analyzed in other studies of the vertical
distributional effects of a carbon tax. Yet actual policy may instead use existing transfer
mechanisms to target the revenue towards low-income family budgets. Therefore, the next
simulation increases only existing transfers and the EITC. The $76.4 billion in net carbon tax
revenue is enough to increase by 5.9% all real payments for the EITC and most transfers. 32 In
fact, either of these first two simulations might represent a preferred mechanism to address the
vertical redistribution of the carbon tax, and either might be shown to represent a better
mechanism to address horizontal redistribution.
            The last simulation uses half of net carbon tax revenues to reduce payroll taxes and half
to increase Social Security benefits. 33 Payroll taxes decline 3.9%, and social security benefits
increase 3.7%. This simulation is intended to mitigate both regressivity and within-decile
outcome heterogeneity. The payroll tax reduction compensates primarily low-wage workers for
the higher costs of consumption, whereas the increase in Social Security benefits targets other
low-income individuals who are not working. Though this simulation targets both workers and
non-workers, it may nevertheless fail to compensate sufficiently some families such as young

32
   Transfers include social security, supplemental security income, wage replacement from workers compensation,
SNAP, WIC, LIHEAP, TANF, veteran’s benefits, unemployment compensation, and general state assistance.
33
     A proportional cut in payroll taxes paid is equivalent to a cut in the effective tax rate with no change in tax base.
                                                          -18-

unemployed families. It could also overcompensate some families, particularly those drawing
high fractions of their incomes from social security. Such families benefit from the indexing of
social security benefits as well as from this direct increase in benefit rates.

       5. Results

Consider first the incidence of a carbon tax with no revenue-recycling mechanism, which serves
as a baseline against which to compare the three alternative rebate simulations. The additional
tax burden in each decile is calculated both as a percent of permanent income (as measured by
annual consumption) and as a percent of pre-existing tax burden, as calculated by the TDM to
include all tax burdens (individual, corporate, payroll, excise, and estate and gift tax).
           Distinct from other analyses of carbon tax incidence, our calculated additional tax burden
accounts for indexing of transfer payments and of the individual income tax brackets. 34 This
often-overlooked feature of carbon tax implementation diminishes measured regressivity. In fact,
for the $100 billion carbon tax, indexing results in $23.6 billion of outlays. As shown here,
inclusion of the offsetting effects of indexing and of the ranking by consumption both act to
decrease measured regressivity of a carbon tax, even with no revenue-recycling mechanism.
           Table 5 displays in the first column the incidence of a carbon tax without the indexing
offsets, with families ranked by income, and with tax burden shown as a percent of income. This
incidence appears very regressive: the carbon tax is 1.2% of income for the bottom income decile
but only 0.52% of income for the top income decile. 35 When applying the indexing offsets, but
still ranking by income and still measuring the added burden as a percent of income, measured
regressivity diminishes (third column): the carbon tax is 0.71% of income for the bottom decile
and 0.45% of income for the top decile. When the added burden is divided by consumption,
however, then the carbon tax with offsets is progressive, even when families are still ranked by
income (column 4): the carbon tax is 0.5% of consumption for the lowest annual income decile

34
     Dinan (2012) and Fullerton et al. (2012) account for indexing of transfers but not of income tax parameters.
35
   As is standard in Treasury distribution tables, the rankings by cash income and consumption have been adjusted
by equivalence scales to account for both the number of persons in the family unit and returns to scale in sharing
resources within the family unit. Each family’s income or consumption is divided by the square root of the number
of persons in the family in order to approximate the true level of well-being for the individuals in the family. Thus, a
family of four with $40,000 of income is ranked as having the same effective income or consumption as a family of
one with $20,000 of income. This adjustment is the same as is used by the Congressional Budget Office (see the
methodology appendix in CBO (2016)). For further details on the effects of the family size adjustment, see Cronin
et. al. (2012). This adjustment only pertains to the ranking of each family. The unit is still the family, and we have
equal numbers of families in each decile. The lowest income decile may include more individuals if low-income
families include more individuals than do high-income families.
                                                      -19-

and 0.81% for the top annual income decile.
        In the right half of Table 5, families are ranked by consumption. When measuring burden
as a percent change in consumption and accounting for indexing of transfers, the carbon tax
appears progressive (column 8). The burden is 0.45% of consumption for the lowest
consumption decile and 0.80% of consumption for the highest consumption decile.
        As shown in Table 6, however, the percentage change in total Federal tax burden is
greatest for the poorest families, and this percentage change in tax burden declines
monotonically with income. 36 The average family in the first consumption decile has a total tax
burden that doubles with the introduction of the carbon tax. The richest families see tax burdens
increase by 1.57% on average. We return to a discussion of Table 6 below.
        When carbon tax revenues are refunded in a per capita lump-sum payment, as shown in
Table 7, the net additional burden as a percent of consumption is even more clearly progressive.
In fact, the average family in each of the first seven consumption deciles receives a net reduction
in tax. Total taxes borne by the average family in the lowest consumption decile are nearly 700%
lower with the carbon tax and rebate. The richest families experience a 1.13% net tax burden
increase, or $1,270 per year, equal to 0.58% of their consumption. The average reduction in tax
burden for the poorest ten percent of families, $294, is equal to 2.59% of consumption.
        However, not all poor families enjoy net tax reductions under this lump-sum rebate. The
full distribution of tax changes as a percent of consumption within each consumption decile are
presented in Figure 1. This figure includes a red vertical line to denote the boundary between
winners and losers, and it shows a blue bar for each one percent range (such as zero up to 1%
more tax, or those between 1% and 2% more tax). Seven percent of the poorest families benefit
from net tax reductions equal to more than 4% of consumption, while 0.3% bear more burden.
The figure shows less heterogeneity in tax changes as a percent of consumption among families
in the highest decile. Eighty-five percent of them experience a tax increase of zero to 1% of
consumption, while 8% incur extra burdens of 1% to 2% of consumption, and 7% get tax cuts of
up to 1% of consumption. Thus, intra-class variation seems to diminish with income.
        To investigate this variation further, the penultimate column of Table 7 reports the
absolute size of the standard deviation of the tax change. Each family’s extra burden reduces

36
   Tables showing the current-law distribution of federal tax burdens are available on the U.S. Department of the
Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis website (https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/Pages/Tax-Analysis-
and-Research.aspx).
                                                        -20-

consumption, so the standard deviation of the burden is the standard deviation of consumption
within the decile. Then, in the last column, the coefficient of variation (CV) of consumption is
this standard deviation (SD) divided by mean consumption. While the SD increases from $203
for the lowest decile to $347 for the ninth decile, the CV falls monotonically from 2.7% for the
poorest decile to 0.8% for the ninth decile (because consumption in the denominator rises faster
than the SD in the numerator).
         For the top decile, however, both the SD and CV increase dramatically (to $22,718, or
22% of consumption). This variation within the top decile is difficult to interpret, because the top
decile is very heterogeneous and virtually unbounded. Some families in Treasury’s confidential
tax return data have extremely high income, consumption, and taxes. Thus, the decile’s standard
deviations are large for income, for energy consumption, and for burdens of a carbon tax. 37 The
added variation within this top decile can be compared across reforms, in Tables 6-10, but the
added variation in the top decile is not comparable to added variation in other deciles.
         The standard deviation of the change in consumption is broadly similar for the carbon tax
alone in Table 6 and with the per capita rebate in Table 7. It rises from the first to the ninth
deciles (and is very large in the richest decile). But the coefficient of variation within the first
five deciles is larger when using carbon revenue for per capita rebates. Even though family size
varies in all deciles, this variation in family size implies variation in per capita rebates that is a
greater percent of consumption in low consumption deciles. An alternative to per capita rebates
could be per family rebates, or rebates that use equivalence scales to offset the burden measured
in effective consumption for each person.
         Next, Table 8 considers the case where carbon revenues are returned via the same 5.9%
increase in the EITC and all transfer benefits (above and beyond indexing of transfers). This
reform also results in a progressive distribution of burdens in the second column, where the net
burden is negative for eight deciles and positive only for the top two deciles. Because transfers
are a larger fraction of income for those in lower deciles, progressivity is greater than for the
carbon tax alone in Table 6. The increase in EITC and all transfers is not as progressive as the

37
   In Treasury’s raw data, some families have large negative income and negative taxes because of loss offsets, but
most of those families have large wealth and only temporary losses. Because these families are not representative of
the lowest income decile, they are not included when calculating results for the lowest decile (but they are included
in the totals). Thus, income is bounded from above and from below in all of the first nine deciles, but not in the top
decile. Because of this extreme variation within the top decile, many other studies using publicly available data have
separated the top 1% of income from the rest of this top decile, but we are not able to do so.
                                                -21-

per capita rebate in Table 7. Although transfers are important sources of income in lower deciles,
many transfers are not means tested. As a result, the lowest decile receives about 5% of transfer
income, whereas the top decile receives 13%. Average family size, in contrast, does not vary
much across deciles, so the per person rebate is more progressive.
       With the rebate via transfers in Table 8, the largest net tax cuts accrue to families in the
third, fourth, and fifth consumption deciles ($212 to $254). In contrast, the poorest families
receive only a $109 tax reduction on average, a little more than one-third the size of the tax
reduction they received under the lump-sum per capita rebate. The richest families pay $1,090
more in tax on average, equal to a half percent of their annual consumption. This reform avoids
average tax changes as a percent of consumption greater than 1%, with the exception of the
second decile where the average tax cut is 1.07% of consumption.
       Though the rebate via transfers is still somewhat progressive, it is not as progressive as
the per capita rebate. Figure 2 shows that this relatively more equal treatment of families across
consumption deciles comes at the cost of greater heterogeneity of tax impacts within each decile.
Looking across impacts within the poorest decile, 44% of families experience a tax increase,
even though the long negative tail of this distribution leads to an average net reduction in taxes
that is about 1% of consumption. Existing transfers for some poor families are small or zero, so a
proportional increase in such transfers adds to heterogeneity of impacts within this group. That
is, larger transfers can offset the positive additional carbon tax burden only for some families.
While some families face higher carbon tax burdens with no additional transfers, more than 25%
of these poorest families enjoy an overall net tax cut equal to more than 2% of consumption.
       The average family in each of the first eight consumption deciles enjoys a net tax cut, yet
Figure 2 shows that 42% to 66% of families within each of these deciles experience tax increases
that are up to 2% of consumption. Comparing Figures 1 and 2 indicates that every consumption
decile exhibits more variation in tax treatment under the transfer expansion than under the lump-
sum rebate. In fact, every coefficient of variation of consumption is greater with the transfer
expansion in Table 8 than with either the lump sum rebate in Table 7 or no rebate in Table 6. In
other words, the use of transfers to rebate carbon tax revenue introduces more intra-class
variation in consumption than does the carbon tax itself.
       Finally, Table 9 shows the carbon tax reform that recycles equal shares of revenues in the
form of payroll tax reductions and increases in social security benefits. This package is slightly
progressive, yielding a small net tax cut for nine deciles and a tax increase only for the richest
                                                         -22-

decile. Compared to the other reforms, however, it most nearly approximates a proportional tax
reform while avoiding the most dramatic intra-class variation in tax changes. It compensates
workers for their extra carbon tax burden through the payroll tax reduction, and it compensates
retirees with enhanced social security benefits. It does not compensate the nonworking,
nonelderly poor, though they benefit from the indexing of transfer income. As a result, the gains
to the poor are more limited than in the other proposed reforms, while the losses to the rich are
also more limited. As reported in Table 9, the poorest ten percent of families experience an
average tax reduction of $18/year, or 0.16% of consumption. The average family in the richest
decile is hit by a tax increase of $704, or 0.32% of consumption. Across all deciles, the largest
net tax cut for the average family is in the fourth and fifth consumption deciles, each of which
receives a tax reduction equal to $113 (or 0.38% and 0.30% of consumption, respectively).
         Looking at Table 9 where nine deciles gain, a conventional analysis of the incidence from
this third reform might suggest that the vast majority of families benefit from the reform. But
further analysis of the heterogeneous tax treatment within each consumption decile reveals the
opposite. As shown in Figure 3, a majority of families in all deciles experience tax increases of
up to 1%. In fact, tax increases of up to 2% of consumption apply to 68% of the poorest families,
a share for this decile that is greater than for any other decile. At the same time as most families
incur very small tax increases, tens of thousands enjoy considerable tax reductions.
         Our 322,000 tax families are weighted to represent all 172 million U.S. families. For the
17.2 million in the poorest decile, 92,000 (0.5%) receive tax cuts or benefit increases equal to 5%
of consumption or more. Gains greater than ten percent of consumption are enjoyed by 27,000
families. Heterogeneity in tax changes as a percent of consumption declines across consumption
deciles in Figure 3. None among the richest families receives a tax cut greater than 5% or an
increase greater than 3% of consumption. Outcomes vary less within deciles from this refund
than from any other refund considered here, but intra-class variation is still greater than with no
refund (except in the top decile). 38 Meanwhile, the CV of consumption is greater than with no
refund for all other deciles by at least 50%, and by as much as 230% for the poorest.
         The distributional impacts of all these reforms are summarized in Figure 4. For each
reform, a whisker bar is used to depict the range from the 10th to 90th percentile of the

38
   In this reform, the coefficient of variation of consumption for the top consumption decile is lower than in any
other rebate scenario modeled in this paper, but only barely.
                                                 -23-

distribution of tax changes within each decile, and an “x” is used to show the median tax change
as a percent of consumption. It is evident in the figure that the third proposed reform that rebates
revenues through EITC and transfers (CT3 in the figure) induces considerably more variation in
tax changes within every group than does any other policy considered. This variation appears to
be largest in the third and fourth consumption deciles. The second-most variation in every decile
is created by the fourth proposal that rebates revenues through payroll taxes and social security
benefits (CT4). In contrast, the carbon tax without rebate (CT1) has the lowest variation in the
middle 80th percentile range of impacts among low income groups. The second reform (CT2),
with per capita rebate, yields the largest median tax reduction as a percent of income for the
poorest 70% of the income distribution. And, among the revenue recycling options, it induces the
least additional variation in the middle 80th percentile range of impacts among all groups.
        One additional point from Figure 4 is that the richest decile has the shortest whisker bars
of any decile, i.e., the least variation between the 10th and 90th percentile of the gain or loss as a
percent of consumption within the decile. Yet its standard deviation as a percent of consumption
is far higher than any other decile (the CV, for all four reforms). The reason is that the richest ten
percent within this richest decile have significantly more consumption and therefore more
change in burden than others within the middle 80 percent of the decile.
        For all four simulations, Table 10 collects the coefficients of variation of consumption
across all ten deciles (from Tables 6-9). Though each of the three revenue-recycling mechanisms
considered in this analysis further increases the progressivity of the carbon tax alone, none
consistently mitigates the intra-class variation in tax changes introduced by the carbon tax.
Indeed, each rebate mechanism increases the CV within most deciles. The carbon tax alone has
the lowest variation of within-class tax treatment across the first five deciles. For other deciles,
the carbon tax without recycling produces the second-most homogeneous tax treatment. The per
capita rebate reduces variation from the carbon tax within each of the top five deciles, and it
yields the least variation among the refunding mechanisms for deciles 3-9. Among refunding
mechanisms, the payroll tax reduction coupled with increased social security benefits has the
lowest within-decile variation for the poorest 20% and richest 10% of households. It comes
closest to achieving distributional neutrality on the vertical dimension. The proportional increase
in transfers introduces the most within-decile variation in consumption of any simulation.
        While the prior literature reviewed above disagrees on “horizontal equity” as a normative
goal, that debate was about variation in the level of tax burden for those at the same level of well-
                                                -24-

being, while we show only variation in the change of tax burden. We could, for example, show
how each reform package changes the standard deviation of total tax burdens within each decile.
For two reasons, such calculations are avoided. First, that analysis would have to look at
“similar” families within some range of consumption, and yet even a strictly proportional tax
would naturally result in a range of tax burdens across that range of consumption. Thus, we see
no reason for interest in whether a reform package helps to equalize existing tax burdens of all
families across a range of consumption. Second, even if we could identify multiple families with
identical means, it is not evident that a reasonable objective for climate policy is to equalize the
pre-existing total tax burden. Still, however, some might hold that avoidance of capricious gains
and losses is a worthy objective of climate policy.

   6. Discussion

A number of studies have analyzed the implications of carbon taxes for vertical redistribution,
finding that a carbon tax is regressive and studying complementary tax reforms that would be
revenue neutral and preserve progressivity. Our study sheds new light on vertical redistributions
from a carbon tax and rebates, and it is the first to study horizontal redistributions. We ask
whether complementary tax reforms can help avoid variation in tax treatment among families of
similar means. We consider the carbon tax alone and with alternative mechanisms for revenue-
neutral rebate of carbon tax revenues, though all simulations index transfer programs and income
tax brackets in accordance with federal statutes.
       The four simulations evaluated in this paper hardly represent the breadth of potential tax
reforms, but our analysis nonetheless provides important insights. First, contrary to the common
belief that carbon taxes in the U.S. are regressive, this analysis shows that a carbon tax alone is
instead progressive, when vertical effects are measured against consumption as a proxy for
permanent income and when accounting for the statutory indexing of transfers and tax brackets.
       Second, and perhaps most importantly, we find that a distributional analysis focused on
vertical burdens can yield misleading conclusions about welfare changes for pluralities or even
majorities of families, including the poorest. Because the usual rebate mechanisms can provide
large gains as a percent of consumption for some poor families, an aggregate decile statistic that
reports a tax cut for the average family conceals the fact that many or most of them receive small
tax increases. Our simulations show that this phenomenon holds not just for the lowest deciles,
but across many deciles for which the average tax change is a net reduction. Thus, when interest
                                                 -25-

centers on the tax change experienced by individual families, as opposed to the aggregate impact
within a class of families, the micro-level analysis performed here is essential. Policymakers may
want to know if a tax reform that delivers large tax cuts to a minority of poor families also leaves
most poor families worse off.
       Third, horizontal redistributions are increased for at least half of the population by any of
the three revenue-recycling reforms we consider. Among our simulations, a tradeoff arises
between vertical and horizontal redistribution. The reform that rebates half of revenues to payroll
tax reductions and half to social security benefits expansion nearly achieves distributional
neutrality from a vertical perspective, but it worsens the horizontal disparities in tax treatment
relative to the carbon tax alone (for all but the richest ten percent of families). Among revenue-
recycling reforms, the per capita rebate has the lowest disparities within most deciles. It is also
the most progressive reform, providing relatively large percentage reductions in taxes for the
poor at the expense of small percentage increases in taxes for the rich.
       Fourth, while variations in tax changes among families in the top consumption decile are
difficult to interpret, such large variations surely reflect the limited capacity for means-tested
revenue recycling and relatively small rebates in the top decile to offset their considerably larger
and more variable tax bills. Yet, while the welfare of the poorest families enjoys a unique place
in the standard analysis of vertical redistribution from carbon taxes, the variation in tax changes
within a group is not more important among poor than among rich families. The standard
deviation of tax change within the richest group is between $22,600 and $22,800 in these
simulations, a narrow range that indicates the inability of these simulated reforms to address
heterogeneous carbon tax impacts among the rich. But it also suggests that to the extent
policymakers are considering reforms to complement a carbon tax, the horizontal disparities
within the rich group will not be greatly impacted by whichever reform is pursued, particularly
so long as those reforms are intended to be progressive.
       Fifth, while Treasury’s Distribution Model affords high-fidelity assessments of rebate
mechanisms that utilize income channels, the data preclude an exploration of rebate mechanisms
based on other family characteristics that could better reduce disparities among families of
similar means. In particular, we do not know the age of a family’s dwelling nor the energy
efficiency of its durable goods, including household appliances and vehicles. We do not observe
the characteristics of the family’s weather, its commute to work, or its built environment (such as
commuter rail and electricity grid infrastructures). These characteristics affect household carbon
                                                -26-

emissions, and if available they could be used to target household-specific transfers to offset
carbon taxes.
       While carbon tax rebates based upon these characteristics might be employed to reduce
intra-class variation in outcomes, they would also directly affect the efficiency of the carbon tax
by reducing the price signal induced by the carbon tax – at least along some margins. For
instance, a carbon tax reduces emissions by inducing purchases of energy-efficient appliances or
vehicles. If owners of inefficient durables received preferential rebates to compensate for their
relatively high carbon taxes attributable to inefficient durables, then their incentives to purchase
efficient durables would be reduced. Likewise, families in hot climates use more electricity for
air conditioning than families in temperate climates (such as on the coasts). Such families face
higher carbon tax bills. If they were compensated for their extra carbon tax burden from their
extra use of electricity, then they would have little incentive to invest in home weatherproofing
or efficient climate control systems, or to change locations.
       To some extent, both tax-change heterogeneity and incentive problems could be
alleviated by designing carbon tax rebates that are based upon the mean consumption of families
that are similar in location, size, and income category. A family receiving a rebate according to
mean carbon emissions of neighbors, for instance, would help reduce air conditioning use
because the family’s rebate is based not on own usage. Still, a collective action problem emerges
where an individual family wants to reduce its own energy use but maintain high use among
neighbors. Moreover, to the extent that rebates are based on characteristics of comparable
families, then incentives to conserve along dimensions that define comparability are diminished.
If the comparable families own single-family homes that consume more energy on average than
multifamily housing, then an individual family has no incentive to choose multifamily over
single family dwellings, though such a switch might be induced by the carbon tax alone.
Similarly, the incentive for families with high air conditioning use to move to cooler climates is
diminished so long as their carbon tax rebates are based upon their geographic location.
       Finally, one might also consider one-time payments to families that depend on their
durable goods holdings or other characteristics at the time of the tax reform, but not thereafter.
That is, the introduction of a carbon tax could be complemented by a one-time transfer to
families based on age, location, size of their homes, and the vintages of their cars and appliances.
This one-time transfer would not affect incentives for future conservation, energy efficiency
investments, and purchases of smaller homes in more temperate climates. Such a payment
                                                -27-

would, in effect, compensate families for the government’s “takings” via the carbon tax. The
rationale for such a payment, however, is not straightforward. As in any investment decision,
rational actors formulate expectations about the values of their investments in alternative states
of the world. Such a policy may be inefficient if it insures holders of energy-using capital against
their losses, particularly as other families may have made more prudent investments in
expectation of a future carbon tax. The prudent family would be punished for holding energy-
efficient durables. Thus, the rationale for rebates pegged to consumption patterns may be weak,
even if incentive problems could be resolved.




References
Aldy, Joseph E., Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer.
     2010. Designing climate mitigation policy. Journal of Economic Literature 48 (4): 903-34.

Anderson, Patricia M., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1997. Unemployment insurance takeup rates and
    the after-tax value of benefits. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 913-37.

Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures on public economics. New York:
     Mcgraw Hill.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett. 2002. A new measure of horizontal equity. American
     Economic Review 92 (4): 1116-25.

Bentham, Jeremy. 1802. Principles of the Civil Code. In Property: Mainstream and critical
     positions, ed. C.B. Macpherson. Toronto: University of Toronto Press (1978).

Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. Psychological frictions and the incomplete
     take-up of social benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment. The American Economic
     Review 105 (11): 3489-529.

Blonz, Joshua, Dallas Burtraw, and Margaret A. Walls. 2011. How do the costs of climate policy
     affect households? The distribution of impacts by age, income, and region. Resources for
     the Future Discussion Paper 10-55, Washington DC.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Ruud A. de Mooij. 1994. Environmental levies and distortionary
    taxation. American Economic Review 84 (4): 1085-9.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2002. Environmental taxation and regulation in
    a second-best setting. In Handbook of public economics, eds. Martin Feldstein and Alan J.
    Auerbach. Amsterdam: North Holland.
                                               -28-

Bull, Nicholas, Kevin A. Hassett, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1994. Who pays broad-based energy
      taxes? Computing lifetime and regional incidence. Energy Journal 15 (3): 145-64.

Carbone, Jared C., Richard D. Morgenstern, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. 2013.
     Deficit reduction and carbon taxes: Budgetary, economic, and distributional impacts.
     Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
     http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/RFF-Rpt-
     Carbone.etal.CarbonTaxes.pdf.

Cass, Oren. 2016. Who pays the bill for the Obama climate agenda? New York: Manhattan
     Institute. http://www.manhattan-institute.org/sites/default/files/IB-OC-0416.pdf.

Congressional Budget Office. 2016. The distribution of federal taxes and household income,
    2013. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51361

Cramton, Peter, and Suzi Kerr. 2002. Tradable carbon permit auctions: How and why to auction
    not grandfather. Energy Policy 30 (4): 333-45.

Cronin, Julie-Anne. 1999. U.S. treasury distributional analysis methodology. Washington, D.C.:
     U.S. Department of the Treasury. https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-
     analysis/Documents/WP-85.pdf.

------. Forthcoming. Revised U.S. treasury distributional analysis methodology. Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Cronin, Julie-Anne, Portia DeFilippes, and Emily Y. Lin. 2012. Effects of adjusting distribution
     tables for family size. National Tax Journal 65 (4): 739-58.

Currie, Janet. 2006. The take-up of social benefits. In Public policy and the income distribution,
     ed. Alan J. Auerbach, David Card, and John M. Quigley. New York, NY: Russell Sage
     Foundation Publications, 80-148.

Dinan, Terry. 2012. Offsetting a carbon tax’s costs on low-income households. CBO Working
     Paper 2012-16, Congressional Budget Office, Washington, D.C.

Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2011. Redistribution and tax expenditures: The earned income
      tax credit. National Tax Journal 64 (2): 689-730.

Flues, Florens, and Alastair Thomas. 2015. The distributional effects of energy taxes. OECD
     Taxation Working Paper, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris,
     France.

Friedman, Milton. 1957. The permanent income hypothesis. In A theory of the consumption
     function, ed. Milton Friedman. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Fullerton, Don. 1996. Why have separate environmental taxes? Tax Policy and the Economy 10:
      33-70.
                                               -29-

Fullerton, Don, and Diane L. Rogers. 1994. Who bears the lifetime tax burden? Washington,
      D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Fullerton, Don, Garth Heutel, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2012. Does the indexing of government
      transfers make carbon pricing progressive? American Journal of Agricultural
      Economics 94 (2): 347-53.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2001. Environmental controls, scarcity rents, and pre-
      existing distortions. Journal of Public Economics 80 (2): 249-67.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. The greenness of cities: Carbon dioxide
     emissions and urban development. Journal of Urban Economics 67 (3): 404-18.

Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. Effects of carbon taxes in an economy with prior tax distortions: An
     intertemporal general equilibrium analysis. Journal of Environmental Economics and
     Management 29 (3): 271-97.

------, ed. 2002. Environmental policy making in economies with prior tax distortions.
       Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W.H. Parry. 2008. Instrument choice in environmental
     policy. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2 (2): 152-74.

Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. 1999.
     The cost-effectiveness of alternative instruments for environmental protection in a second-
     best setting. Journal of Public Economics 72 (3): 329-60.

Grainger, Corbett A., and Charles D. Kolstad. 2010. Who pays a price on carbon? Environmental
     and Resource Economics 46 (3): 359-76.

Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2009. The incidence of a U.S. carbon
     pollution tax: A lifetime and regional analysis. Energy Journal 30 (2): 155-78.

Horowitz, John, Julie-Anne Cronin, Hannah Hawkins, Laura Konda and Alex Yuskavage. 2017.
    Methdology for analyzing a carbon tax. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the
    Treasury. https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-
    analysis/Documents/WP-115.pdf

Kaplow, Louis. 1989. Horizontal equity: Measures in search of a principle. National Tax Journal
     42 (2): 139-54.

------. 1992. A note on horizontal equity. Florida Tax Review 1 (3): 191-96.

------. 1995. A fundamental objection to tax equity norms: A call for utilitarianism. National Tax
       Journal 48 (4): 497-514.

------. 2000. Horizontal equity: New measures, unclear principles. NBER Working Paper 7649,
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
                                               -30-


Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2009. Smart taxes: An open invitation to join the Pigou club. Eastern
    Economic Journal 35 (1): 14-23.

Mathur, Aparna, and Adele C. Morris. 2014. Distributional effects of a carbon tax in broader
    U.S. fiscal reform. Energy Policy 66: 326-34.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 1999. A distributional analysis of green tax reforms. National Tax Journal 52
    (4): 655-81.

------. 2009. Designing a carbon tax to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Review of
       Environmental Economics and Policy 3 (1): 63-83.

Musgrave, Richard A. 1959. The theory of public finance. New York: McGraw-Hill.

------. 1990. Horizontal equity, once more. National Tax Journal 43 (2): 113-22.

Parry, Ian W. H. 1995. Pollution taxes and revenue recycling. Journal of Environmental
     Economics and Management 29 (3): S64-S77.

Parry, Ian W. H. 2015. Carbon tax burdens on low-income households: A reason for delaying
     climate policy? CESifo Working Paper No. 5482, Munich, Germany.

Parry, Ian W. H., and Antonio M. Bento. 2000. Tax deductions, environmental policy, and the
     “double dividend” hypothesis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39
     (1): 67-96.

Parry, Ian W. H., Kevin A. Hassett, Adele Morris, and Roberton C. Williams III. 2015.
     Implementing a U.S. carbon tax: Challenges and debates. New York: Routledge.

Pizer, William A., and Steven Sexton (2016). Distributional impacts of energy taxes. Duke
      University Working Paper, Durham, NC.

Poterba, James M. 1989. Lifetime incidence and the distributional burden of excise taxes.
     American Economic Review 79 (2): 325-30.

------. 1991. Is the gasoline tax regressive? Tax Policy and the Economy 5: 145-64.

Rausch, Sebastian, Gilbert E. Metcalf, and John M. Reilly. 2011. Distributional impacts of
     carbon pricing: A general equilibrium approach with micro-data for households. Energy
     Economics 33 (S1): S20-S33.

Sidgwick, Henry. 1874. The method of ethics. London: Macmillan.

Simons, Henry C. 1950. Federal tax reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sterner, Thomas. 2012. Distributional effects of taxing transport fuel. Energy Policy 41: 75-83.
                                                            -31-

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1982. Utilitarianism and horizontal equity: The case for random
      taxation. Journal of Public Economics 18 (1): 1-33.

Stone, Chad. 2015. The design and implementation of policies to protect low-income households
     under a carbon tax. Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
     http://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/9-21-15climate.pdf.

Ummel, Kevin. 2016. Impact of CCL’s proposed carbon fee and dividend policy: A high-
   resolution analysis of the financial effect on U.S. households. Coronado: Citizens Climate
   Lobby. https://citizensclimatelobby.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Ummel-Impact-of-
   CCL-CFD-Policy-v1_4.pdf.

West, Sarah E., and Roberton C. Williams III. 2004. Estimates from a consumer demand system:
     Implications for the incidence of environmental taxes. Journal of Environmental
     Economics and Management 47 (3): 535-58.

Williams, Roberton C., III., Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared C. Carbone, and Richard D.
     Morgenstern. 2015. The initial incidence of a carbon tax across income groups. National
     Tax Journal 68 (1): 195-214.




TABLES AND FIGURES


           Table 1: Effects of a Carbon Tax on Fuel Commodity Prices
                                                                                       Percent increase
                                           Price ($2017)         Carbon tax
                                                                                        due to carbon
                                           various unitsa       $25/mt CO2b
                                                                                             tax3

           Commodity prices
              Petroleum                     $48.41/bbl             $12.90/bbl                27%
              Natural Gas                   $2.95/mcf              $1.29/mcf                 44%
              Coal                          $35.16/ton             $46.86/ton               133%

           a   Projections by the Office of Tax Analysis (OTA) of the U.S. Treasury.
           bBased on on carbon content of 53.12 kg/mcf (natural gas) , 1,874 kg/ton (average coal),
           0.43 mt/bbl petroleum). Source for natural gas:
           http://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm.
           Source for coal and petroleum: https://www.epa.gov/energy/ghg-equivalencies-calculator-
           calculations-and-references.
                                               -32-




        Table 2: Changes in Consumption Category Prices Due to Carbon Tax
                            Hassett, et al. (2009)     Mathur and Morris        Treasury (2016)
                            ($15/mt, 2005 prices,            (2014)           ($25/mt, 2017 Prices)
Commodity                    2003 consumption)        ($15/mt, 2010 prices)

Coal                            Nearly 100%                                          133%
Petroleum                          13%                                               27%
Natural gas                         7%                                               44%
Family consumption good
food at home                       0.70%                     0.83%                   1.46%
food at restaurants                0.58%                     0.47%                   0.18%
food at work                       0.86%                     1.05%                   1.46%
tobacco                            0.67%                     0.64%                   0.35%
alcohol at home                    0.58%                     0.72%                   0.36%
alcohol on premises                0.58%
clothes                            0.40%                     0.34%                   0.57%
clothing services                  0.41%                     0.22%                   1.00%
jewelry                            0.43%                     0.39%
toiletries                         0.72%
health and beauty                  0.42%                     0.55%                   0.72%
tenant occupied dwelling           0.31%                     0.17%                   0.88%
other dwelling rental              0.42%                     0.19%                   0.71%
furnishings                        0.55%                     0.74%                   0.86%
household supplies                 0.71%                     0.83%                   0.58%
electricity                       12.55%                    5.21%                   9.01%
natural gas                       12.28%                    18.92%                  14.83%
water                              0.63%                     0.46%                   2.45%
home heating oil                  9.56%                     6.10%                   14.51%
telephone                          0.26%                     0.27%                   0.42%
domestic services                  0.49%                                             0.61%
health                             0.39%                     0.32%                   0.55%
business services                  0.50%                     0.24%                   0.52%
life insurance                     0.31%                     0.06%                   0.18%
automobile purchases               0.90%                     1.04%                   0.56%
automobile parts                   0.65%                                             0.89%
automobile services                0.40%
gasoline                          7.73%                      4.72%                  14.81%
tolls                              0.64%
automobile insurance               0.31%                     0.06%                   0.18%
mass transit                       0.90%                     0.75%                   4.61%
other transit                      0.62%                     1.54%                   0.72%
air transportation                 1.86%                     2.01%                   5.46%
books                              0.40%                     0.35%                   0.42%
magazines                          0.49%
recreation equipment               0.42%                     0.63%                   0.58%
other recreation services          0.51%                     0.31%                   1.14%
gambling                           0.31%
higher education                   0.30%                     0.44%                   1.32%
preK-secondary educ                0.34%
other education services           0.30%
charity                            0.41%                     0.25%                   0.49%
                                                        -33-




Table 3: Distribution of Cash Income and Consumption, by Consumption Decile


    Adjusted Family                                        Percent                Percent
     Consumption                                        Distribution of        Distribution of
        Decile            Consumption Rangea            Cash Income            Consumption

          1b                      $0 to $11,405                 1.0                     1.8
           2                 $11,405 to $15,559                 1.9                     2.9
           3                 $15,559 to $19,810                 2.8                     3.8
           4                 $19,810 to $24,961                 3.8                     4.9
           5                 $24,961 to $31,181                 5.2                     6.2
           6                 $31,181 to $38,226                 6.8                     7.7
           7                 $38,226 to $46,220                 8.8                     9.5
           8                 $46,220 to $57,267                 11.3                    11.8
           9                 $57,267 to $75,827                 15.4                    15.0
          10                      over $75,827                  44.3                    36.3

        Totalb                                                  100.0                  100.0

a
 The consumption range is shown on a single-person family equivalent basis. Families are
ranked according to consumption adjusted for family size, using a square root of family size
adjustment. A family of four with $40,000 of consumption would be equivalent to a family of
one with $20,000 of consumption.
b
    Families with negative income are excluded from the first decile but included in the total.
                                                           -34-

                   Table 4: Consumption Shares by Consumption Categories for Each Decile

                                                 Percent of total consumption, by consumption decile
Consumption category             All        1        2        3       4      5      6      7       8     9      10
                               Families   poor                                                                 rich
food home                        10.9     14.0      13.5    12.7   12.2   11.7    11.3   10.9    11.2   11.0   9.9
food at restaurants              4.2       2.5      3.2     3.6    3.7    3.8     3.9    4.0     4.2    4.3    4.6
food at work                     0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.1    0.1     0.0    0.0    0.0
tobacco                          0.8       2.6      2.4     2.0    1.6    1.2     1.0    0.8     0.7    0.6    0.2
alcohol                          0.7       0.5      0.6     0.6    0.6    0.6     0.6    0.6     0.6    0.7    0.8
clothes                          1.5       1.0      1.3     1.6    1.7    1.5     1.4    1.4     1.4    1.3    1.7
clothing services                0.3       0.3      0.3     0.3    0.3    0.3     0.3    0.3     0.3    0.3    0.4
health and beauty                0.6       0.3      0.4     0.4    0.4    0.5     0.5    0.6     0.6    0.6    0.7
tenant occupied dwelling         18.6     19.6      20.4    19.4   19.3   18.8    18.8   18.1    17.6   17.8   19.0
other dwelling rental            0.8       0.1      0.2     0.2    0.2    0.3     0.4    0.6     0.8    0.9    1.3
furnishings                      1.0       0.6      0.5     0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8    0.9     1.0    1.0    1.4
household supplies               0.8       0.3      0.4     0.6    0.5    0.5     0.6    0.7     0.7    0.8    0.9
electricity                      3.2       4.1      4.1     3.9    3.6    3.5     3.4    3.1     3.3    3.3    2.9
natural gas                      0.9       0.9      1.0     1.1    1.1    1.0     1.0    1.0     1.0    0.9    0.9
water                            1.2       1.2      1.1     1.2    1.2    1.1     1.1    1.2     1.3    1.2    1.1
home heating oil                 0.3       0.2      0.2     0.2    0.4    0.4     0.4    0.3     0.3    0.3    0.4
telephone                        2.8       2.8      3.0     3.1    2.8    2.8     2.8    2.7     2.8    2.9    2.6
domestic services                1.8       1.2      1.3     1.6    1.6    1.5     1.5    1.8     1.8    1.8    2.0
health                           17.3     31.6      26.2    23.1   23.2   24.2    23.8   22.3    19.9   17.4   9.8
business services                1.1       0.4      0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7     0.7    0.7     1.0    1.6    1.3
personal insurance, pensions     9.8       3.5      5.3     6.8    7.0    7.3     8.0    9.1     9.5    9.9    12.3
automobile purchases             2.4       0.4      0.4     0.6    0.9    0.9     0.9    1.0     0.9    2.0    4.6
automobile parts                 1.6       0.6      1.0     1.4    1.3    1.3     1.5    1.6     1.8    1.8    1.7
gasoline                         5.5       4.0      5.0     5.8    5.7    5.5     5.4    5.8     6.0    5.6    5.4
automobile insurance             2.0       1.3      1.5     1.9    2.0    2.0     1.9    2.0     1.9    2.0    2.0
mass transit                     0.5       0.4      0.3     0.3    0.3    0.4     0.5    0.6     0.5    0.5    0.5
other transit                    0.7       0.4      0.4     0.5    0.8    0.8     0.7    0.7     0.7    0.6    0.9
air transportation               0.6       0.4      0.6     0.2    0.2    0.3     0.4    0.5     0.6    0.7    0.8
reading                          0.2       0.2      0.1     0.1    0.1    0.1     0.2    0.2     0.2    0.2    0.3
recreation equipment             3.1       2.8      2.8     2.8    2.7    2.9     3.0    2.9     3.2    3.4    3.2
other recreation services        0.9       0.3      0.4     0.5    0.5    0.6     0.6    0.8     0.9    0.9    1.2
education                        1.0       0.4      0.5     1.1    1.5    1.0     0.7    0.7     0.5    0.6    1.5
charity                          2.7       1.2      1.3     1.4    1.4    1.7     1.9    2.1     2.8    3.0    3.5

Total                           100.      100.      100.    100.   100.   100.    100.   100.    100.   100.   100.
Table 5: Comparing Carbon Tax Distributions Ranked by Income and Consumption with and without Indexing Offsets

                        Ranked by Adjusted Family Cash Income                              Ranked by Adjusted Family Consumption
                  without indexing offsets    with indexing offsets                   without indexing offsets   with indexing offsets

                     (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
                 Tax Change      Tax Change       Tax Change       Tax Change       Tax Change      Tax Change       Tax Change       Tax Change
   Decile          as % of         as % of          as % of          as % of          as % of         as % of          as % of          as % of
                   income        consumption        income         consumption        income        consumption        income         consumption


      1                  1.21              0.86            0.71             0.50             1.08             0.89            0.54             0.45
      2                  0.99              0.97            0.54             0.52             1.03             0.96            0.58             0.54
      3                  0.94              0.99            0.49             0.52             0.95             1.01            0.55             0.58
      4                  0.89              0.99            0.50             0.55             0.89             1.00            0.54             0.61
      5                  0.83              0.97            0.52             0.61             0.82             0.97            0.55             0.65
      6                  0.78              0.96            0.56             0.69             0.76             0.96            0.56             0.71
      7                  0.76              0.97            0.58             0.74             0.74             0.98            0.57             0.75
      8                  0.73              0.99            0.57             0.78             0.72             1.00            0.55             0.76
      9                  0.66              0.97            0.52             0.78             0.65             0.96            0.50             0.74
     10                  0.52              0.94            0.45             0.81             0.53             0.94            0.46             0.80

    Total                0.67              0.96            0.51             0.73             0.67             0.96            0.51             0.73
Notes: The carbon tax is scaled to hit $100 billion without offsets. The tax is assumed to be passed forward to consumers in the form of price
increases on consumption goods, with the relative price increase of each good dependent on the carbon intensity of its inputs. Since total
consumption is about $10 trillion, the $100 billion carbon tax increases the general price level by about 1%. Government transfers and certain
parameters in the individual income tax are indexed. As a result, the general price increase of 1% increases government transfer expenditures by
about $8 billion and decreases individual income tax receipts by about $15.5 billion. Together, all else equal, these two offsets would be expected
to decrease carbon tax revenue by roughly $23.5 billion.
     Table 6: Incidence by Decile of Carbon Tax, with Indexing Offsets and No Rebates

                                                                                               Coefficient of
                      Average          Tax change          Tax change          Standard
 Consumption                                                                                    variation of
                     change in           as a %             as a % of          deviation
   Decile                                                                                      consumption
                    tax burden        consumption        current-law taxa      of burden
                                                                                                  (in %)
        1                $51               0.45                119.0              $64               0.86
        2                $95               0.54                 98.6             $103               1.08
        3               $134               0.58                 20.6             $152               1.24
        4               $178               0.61                  9.2             $195               1.26
        5               $245               0.65                  5.8             $213               1.12
        6               $330               0.71                  4.3             $250               1.06
        7               $434               0.75                  3.8             $342               1.21
        8               $544               0.76                  3.2             $360               1.05
        9               $674               0.74                  2.5             $422               0.96
       10              $1,757              0.80                  1.6            $22,725            22.05
 a
   Current law includes Treasury’s assumptions about the incidence of all Federal taxes: individual income tax,
 corporate income tax, payroll taxes, excises and customs duties, and estate and gift taxes.




Table 7: Incidence by Decile of Carbon Tax, with Indexing Offsets and Per Capita Rebate

                                                                                               Coefficient of
                       Average        Tax change         Tax change as Standard
 Consumption                                                                                    variation of
                      change in         as a %           a % of current deviation of
   Decile                                                                                      consumption
                     tax burden      consumption            law taxa      burden
                                                                                                  (in %)
        1               -$294             -2.59             -691.55             $203                2.69
        2               -$325             -1.86             -336.71             $236                2.47
        3               -$297             -1.29              -45.87             $262                2.14
        4               -$258             -0.88              -13.34             $281                1.82
        5               -$206             -0.55               -4.91             $252                1.32
        6               -$125             -0.27               -1.64             $237                1.01
        7                -$33             -0.06               -0.29             $276                0.98
        8                $71               0.10                0.42             $280                0.81
        9               $204               0.23                0.76             $347                0.79
       10               1,270              0.58                1.13            $22,718             22.04
 a
  Current law includes Treasury’s assumptions about the incidence of all Federal taxes: individual income tax,
 corporate income tax, payroll taxes, excises and customs duties and estate and gift taxes.
                                                   -37-




    Table 8: Incidence by Decile of Carbon Tax, with Indexing Offsets and Proportional
                             Increase in EITC and Transfers

                                                                                           Coefficient of
                     Average        Tax change         Tax change           Standard
Consumption                                                                                 variation of
                    change in         as a %            as a % of           deviation
  Decile                                                                                   consumption
                   tax burden      consumption       current law taxa       of burden
                                                                                              (in %)
         1           -$109             -0.96              -255.92              $233             3.09
         2           -$187             -1.07              -193.70              $339             3.55
         3           -$224             -0.97               -34.63              $469             3.83
         4           -$254             -0.87               -13.15              $613             3.98
         5           -$212             -0.56                -5.05              $736             3.86
         6           -$108             -0.23                -1.42              $813             3.46
         7            -$31             -0.05                -0.27              $913             3.23
         8             -$5             -0.01                -0.03             $1,022            2.97
         9             $59              0.06                0.22              $1,155            2.61
        10           $1,090             0.50                0.97             $22,773           22.10
a
  Current law includes Treasury’s assumptions about the incidence of all Federal taxes: individual income
tax, corporate income tax, payroll taxes, excises and customs duties and estate and gift taxes.




Table 9: Incidence by Decile of Carbon Tax, with Indexing Offsets, Half of Revenue to
         Payroll Tax Reduction and Half to Social Security Benefits Increase

                                                                                           Coefficient of
                     Average        Tax change   Tax change                 Standard
Consumption                                                                                 variation of
                    change in         as a %      as a % of                 deviation
  Decile                                                                                   consumption
                   tax burden      consumption current law taxa             of burden
                                                                                              (in %)
         1             -$18            -0.16               -41.68             $153              2.03
         2             -$44            -0.25               -45.31             $228              2.39
         3             -$74            -0.32               -11.39             $309              2.52
         4            -$113            -0.38                -5.84             $388              2.52
         5            -$113            -0.30                -2.68             $437              2.29
         6             -$89            -0.19                -1.17             $471              2.00
         7             -$70            -0.12                -0.61             $543              1.92
         8             -$81            -0.11                -0.47             $593              1.72
         9             -$86            -0.09                -0.32             $664              1.50
        10             $704             0.32                0.63             $22,616           21.94
a
  Current law includes Treasury’s assumptions about the incidence of all Federal taxes: individual income
tax, corporate income tax, payroll taxes, excises and customs duties and estate and gift taxes.
                                        -38-




Table 10: Coefficient of Variation (in %), by Decile for Each Carbon Tax Simulation

                                                                       Payroll tax
                                                    Proportional
Consumption                                                          reduction and
                 No rebate      Per capita rebate    increase in
  Decile                                                            Social Security
                                                      transfers
                                                                   benefits increase
     1              0.86              2.69              3.09              2.03
     2              1.08              2.47              3.55              2.39
     3              1.24              2.14              3.83              2.52
     4              1.26              1.82              3.98              2.52
     5              1.12              1.32              3.86              2.29
     6              1.06              1.01              3.46              2.00
     7              1.21              0.98              3.23              1.92
     8              1.05              0.81              2.97              1.72
     9              0.96              0.79              2.61              1.50
    10             22.05             22.04             22.10             21.94
                                                                  -39-


                               Figure 1: Distribution of Tax Changes for Carbon Tax with Per Capita Rebate
Percent of decile population




                                                     Tax change as percent of consumption
                                                                      -40-



                               Figure 2: Distribution of Tax Changes for Carbon Tax with Proportional Increase in
                                                                   Transfers
Percent of decile population




                                                      Tax change as percent of consumption
                                                                       -41-


                               Figure 3: Distribution of Tax Changes for Carbon Tax with Payroll Tax Reduction and
                                                          Social Security Benefits Increase
Percent of decile population




                                                       Tax change as percent of consumption
                                                             -42-


Figure 4: Distribution of the Change in Tax Burdens as a % of Consumption by Decile, for
   a Carbon Tax with and without Rebates (Range of each Bar is 10th to 90th percentile)



 Change in Tax Burden as a
  Percent of Consumption
     2.00




     1.00




     0.00




    -1.00




    -2.00




    -3.00




    -4.00




    -5.00




    -6.00
            1st CT1
            1st CT2
            1st CT3
            1st CT4


                       2nd CT1
                       2nd CT2
                       2nd CT3
                       2nd CT4




                                           4th CT1
                                           4th CT2
                                           4th CT3
                                           4th CT4


                                                       5th CT1
                                                       5th CT2
                                                       5th CT3
                                                       5th CT4


                                                                    6th CT1
                                                                    6th CT2
                                                                    6th CT3
                                                                    6th CT4


                                                                                 7th CT1
                                                                                 7th CT2
                                                                                 7th CT3
                                                                                 7th CT4


                                                                                              8th CT1
                                                                                              8th CT2
                                                                                              8th CT3
                                                                                              8th CT4


                                                                                                        9th CT1
                                                                                                        9th CT2
                                                                                                        9th CT3
                                                                                                        9th CT4
                                 3rd CT1
                                 3rd CT2
                                 3rd CT3
                                 3rd CT4




                                                                                                                  10th CT1
                                                                                                                  10th CT2
                                                                                                                  10th CT3
                                                                                                                  10th CT4
                                                     Consumption Decile

                                                     CT1 = Carbon Tax No Rebate
                                                     CT2 = Carbon Tax with Per Person Rebate
                                                     CT3 = Carbon Tax with Transfer/EITC Rebate
                                                     CT4 = Carbon Tax with 1/2 Payroll 1/2 SSB Rebate
