NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DEBIT CARDS ENABLE THE POOR TO SAVE MORE
Pierre Bachas
Paul Gertler
Sean Higgins
Enrique Seira
Working Paper 23252
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23252

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
We are grateful to officials in Mexico’s government
bank Bansefi and the conditional cash transfer
program Prospera (formerly Oportunidades) for sharing data and answering numerous questions. At
Bansefi, we are indebted to Miguel Ángel Lara, Oscar Moreno, Ramón Sanchez, and especially Benjamín
Chacón and Ana Lilia Urquieta. At Prospera, we are indebted to Martha Cuevas, Armando Gerónimo,
Rodolfo Sánchez, Carla Vázquez, and especially Rogelio Grados, Raúl Pérez, and José Solis. For comments
that greatly improved the paper, we thank David Atkin, Alan Barreca, Richard Blundell, Chris Carroll,
Carlos Chiapa, Shawn Cole, Natalie Cox, Pascaline Dupas, John Edwards, Gerardo Escaroz, Fred
Finan, Jess Goldberg, Emilio Gutierrez, Jens Hainmueller, Anders Jensen, Anne Karing, Dean Karlan,
Supreet Kaur, Leora Klapper, David Laibson, Ethan Ligon, John Loeser, Nora Lustig, Jeremy Magruder,
Justin McCrary, Atif Mian, Ted Miguel, Doug Nelson, Christine Parlour, Betty Sadoulet, Todd Schoellman,
Ben Sperisen, Jonathan Zinman, and numerous seminar participants. We are also grateful to Ignacio
Camacho, Ernesto Castillo, Oscar Cuellar, Bernardo García, Austin Farmer, Joel Ferguson, and Isaac
Meza for research assistance. Gertler and Seira gratefully acknowledge funding from the Consortium
on Financial Systems and Poverty and the Institute for Money, Technology & Financial Inclusion.
Higgins gratefully acknowledges funding from the Fulbright–García Robles Public Policy Initiative
and National Science Foundation (Grant Number 1530800). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Pierre Bachas, Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, and Enrique Seira. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Debit Cards Enable the Poor to Save More
Pierre Bachas, Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, and Enrique Seira
NBER Working Paper No. 23252
March 2017, Revised August 2019
JEL No. D14,D83,G21,O16
ABSTRACT
We study an at-scale natural experiment in which debit cards are given to cash transfer recipients who
already have a bank account. Using administrative account data and household surveys, we find that
beneficiaries accumulate a savings stock equal to 2 percent of annual income after two years with
the card. The increase in formal savings represents an increase in overall savings, financed by a reduction
in current consumption. There are two mechanisms: first, debit cards reduce transaction costs of accessing
money; second, they reduce monitoring costs, leading beneficiaries to check their account balances
frequently and build trust in the bank.

Pierre Bachas
Princeton Economics Department
Office 214
Princeton, NJ 08542
no email available

Sean Higgins
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
seanhiggins@berkeley.edu

Paul Gertler
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

Enrique Seira
Centro de Investigación Económica
ITAM
Ave. Santa Teresa # 930
Mexico
enrique.seira@gmail.com

1

Introduction

A remarkably large number of households do not have sufficient savings to cope with relatively
small shocks. For example, more than 40% of Americans report that they “either could not pay
or would have to borrow or sell something” to finance a $400 emergency (Federal Reserve, 2017).
Some hypothesize that this is due to a lack of access to low-cost, convenient savings devices at
formal financial institutions (Karlan, Ratan and Zinman, 2014). When households do have access
to financial institutions, there are a number of well-documented causal impacts including increased
entrepreneurial investment, wealth accumulation, and ability to cope with shocks (Bruhn and Love,
2014; Stein and Yannelis, 2019; Célérier and Matray, forthcoming).
Nevertheless, take-up and active use of bank accounts “remain puzzlingly low” (Karlan et al.,
2016, p. 2), even when accounts are offered without fees (Dupas et al., 2018). In fact, 40% of
adults worldwide do not have a formal bank or mobile money account (Demirgüç-Kunt et al.,
2018). Similarly, cash transfer recipients paid through direct deposit into bank accounts generally
withdraw the entire transfer amount in one lump sum each pay period (e.g., Muralidharan, Niehaus
and Sukhtankar, 2016).
We study a natural experiment in which debit cards tied to existing savings accounts were rolled
out geographically over time to beneficiaries of the Mexican conditional cash transfer program
Oportunidades. Debit cards alleviate two important barriers to using formal financial institutions.
First, debit cards lower the indirect transactions costs of accessing money in an account by facilitating more convenient access via a network of ATMs.1 Second, debit cards also reduce the indirect
cost of checking balances, which is a mechanism that individuals can use to monitor that banks are
not unexpectedly reducing balances. Through monitoring, individuals build trust that money deposited in a bank account will be there when wanted. In fact, a lack of trust in banks to not “steal”
their savings—often through hidden and unexpected fees—is frequently listed as a primary reason
why the poor are hesitant to use banks (Dupas et al., 2016; FDIC, 2016). Among Oportunidades
beneficiaries, “repeated balance checking is common, usually out of anxiety to confirm that their
money is still there” (CGAP, 2012, p. 20).
The phased geographic rollout of debit cards to Oportunidades recipients provides plausibly
1 In our context,

debit cards reduce the indirect time and transport transaction costs of accessing money in the bank
account, as savings can be withdrawn at any bank’s ATM, rather than only at bank branches of a particular bank. In
contrast, Schaner (2017) provides ATM cards that reduce direct transaction costs: higher withdrawal fees are charged
by bank tellers in her study, and the only ATMs at which the cards can be used are located at bank branches of the
corresponding bank.

1

exogenous variation in the timing of assignment of debit cards, allowing us to estimate the causal
impact of having a debit card on saving in a difference-in-differences event study framework. Before the rollout, beneficiaries had been receiving their transfers through savings accounts without
debit cards, but rarely used their accounts to save: they typically withdrew the full transfer amount
shortly after receiving it.2
Using high-frequency administrative data from nearly 350,000 beneficiary bank accounts in
357 bank branches nationwide over five years, we find that debit cards caused a large and significant increase in the active use of the accounts. The number of transactions (withdrawals) jumped
immediately, while the proportion of beneficiaries holding significant positive savings in their bank
account increased more slowly from 13% to 87% over a two-year period. After two years, beneficiaries with debit cards have built up a stock of savings equal to 2% of annual income. This
increase in savings—caused by an at-scale and replicable intervention—contrasts with the smaller
and sometimes null effects on savings found by other interventions in the literature (Figure 1).3
Using a rich household panel survey covering a subsample of the beneficiaries, we then test
whether the increase we observe in formal savings is an increase in overall savings or a substitution
from other forms of saving, both formal and informal. We focus on beneficiaries who have had the
card for about a year at the time they are surveyed, and find that after one year with the card, there is
no change in income and a significant reduction in consumption equal to about 4.9% of income.4
Because consumption and income are flows, and because the administrative bank account data
show that the savings stock does not evolve linearly over time, we carefully compare this reduction
in consumption of 4.9% of income to the change in the savings rate for beneficiaries from the same
localities after they have had the card for the same amount of time as in the survey. This change in
the savings rate from the comparable administrative data is 4.6% of income.
This suggests that the total savings rate likely rose by a similar amount to what we observe in
2 Prior to receiving cards, 13% of beneficiaries saved in the bank accounts. This is consistent with findings from
other countries such as Brazil, Colombia, India, and South Africa, in which cash transfers are also paid through bank
accounts and recipients generally withdraw the entire transfer amount in one lump sum withdrawal each pay period
(CGAP, 2012; Muralidharan, Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2016).
3 We also estimate a model of precautionary savings to estimate the equilibrium buffer stock, and find that beneficiaries are saving towards an equilibrium buffer stock of 2.7% of annual income. After saving in the account for one
year, beneficiaries accumulate three-fourths of the equilibrium buffer stock on average.
4 Because the survey oversampled localities that received cards early in the rollout, the vast majority of beneficiaries who had received a card by the time of the survey received it approximately one year before the survey. We
exclude the households that received cards shortly before the survey for a cleaner comparison with administrative data
and easier interpretation.

2

the administrative bank account data (assuming that total savings is income minus consumption).
More precisely, the administrative data suggest an increase in the savings rate of 4.6% of income
and the survey estimates show no change in income and a consumption reduction of 4.9% of
income, both for beneficiaries from the same localities who have had the card for approximately
one year. Furthermore, the point estimates from the two sources of data are nearly identical (within
0.2% of income, or less than 50 cents per month) and each lies within the 95% confidence interval
of the other. As with most household surveys, however, our survey estimates are noisy: the lower
bound of the 95% confidence interval in the survey is 1.0% of income. Thus, while we can reject
that the increase in formal savings was purely substitution from other forms of savings, we cannot
rule out that part of the formal savings increase was.
Why would debit cards lead to increased savings? An obvious candidate is that debit cards
decrease the transaction costs of accessing money, which makes saving in the account more attractive since savings can be easily accessed when needed. Indeed, debit cards reduce the indirect
transaction costs of accessing the account: before receiving a card, account holders had to go to
one of only 500 Bansefi branches nationwide to withdraw money, traveling a median road distance
of 4.8 kilometers.5 After receiving the card, each beneficiary could withdraw their balance from
any bank’s ATM, i.e. at any of the more than 27,000 ATMs in Mexico; the median road distance
between a beneficiary’s house and the closest ATM is 1.3 kilometers (Bachas et al., 2018). We find
that the number of withdrawals made per month jumps by 40% immediately after receiving the
card and stays relatively flat afterwards. Many beneficiaries start making two or three withdrawals
per transfer period, while almost all beneficiaries used to make a single withdrawal of the entire
transfer. Furthermore, 16% of beneficiaries begin accumulating savings immediately, likely due to
the immediate reduction in transaction costs to access their money.
The reduction in transaction costs to access money does not by itself fully explain the increase
in savings. Upon receiving a debit card, most beneficiaries do not begin saving immediately, but
instead appear to first use the card to monitor account balances and thereby build trust that their
money is safe. Although a beneficiary could check her balance at Bansefi branches by asking a
bank teller prior to receiving the card, the debit card makes balance checks much more convenient
5 This may explain their low initial use of the accounts to save,

which in turn also explains why reduced transaction
costs would not have the opposite effect of reducing savings. If clients were already saving in their accounts and the
transaction costs provided a form of commitment device, as was the case for one of the households profiled by Morduch
and Schneider (2017), we might expect a reduction in transaction costs to reduce savings. However, most clients were
not saving in the account prior to receiving a card.

3

since it can be done at any bank’s ATM.6 Thus, as in Labonne and Chase (2010), a reduction
in transaction costs enables trust building. Once trust is established, beneficiaries take advantage
of the reduced transaction costs of accessing money associated with debit cards and increase the
amount of savings held in their bank accounts.
Two main pieces of evidence support the mechanism of using the card to monitor balances and
thereby build trust. First, using the high-frequency administrative data on bank account transactions, we observe that upon receipt of the debit card, clients initially leave small amounts of money
in the account and use the card to check their account balances frequently, but reduce balance check
frequency over time. Simultaneously, the proportion of beneficiaries who save in the account and
the amount that they save rises over time with the card. We confirm this relationship statistically
by testing for a negative within-account correlation between balance checks and savings; that is,
people check their balances less at the same time that they save more, consistent with using balance checks to build trust.7 Second, in survey data from a subsample of the beneficiaries, those
who have had their debit cards for a short period of time report significantly lower rates of trust
in the bank than beneficiaries who have had their debit cards longer. We also rule out a number
of competing mechanisms including falling transaction costs over time and learning the banking
technology, among others.
We thus make three contributions to the literature. First, we show that debit cards caused a
large and significant increase in the number of active account users in terms of both number of
withdrawals and savings. The stock of savings accumulated after two years corresponds to 2%
of annual income. This is larger than estimates from most other savings interventions—including
offering commitment devices, no-fee accounts, higher interest rates, and financial education (Figure 1). Two other studies that also find a large effect on savings are Suri and Jack (2016), who study
the impact of mobile money, and Callen et al. (forthcoming), who study the impact of weekly home
visits by a deposit collector equipped with a point-of-sale terminal. Like debit cards, these technologies both lower transaction costs and enable clients to more easily monitor account balances.8
6 In addition, the reduced indirect transaction costs of accessing money in the account increase the potential benefit
of saving formally, which would increase the beneficiary’s desire to learn whether the bank is trustworthy.
7 The Bansefi accounts do not charge overdraft fees, so this behavior is not consistent with checking balances to
avoid overdraft fees when the account balance is low. Furthermore, the relationship holds—and becomes stronger—
when we exclude balance checks that occur on the same day as a withdrawal, ruling out the possible explanation that
beneficiaries check their balance before withdrawing only when they know they have a low account balance.
8 Mobile money clients can easily check account balances from their phones, and Callen et al.’s (forthcoming)
deposit collection includes a receipt printed in real-time with the deposit amount and new account balance after each

4

Second, we show that the savings effect comes—at least partially—from an increase in total
savings achieved by reducing current consumption, rather than a substitution from other forms of
saving. Other studies testing whether an increase in formal savings represents an increase in total
savings or a substitution from informal savings do not typically have sufficient power to rule out
full substitution, even when they find large point estimates on total savings (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2015;
Kast, Meier and Pomeranz, 2018).9 While account holders appear to reduce consumption as they
increase savings over time in Somville and Vandewalle (2018, Figure 2), their consumption results
are not statistically significant; Breza and Chandrasekhar (2019) similarly find noisy consumption
results suggestive of a reduction in consumption to finance savings. In this paper, we definitively
show that a portion (and based on the point estimates, possibly all) of the increase in formal savings
is financed by reducing current consumption.
Third, we directly investigate two barriers to saving: indirect transaction costs and distrust. We
show evidence that the immediate increase in the number of transactions is due to the decreased
transaction costs of accessing the account, while the delayed increase in the proportion of beneficiaries who save suggests that allowing clients to more easily monitor the bank by checking
account balances increases their trust in the bank over time. Studies have explored the role of trust
in stock market participation, use of checks instead of cash, and mortgage refinancing in developed
countries (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2004, 2008; Johnson, Meier and Toubia, 2019) and the
role of trust in borrowing and take-up of insurance products in developing countries (Karlan et al.,
2009; Cole et al., 2013). There are few studies, however, that rigorously explore the role of distrust
as a constraint to saving or the role of financial technology in increasing trust (Karlan, Ratan and
Zinman, 2014).10
In summary, debit cards combined with ATMs or point-of-sale terminals (and, in other contexts,
mobile phones combined with mobile money platforms) are low-cost technologies that reduce the
weekly deposit—a feature that the bank viewed as crucial to establish trust in the deposit collectors. We were unable
to include these studies in the comparison for reasons explained in Appendix A.
9 An exception is Callen et al. (forthcoming), who find a statistically significant impact on total savings that is
similar in magnitude to the impact on formal savings. Unlike our paper, they find no impact on consumption but rather
find that an increase in labor supply in response to the savings intervention enables the increase in savings.
10 Previous studies on debit cards and mobile money have focused on the effect of the lower transaction costs facilitated by these technologies to make purchases, access savings and remittances, and transfer money (Zinman, 2009;
Jack and Suri, 2014; Schaner, 2017), but not their capacity to monitor and build trust in financial institutions. Two
studies on trust and savings are Osili and Paulson (2014), who study the impact of past banking crises on immigrants’
use of banks in the US, and Mehrotra, Vandewalle and Somville (forthcoming), who promote interactions with bankers
and find that account savings is strongly associated with trust in one’s own banker.

5

indirect transaction costs of both accessing funds in an account and checking balances to build
trust in financial institutions. These technologies are simple, prevalent, and potentially scalable
to hundreds of millions of unbanked households worldwide. Combining these technologies with
government cash transfer programs could be a promising channel to increase financial inclusion
and enable the poor to save, not only because of the sheer number of people that are served by
cash transfers, but also because many governments and nongovernmental organizations are already
embarking on digitizing their cash transfer payments through bank or mobile money accounts (e.g.,
Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016; Muralidharan, Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2016).
2

Institutional Context

We examine the rollout of debit cards to urban beneficiaries of Mexico’s conditional cash transfer
program Oportunidades, whose cash benefits were already being deposited directly into formal
savings accounts without debit cards. Oportunidades is one of the largest and most well-known
conditional cash transfer programs worldwide, with a history of rigorous impact evaluation (Parker
and Todd, 2017). The program provides cash transfers to poor families conditional on sending their
children to school and having preventive health check-ups. It began in rural Mexico in 1997 under
the name Progresa, and later expanded to urban areas starting in 2002. Today, nearly one-fourth of
Mexican households receive benefits from Oportunidades, recently rebranded as Prospera.11
As it expanded to urban areas in 2002–2005, Oportunidades opened savings accounts in banks
for beneficiaries in a portion of urban localities, and began depositing the transfers directly into
those accounts. By 2005, beneficiary families in over half of Mexico’s urban localities were receiving their transfer benefits directly deposited into savings accounts at Bansefi, a government bank
created to increase savings and financial inclusion among underserved populations. The Bansefi
savings accounts have no minimum balance requirement or monthly fees and pay essentially no
interest.12 No debit or ATM cards were associated with the accounts, so beneficiaries could only
access their money at Bansefi bank branches. Because there are only about 500 Bansefi branches
nationwide and many beneficiaries live far from their nearest branch, accessing their accounts involved large transaction costs. The median urban household receiving its transfers in a Bansefi
11 The program has led to increases in school attendance and grade completion, improvements in childrens’ health
outcomes, modest increases in household consumption and caloric intake, and no change in labor market participation
or labor market income (see Parker and Todd, 2017, for a review). Note that these effects do not confound our study
since everyone in our analysis is a beneficiary.
12 Nominal interest rates were between 0.09 and 0.16% per year compared to an inflation rate of around 5% per
year during our sample period.

6

account was 4.8 kilometers from the nearest Bansefi branch (Bachas et al., 2018). Overall, the
savings accounts were barely used prior to the introduction of debit cards: 89.9% of clients made
one withdrawal each bimester, withdrawing 99.5% of the transfer on average (Table B.1).13
In 2009, the government began issuing Visa debit cards to beneficiaries who were receiving
their benefits directly deposited into Bansefi savings accounts. The cards enable account holders
to withdraw cash and to check account balances at any bank’s ATM, as well as make electronic
payments at any store accepting Visa. Beneficiaries can make two free ATM withdrawals per
bimester at any bank’s ATM; additional ATM withdrawals are charged a fee that varies by bank.
When Bansefi distributed the debit cards, they also provided beneficiaries with a training session
on how and where to use the cards (Appendix C). The training sessions did not vary over time and
did not discuss savings, nor encourage recipients to save.
Our sample consists of urban beneficiaries who received their transfer benefits in bank accounts
prior to the rollout of debit cards. As shown in Figure 2, beginning in January 2009 debit cards
tied to these existing bank accounts were rolled out to beneficiaries by locality. When Bansefi
distributed cards in a particular locality, all beneficiaries in that locality received cards during the
same payment period. By the end of 2009, about 75,000 beneficiaries had received debit cards
tied to their pre-existing savings accounts. Another 172,000 beneficiaries received cards by late
2010. By October 2011, the last month for which we have administrative data from Bansefi, a
total of 256,000 beneficiaries had received debit cards tied to their pre-existing savings accounts.
Another 93,000 beneficiaries received cards between November 2011 and April 2012, shortly after
the end date of our study period. We use this last group as a “pure” control group throughout the
duration of our study, although as we describe in Section 4, we take advantage of all the variation in
exposure time generated by the staggered rollout of cards at the locality level over time. The map
in Figure 2b shows that the card expansion had substantial national geographic breadth throughout
the rollout.
While the timing of the rollout of cards was not explicitly randomized across localities, we
show in Section 4 that the timing was uncorrelated with observed locality-level characteristics.
This is consistent with conversations we conducted with Oportunidades officials, who asserted
that they did not target localities with particular attributes because they wanted to test their ad13 A

bimester is a two-month period; Oportunidades payments are paid every two months. Our measure of percent
withdrawn can exceed 100% of the transfer since the account could have a positive balance prior to the Oportunidades
payment.

7

ministrative procedures for the rollout—such as how easy it would be to distribute cards—on a
quasi-representative sample. In addition, we show that the variables we use from the transactionslevel data, as well as other variables such as wages, prices, and financial infrastructure, exhibit
parallel pre-trends. Importantly, when a locality is treated, all beneficiaries in the locality receive
cards that period. Furthermore, although the total number of beneficiaries increases slightly over
time at the national level, we show that the rollout was not accompanied by a differential change
in the number of beneficiaries in a locality (Section 4).
3

Data Sources

We use four main sources of data. The first is administrative data on account balances and transactions from Bansefi on the universe of beneficiaries who already received benefits in a savings
account and were then given a debit card. We also use three surveys of Oportunidades beneficiaries. Table 1 displays the number of beneficiaries, time periods, main variables, and variation we
exploit for each of these data sources.
3.1

Administrative Data

To examine the effect of debit cards on savings and account use, we exploit account-level data
from Bansefi on the average monthly balance and all transactions for the universe of accounts that
received transfers in a savings account prior to receiving a debit card. These data consist of 348,802
accounts at 357 Bansefi branches over almost five years, from January 2007 to October 2011. They
include monthly average savings balance; the date, amount, and type of each transaction made in
the account (including Oportunidades transfers); the date the account was opened, and the month
the card was given to the account holder. Figure 2a shows the timing of the administrative data and
the rollout of debit cards.
Table B.1 shows summary statistics from this dataset. Using data from the first bimester of
2008 (before any debit cards were disbursed to beneficiaries), the accounts in our sample make 0.01
client deposits and 1.1 withdrawals per bimester on average, and the average amount withdrawn
is 99.5% of the Oportunidades transfer, indicating very low use of the account for saving prior
to receiving the card. End-of-period balances are 124 pesos or about US$11 on average; the
distribution of end-of-period balances is skewed: the 25th percentile is just 2 pesos (US$0.20)
and the median is 42 pesos (US$4). The average amount transfered by Oportunidades in the first
bimester of 2008 is 1,540 pesos, or about US$144, per bimester; using survey data we find that
Oportunidades income represents about one-fourth of beneficiaries’ total income on average. The
8

average account had already been open for 3.5 years by January 2008, so beneficiariaries in our
study had substantial experience with a savings account prior to receiving the debit card.
3.2

Survey Data

Since its inception in 1997, Oportunidades has a long history of collecting high-quality surveys
from their beneficiaries, and these surveys have been used extensively by researchers (Parker and
Todd, 2017). We use three distinct Oportunidades household-level surveys, described below. Figures B.1–B.3 show when survey respondents received cards in each of these surveys, relative to
the timing of the survey. In all surveys, the sample we use for estimation consists of households
that received cards at some point during the rollout; these households correspond to a subset of the
accounts in the administrative data described in Section 3.1.
3.2.1

Household Panel Survey (ENCELURB)

The most comprehensive survey data we use is the Encuesta de las Características de los Hogares
Urbanos (ENCELURB), a household panel survey with comprehensive modules on consumption,
income, and assets. The survey includes three pre-treatment waves in 2002, 2003, and 2004, and
one post-treatment wave conducted between November 2009 and February 2010. The surveys were
originally collected for the evaluation of the program in urban areas. Localities that switched to
debit cards in early 2009 were oversampled in the fourth wave (which did not return to all localities
from the original sample for budgetary reasons). As a result, most of the treatment group in this
survey—beneficiaries who received cards prior to the fourth wave of the survey—had the card for
close to one year when surveyed. We exclude the small group of beneficiary households in this
survey that received cards in late 2009, shortly before the post-treatment survey wave, for cleaner
comparisons with the administrative data results.14 We merge the survey with administrative data
from Oportunidades on the debit card expansion to study the effect of the card on consumption and
saving in a difference-in-differences model.
3.2.2

Trust Survey (ENCASDU)

The Encuesta de Características Sociodemográficas de los Hogares Urbanos (ENCASDU), conducted in 2010, is a stratified random sample of 9,931 Oportunidades beneficiaries. We refer to
this survey as the Trust Survey since it gives us a measure of trust in the bank. We restrict our
14 Because

only 74 of the 2942 households in this survey living in urban localities included in the rollout are in
localities treated in late 2009, our results hardly change if we do not drop these households.

9

analysis to beneficiaries who had already received debit cards by the time of the survey, since
the module with questions we use about reasons for not saving was only asked to those who had
already received debit cards. This leaves us with a sample of 1,694 households, with a median
exposure to the card of 14 months.
The survey asks, “Do you leave part of the monetary support from Oportunidades in your bank
account?” If the response is no, the respondent is then asked the open-ended question, “Why don’t
you keep part of the monetary support from Oportunidades in your Bansefi savings account?” Lack
of trust is captured by responses such as “because if I do not take out all of the money I can lose
what remains in the bank”; “because I don’t feel that the money is safe in the bank”; “distrust”;
and “because I don’t have much trust in leaving it.”15
3.2.3

Payment Methods Survey

The Encuesta de Medios de Pago (Payment Methods Survey) is a cross-sectional survey of a stratified random sample of 5,388 beneficiaries, conducted in 2012. This survey was fielded to measure
operational details of the payment method. In particular, it asks about use of the debit cards and
beneficiaries’ experiences using ATMs. We use it to measure the self-reported number of balance
checks and withdrawals with the card, whether beneficiaries get help using an ATM, and if they
know their card’s PIN by heart. We restrict the analysis to the 1,617 surveyed beneficiaries in the
sampled urban localities that had received cards prior to the survey; median exposure time to the
card is 12 months.
3.3

Auxiliary Data

We use auxiliary data for four purposes: to identify (in survey data) when beneficiaries in each
locality received cards as part of the rollout, to test for balanced pre-trends across a broad range of
observables, to test whether the timing of the rollout is correlated with locality-level characteristics,
and to test for a supply-side response by banks to the debit card rollout.
3.3.1

Auxiliary Administrative Data

We use administrative data from Oportunidades on the number of beneficiaries and payment method
by locality by bimester beginning in 2007. These data allow us to identify the timing of the rollout
of debit cards (which is not necessary for results using the Bansefi administrative data—where we
15 We

also use this question to define alternative reasons for not saving, including lack of knowledge (e.g., “they
didn’t explain the process for saving”) and fear of ineligibility (e.g., “because if I save in that account they can remove
me from the Oportunidades program”).

10

directly observe when each account receives a debit card—but which we use for results using survey data). We also use data from Mexico’s National Banking and Securities Commission (CNBV)
which include a number of financial indicators at the bank by municipality by quarter level beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008. From these data, we use the number of bank branches,
ATMs, debit cards, and credit cards to test for balanced pre-trends and to test for a supply-side
response by banks. We use administrative data from Mexico’s Central Bank on the universe of
point-of-sale terminal adoptions and cancelations since 2006 (Higgins, 2019) to test for balanced
pre-trends in financial technology adoption on the supply side of the market. Finally, we use local
elections data that we digitized to test whether the timing of the rollout was determined by political
considerations (specifically, the party in power at the local level).
3.3.2

Auxiliary Survey Data

We use data from three surveys to test for balanced levels and pre-trends in the economic performance of the localities. First, we use locality-level indicators derived from Mexico’s 2005
Population Census. The indicators we use are the ones used by Mexico’s National Council of Social Development and Policy Evaluation (CONEVAL) to measure locality-level development gaps.
Second, we use microdata on wages from Mexico’s quarterly labor force survey, the Encuesta Nacional de Ocupación y Empleo (ENOE). This data set includes wages for 20 million individual
by quarter observations over 2005–2016. Third, we use price quotes from the microdata used to
construct Mexico’s consumer price index. These data include over 4 million price quotes over
2002–2014 at the product by store by month level for food, beverages, alcohol, and tobacco.
4

Empirical Strategy and Identification

We exploit variation generated by the staggered rollout of debit cards to different localities by
Oportunidades. In this section, we show that conditional on being included in the rollout, the
timing of when a locality receives treatment is not correlated with levels or trends in observables
from a number of datasets. These datasets include microdata on wages and food prices, localitylevel data on financial infrastructure and poverty, local elections data, and transaction-level data
from beneficiaries’ bank accounts.
Our empirical strategy depends on the data being used, but the underlying variation we use
always stems from the plausibly exogenous rollout of debit cards over time. When the data have
a panel dimension—i.e., the administrative data and the Household Panel Survey—we estimate a
difference-in-differences specification. When we only have a cross-section of cardholders—i.e.,
11

the Trust Survey and Payment Methods Survey—we exploit variation in the length of time beneficiaries have been exposed to the card. In this section, we present the main empirical models we
use and verify the plausibility of the identification assumptions needed for a causal interpretation.
4.1

Generalized Difference-in-Differences (Event Study)

The large sample over a long period of time in the administrative data allows us to estimate a
generalized difference-in-differences specification where the treatment effect is allowed to vary
dynamically over time and is measured in “event time” relative to each beneficiary’s treatment
period. In other words, we use an event study specification with a pure control group throughout
the study period—the pure control group are those who were treated after October 2011, the last
period for which we have data. Specifically, we estimate
b

yit = λi + δt + ∑ φk Dkit + εit

(1)

k=a

where yit is the outcome of interest, i and t index account and period respectively, the λi are
account-level fixed effects, and the δt are calendar-time (as opposed to event-time) fixed effects.
Dkit is a dummy variable indicating that account i has had a debit card for exactly k periods at time
t, while a < 0 < b are periods relative to the switch to debit cards; we measure effects relative to
the period before getting the card, so we omit the dummy for k = −1. For those in the control
group who receive cards after our study period ends, Dkit = 0 for all k.16 We use this specification
to study withdrawals and savings in the account. We average time over four-month periods since
payments are sometimes shifted to the end of the previous bimester.17 We estimate cluster-robust
standard errors, clustering εit by locality.
As in any difference-in-differences model, to interpret each φk as the causal effect of having the
card for k periods, we need to invoke a parallel trend assumption: in the absence of the card, early
and late card recipients would have had the same changes in account use and savings behavior.
16 Since

we have a control group that does not receive cards until after the study period ends (as in McCrary,
2007), we can pin down the calendar-time fixed effects without facing the under-identification problems described in
Borusyak and Jaravel (2016). We set a and b as the largest number of periods before or after receiving the card that are
possible in our data, but only graph the coefficients representing three years before receiving the card and two years
after (see Borusyak and Jaravel, 2016, on why this is better than “binning” periods below some k or above k.).
17 This could cause an artificially large end-of-bimester balance if the recipient had not yet withdrawn their transfer. Payment shifting happens for various reasons, including local, state, and federal elections, as a law prohibits
Oportunidades from distributing cash transfers during election months.

12

While this is untestable, we test for parallel pre-intervention trends by showing that φk = 0 for all
k < 0. We perform these tests not only for the outcomes that we use with specification (1), which
come from the Bansefi savings and transactions data, but also for a number of other outcomes from
numerous data sources.
Figure 3 panels a and b show that the timing of when different localities receive cards as
part of the rollout is not correlated with pre-trends in wages, food prices, or financial technology
(point-of-sale terminals, bank branches, ATMs, or debit and credit cards). Furthermore, panel c
shows that it is not correlated with beneficiary savings or the number of withdrawals they make
from their accounts. Using less granular annual data, we also test and rule out that the rollout
was correlated with pre-trends in the number of program beneficiaries (Figure B.4) or whether
the party in power at the municipal level corresponds with the party in power at the national level
(Figure B.5). In addition to demonstrating parallel pre-trends, Figures B.4 and B.5 show that there
was no differential change in the number of program beneficiaries or local politics as a result of
the debit card rollout.
As an additional test of whether the timing of the rollout is correlated with levels or trends in
locality-level observables, we follow Galiani, Gertler and Schargrodsky (2005) and use a discrete
time hazard model. This is equivalent to testing whether in a given period t, the probability of
being treated at t conditional on not being treated yet at t − 1 is correlated with observables. We
combine several data sets to include measures of the pre-treatment levels and trends of financial
infrastructure, politics, and the locality-level variables used by Mexico’s National Council of Social Development Policy Evaluation—the independent government agency that produces Mexico’s
official poverty estimates—to determine locality-level development gaps.18 We reject that the timing of the rollout is correlated with observables among localities included in the rollout: of the 22
variables included in the model, the coefficient on one variable is statistically significant at the 5%
level (as would be expected by chance), and the remaining coefficients are statistically insignificant
(Table 2).19

18 We include trends for the variables for which it is possible, i.e. those from data sets with at least annual frequency
(ruling out the 2005 Census) with data beginning prior to 2008. The data on Bansefi branches and ATMs begin in the
last quarter of 2008; hence we only include levels of those variables.
19 In addition to these 22 variables, we include a 5th-order polynomial in time, as in Galiani, Gertler and Schargrodsky (2005).

13

4.2

Difference-in-Differences with Survey Data

With the household survey panel data, we estimate a standard difference-in-differences model since
we observe just one time period after treatment. We estimate
yit = λi + δt + γD j(i)t + νit ,

(2)

where yit is consumption, income, or the stock of assets for household i at time t. Time-invariant
differences in household observables and unobservables are captured by the household fixed effects
λi , common time shocks are captured by the time fixed effects δt , and D j(i)t = 1 if locality j in
which beneficiary household i lived prior to treatment has received debit cards by time t. We use
the locality of residence prior to treatment to avoid confounding migration effects, and estimate
cluster-robust standard errors clustered by locality.20
The identifying assumption is again parallel trends. In addition to the evidence that the rollout
of cards was not correlated with levels or trends of variables from several data sets in Section 4.1,
we verify parallel pre-treatment trends in the household survey panel data by estimating
yit = λi + δt + ∑ ωk T j(i) × I(k = t) + ηit ,

(3)

k

where k indexes survey round (k = 2002 is the reference period and is thus omitted), T j(i) = 1 if locality j in which beneficiary i lives is a locality that received cards before the post-treatment survey
wave, and I(k = t) are time dummies. Thus, the ωk for k < 2009 estimate placebo difference-indifferences effects for the pre-treatment years. For each variable, we fail to reject the null of
parallel trends using an F-test of ωk = 0 for all k < 2009 (Table 3b, column 4).
4.3

Cross-Section Exploiting Variation in Time with Card

The Trust Survey and Payment Methods Survey are cross-sections of beneficiaries with cards
(hence there is no pure control group), and each survey has less than 2,000 observations. This
poses constraints: we have to rely on exposure time to the card as the identifying variation, and to
economize on power, we split the beneficiaries into two equal-sized groups based on how long they
20 In

our data, very few households migrate. In theory this could be a result of migrating households attriting from
the survey. Nevertheless, we confirm using other data that migration in these localities is low. Using data from a panel
of 12 million voter registrations (a 15% random sample from the universe of 80 million voter registrations in Mexico),
we check the proportion of residents from the same localities as those in the Household Panel Survey who migrate
over a three-year period and find that only 4.5% of residents migrate to another locality.

14

have had the card. Note that the variation in time with the card is still determined by the plausibly
exogenous rollout of cards by the government.
We regress the outcome variable—such as self-reported reasons for not saving—on a dummy
of whether beneficiary i’s time with the card is below the median:
yi = α + γI(Card ≤ median time)i + ui ,

(4)

where ui is clustered at the locality level.
This specification requires orthogonality between the error term ui and timing of card receipt
for a causal interpretation of γ—a stronger identification assumption than parallel trends.21 We
thus conduct balance tests using (4) with characteristics that should not be affected by debit card
receipt as the dependent variable, such as number of household members, age, gender, status,
and education level, as well as variables unaffected by debit card receipt in the Household Panel
Survey, such as assets and income. Table 3a shows that in our survey samples, those with the card
for less and more than the median time are balanced, consistent with our finding that the timing of
treatment of localities included in the rollout was not correlated with observables.22
It is worth emphasizing that the beneficiaries in the household surveys are a strict subset of the
beneficiaries in the administrative data, and that the underlying variation in all specifications stems
from exposure time to the card, which was determined exogenously by Oportunidades’ rollout of
debit cards.
5

Effect of Debit Cards on Account Use and Savings

In this section, we use the administrative data from Bansefi on all transactions and average monthly
balances in 348,802 accounts of Oportunidades beneficiaries to estimate the dynamic effect of
debit cards on transactions (withdrawals and deposits) and savings in the accounts. To interpret the
results, we first note that beneficiaries begin using their debit cards to make withdrawals at ATMs
almost immediately (rather than continue to make withdrawals at bank branches). In the fourmonth period in which they receive cards, 85% of beneficiaries withdraw money from an ATM,
21 An additional issue with this specification is that, to the extent that treatment has immediate effects, we may be
biased against finding an effect since all our observations here are treated.
22 The Payment Methods Survey includes fewer measures of household and sociodemographic characteristics since
the survey was focused on experience with the debit cards and ATMs. We find no statistically significant differences
in the 10 variables on household and sociodemographic characteristics included in the Trust Survey nor the 5 variables
included in the Payment Methods Survey.

15

and this increases to over 90% in subsequent periods (Figure 4).
5.1

Number of Transactions

By lowering indirect transaction costs, debit cards should lead to more transactions, as predicted by
theory (Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956) and empirical evidence (Attanasio, Guiso and Jappelli, 2002;
Schaner, 2017). This is indeed what we find. Figure 5a shows the distribution of the number of
withdrawals per bimester, before and after receiving the card. Prior to receiving the card, 90% of
beneficiaries made a single withdrawal per bimester. The distribution of withdrawals in the control
group is nearly identical to that of the treatment group prior to receiving a debit card. In contrast,
after receiving the card, 67% of beneficiaries continue to make just one withdrawal, but 25% make
2 withdrawals, 5% make 3 withdrawals, and 2% make 4 or more withdrawals.23 Meanwhile, the
number of withdrawals in the control group does not change over time (Figure B.6).
On the other hand, there is no effect on client deposits: Figure 5b shows that 99% of accounts
have zero client deposits per bimester before and after receiving the card. Account holders thus
do not add savings from other sources of income to their Bansefi accounts. This is unsurprising
for two reasons. First, deposits can not be made at ATMs (since these belong to banks other than
Bansefi): beneficiaries still need to travel to a Bansefi bank branch to make deposits. Hence the
transaction cost of depositing money into the account remains unchanged. Second, beneficiaries
receive about one-fourth of their total income from the Oportunidades program on average, so
unless the optimal savings rate in a particular period is higher than 25% of total income, there is
no reason to deposit more into the savings account from other income sources.
In order to examine the evolution of the debit card’s effect on withdrawals over time, we estimate the generalized difference-in-differences or event study specification from (1), with withdrawals per bimester as the dependent variable. Figure 6 plots the φk coefficients of average withdrawals per bimester for each four-month period, compared to the period just before receiving
cards. Prior to receiving the card, pre-trends are indistinguishable between treatment and control:
we cannot reject the null of φk = 0 for all k < 0. In addition to having parallel trends, both treatment
and control accounts average just under one withdrawal per period on average. The effect on withdrawals is immediate, as would be expected from the instantaneous change in transaction costs
induced by the card. Prior to receiving the card, beneficiaries in both the treatment and control
23 Recall

that the first two withdrawals per bimester are free at any bank’s ATM, but subsequent withdrawals are
charged a fee, which may explain why few beneficiaries make more than two withdrawals even after receiving the
card.

16

groups average about 1 withdrawal per bimester, but immediately after receiving the card, treated
beneficiaries begin making an additional 0.4 withdrawals per bimester on average.
5.2

The Stock of Savings (Account Balances)

Next, we explore whether debit cards cause an increase in savings from period to period. The
results on withdrawals tell us nothing about period-to-period savings, as beneficiaries could continue withdrawing once per period but reduce the total amount they withdraw during the period and
thereby increase their savings. On the other hand, they could increase the number of withdrawals
and leave some money in the account after the first withdrawal in the pay period, but withdraw the
remaining money later in the same period thereby leaving the account balance close to zero by the
end of that period. The latter possibility means that we have to construct our measure of savings
carefully, as it would lead to a mechanically higher average balance within each period that does
not correspond to accumulating saving in the account over time, i.e., across periods.
Instead, we are interested in measuring savings across periods. Ideally, we could measure the
stock of savings as the end-of-period balance, calculated as the beginning-of-period balance plus
all deposits minus all withdrawals. Unfortunately, while we have transactions data beginning in
January 2007, we do not have the initial balances for the first period of our data (January 2007),
and cannot merely assume that these equal zero because we know from the average balance data
that a non-trivial portion of beneficiaries do save in their accounts prior to 2007, as we discuss in
Section 5.3. Thus, to construct a reliable estimate of end-of-period balance we combine data on
the average balance for each period with transactions-level data on the timing and amount of each
transaction (see Appendix D for details).
We estimate (1) using account i’s end-of-period balance in period t as the dependent variable.24
The φk terms thus measure the causal effect of debit cards on the stock of savings k periods after
receiving a card. Figure 7 plots the φk coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals. We note the
empirical support for parallel trends, shown by the zero coefficients for pre-event periods, k < 0.25
In the first few periods after receiving a card, we observe a small savings effect of 100 to 200 pesos
(about US$8 to 15). The initial effect is small because only a minority of beneficiaries begin saving
shortly after receiving a card—we explore this further below. Savings increase substantially after
24 Following other papers measuring savings (e.g., Kast, Meier and Pomeranz, 2018), we winsorize savings balances
at the 95th percentile to avoid results driven by outliers.
25 In 8 of the 9 pre-treatment periods, there is no statistically significant difference between the savings balance of
the treatment and control groups.

17

about one year with the card: three four-month periods after card receipt, the savings effect is 448
pesos, while it is 753 pesos after two years with the card. These effect sizes are equal to 1.2 and
2.0% of annual income, respectively, and are larger than the effect sizes found in other studies of
savings interventions (Figure 1).
The effect of debit cards on the average stock of savings from Figure 7 combines two effects:
the impact of debit cards on the probability of saving and the saving amount conditional on saving.
Figure 8 decomposes these two components. Figure 8a shows the proportion of treated beneficiaries who have at least a small positive balance at the end of each period: while only 13% of
beneficiaries saved in their account in the period before receiving cards, an additional 16% start
saving immediately after receiving a card.26 For these beneficiaries, it is likely that the reduction
in the transaction costs of accessing savings provided by the cards was a sufficient condition to
save in a formal bank account. The proportion of beneficiaries who save in their Bansefi accounts
increases over time: after nearly one year with the card, 42% of beneficiaries save in the account,
and after two years nearly all beneficiaries (87%) save in their Bansefi account.
To estimate the second component, i.e. the amount of savings conditional on having started
to save, we define a new event as the period in which a beneficiary begins saving (rather than
when the beneficiary receives a card). This event is not causal—it occurs at different points in
time for different beneficiaries, due to both the quasi-exogenous timing of receiving cards and the
endogenous timing of when they choose to start saving once they receive the card. Our goal with
this estimation is merely descriptive: to estimate the amount of savings each period after having
started to save. We estimate (1) using this new event and show the results in Figure 8b.27 In the first
period when beneficiaries save in the account, they deposit 589 pesos on average, or 4.7% of their
total income that period. They deposit significantly less in the following periods, consistent with
models of precautionary saving in which an individual’s savings rate is decreasing in her stock of
savings as it approaches her buffer stock target (Carroll, 1997).
5.3

Equilibrium Buffer Stock

How much savings are beneficiaries trying to accumulate in equilibrium as a buffer stock? Since
many beneficiaries are still accumulating savings after two years with the card, when our data end,
26 We set the threshold for a “small positive balance” at 150 pesos, given that balances below 50 or 100 pesos could
be due to ATMs not disbursing exact change rather than voluntary savings.
27 Because the majority do not begin saving until they have had the card for a year, we only graph the savings stock
for three post-saving periods (as further-period estimates would be based solely on the small sample of earlier savers).

18

we do not have sufficient time periods to directly measure their equilibrium buffer stock. Instead,
we provide an indirect estimate of the beneficiaries’ buffer stock target, following the precautionary
savings literature. The precautionary savings motive (Deaton, 1991) leads to a savings target, and
as a result, an individual’s savings rate is decreasing in her stock of savings as it approaches the
target (Carroll, 1997).
Hence, we model the flow of savings in a particular period, denoted ∆Savingsit ≡ Savingsit −
Savingsi,t−1 (where Savingsit is beneficiary i’s stock of savings in period t), as a function of the
existing stock of savings in the previous period and transfers in the current period.28 We implement
this as a linear model and include time-period fixed effects:
∆Savingsit = δt + θ Savingsi,t−1 + γTrans f erit + εit .

(5)

In order to identify the effects of the debit card on the savings rate over time, we include timesince-saving event dummies (following equation 1) and also interact the lagged stock of savings
and current transfers with these time-since-saving event dummies.29 We define events as the (endogenous) period in which a beneficiary begins saving, since we are interested in the dynamics of
28 Ideally

we would implement this model using total savings and total income but we are restricted to using bank
account information. We therefore estimate the change in end-of-period balances (rather than change in total savings)
as a function of lagged end-of-period balances (instead of lagged total savings) and transfers received during the period
(instead of total income). Under a set of assumptions which appear to hold in our setting, we can interpret the results
as corresponding to the equilibrium buffer stock of overall savings. Specifically, we need to assume that (i) there are
no deposits into the account other than the transfer, (ii) having a debit card does not affect other income sources, and
(iii) having a debit card does not affect non-account savings. Evidence for assumption (i) is in Figure 5, evidence for
(ii) is in Table 4, and evidence for (iii) comes from our comparison of magnitudes in Figure 7 and Table 4.
29 Therefore, we estimate
b

∆Savingsit = δt +

∑
∗

k =0

b

αk∗ Dkit +θ Savingsi,t−1 +

∑
∗

b

∗

ξk Dkit ×Savingsi,t−1 +γTrans f ersit +

k =0

∗

ψk Dkit ×Trans f ersit +εit
∑
∗

k =0

where k∗ denotes periods relative to starting to save. We do not include individual fixed effects, since including
individual fixed effects and a lagged dependent variable would bias our estimates (Nickell, 1981). The savings rate k∗
periods after starting to save is
Φ̂k∗ ≡ (α̂k∗ + ξˆk∗ ωk∗ −1 + ψ̂k∗ µk∗ )/Y ,
where ωk∗ −1 is average lagged end-of-period balance and µk∗ is average transfers k∗ periods after starting to save; Y
is average income. The numerator gives the difference between treatment and control in the flow of savings in pesos;
the denominator divides by average income to obtain the savings rate. The denominator is average beneficiary income
from the household survey (since total income is not available in the administrative data) and merely scales the results
to make them more interpretable. We use the delta method to estimate standard errors and to construct confidence
intervals.

19

savings once beneficiaries start to save. Hence, we restrict the sample to beneficiaries who started
saving at some point during the study period (87% of treated beneficiaries) and to the pure control
group in our estimation.
Figure 9 shows the proportion of income saved in each period relative to the period in which
the beneficiary started to save. In the first period after beginning to save, the average beneficiary
saves 4.3% of income, and this falls over time (to a savings rate of 3.4% of income after one year
of saving) as her stock of savings approaches her target. Models of precautionary saving predict
that the savings rate should fall once a positive savings balance is achieved, with the savings rate
dampened by a negative coefficient on lagged balance. We indeed find θ = −0.58 < 0 (with a
standard error of 0.02).
To estimate the equilibrium buffer stock, we note that once a beneficiary has reached her equilibrium buffer stock, Savingsit = Savingsi,t−1 ; we plug this restriction into (5) together with our
estimated coefficients to solve for equilibrium savings for those with a card. We predict that the
average equilibrium buffer stock is 1008 pesos (US$78). To put this quantity in context, it equals
2.7% of beneficiaries’ annual income. After one year of saving in the account (and up to two years
with the card), the beneficiaries who save—who make up 87% of beneficiaries—have accumulated
76% of their desired buffer stock on average.
6

Increase in Overall Savings vs. Substitution

The increase in formal savings in beneficiaries’ Bansefi accounts might represent a shift from other
forms of saving, such as saving under the mattress or in informal saving clubs, with no change
in overall savings. This section investigates whether the observed increase in Bansefi account
savings represents an increase in overall savings or crowds out other savings. We take advantage
of Oportunidades’ Household Panel Survey, conducted in four waves during the years 2002, 2003,
2004 and November 2009 to February 2010.
We use a simple difference-in-differences identification strategy where we examine changes in
beneficiaries’ consumption, income, and stock of assets, again exploiting the differential timing of
debit card receipt. We compare trends of those with cards at the time of the fourth survey wave to
those who had not yet received cards. Section 4 formally tested for parallel pre-treatment trends for
each dependent variable and failed to reject the null hypothesis of parallel trends. We estimate (2)
in columns 1–3 and (2) with the additional interaction of time fixed effects and baseline household
characteristics in column 4, separately for three dependent variables: consumption, income, and

20

an asset index.30 The additional interaction of time fixed effects and baseline household characteristics follows de Janvry et al. (2015), and absorbs variation in how the dependent variable evolves
over time for different types of households.
Table 4, column 4 shows that consumption decreased by about 154 pesos per month among
treated households relative to control (statistically significant at the 5% level). We do not find any
effect on income. We also test the difference in the coefficients of consumption and income using a
stacked regression (which is equivalent to seemingly unrelated regression when the same regressors
are used in each equation, as is the case here); although both consumption and income are noisily
measured, the difference in the coefficients is significant at the 5 or 10% level in all specifications
(the p-value of the F-test of equality of the coefficients on consumption and income is 0.062 in
column 4). Table 4, columns 1–3 show that our results are robust to the extent of winsorizing and
to removing the controls for flexible time trends as a function of household characteristics.
The point estimates of the effect of debit cards on consumption and lack of effect on income
suggest that the increase in formal savings shown in Section 5 represents an increase in total savings
(since total savings is income minus consumption). To compare estimates from the survey and
administrative data, we first note that the survey estimate on reduced consumption—which equals
4.9% of income—is measured as a flow at a specific point in time relative to receiving a card.
Specifically, this survey estimate corresponds to the effect of a card on the flow of consumption
after approximately one year.31 The timing of this effect matters for our comparison given our
finding from the administrative data that the savings stock does not evolve linearly over time.
We therefore compare our estimate of the reduction in consumption from the survey (4.9% of
income) to the change in the flow of savings after one year with the card, for a comparable set of
beneficiaries in the administrative data. We achieve this by restricting the administrative data for
this comparison to the same set of treatment localities included in our survey estimates.32 We then
compute the change in the average ∆Savingsit for this subset of the administrative data, where we
restrict t to the period after exactly one year with the card. For ease of interpretation, we divide this
30 Standard errors shown in parentheses are cluster-robust asymptotic standard errors, clustered at the locality level.
There are 46 localities in our estimation sample from the survey. We also show wild cluster bootstrap percentile-t 95%
confidence intervals in square brackets.
31 This is because the treated localities included in the post-treatment survey wave were deliberately selected to be
primarily the localities that received cards at the beginning of the rollout; see Figure B.1. We exclude beneficiaries in
the survey who live in localities that received cards shortly before the survey wave.
32 We cannot restrict to the exact same accounts because we lack an identifier that would allow us to merge the two
data sources at the account/beneficiary level.

21

change in the flow of savings after one year with the card, which is measured in pesos, by average
income (taken from the survey).33 This gives us an estimate of the effect of debit cards on the flow
of formal savings of 4.6% of income, which is within 0.2% of income—or less than 50 cents per
month—of our survey estimate of reduced consumption. Furthermore, each of the two estimates
is within the 95% confidence interval of the other.
As in most household surveys, however, our estimates of the change in consumption are noisy:
while we can reject that the increase in formal savings was purely substitution from other forms of
saving, we cannot rule out that some but not all of the increase in formal savings was substitution.
To maximize power, we focus on the specification from Table 4 column 4, which absorbs additional
variation in how the dependent variable evolves over time for different types of households by
including time fixed effects interacted with baseline household characteristics. The lower bound
of the 95% confidence interval estimated using a percentile-t wild cluster bootstrap is a reduction
in consumption equal to 33 pesos per month or 1.0% of income; the lower bound of the 90%
confidence interval is 50 pesos per month or 1.6% of income.
The finding that consumption appears to decrease by the same amount as formal savings increase, while income does not appear to change, provides evidence that the increase in formal
savings represents new savings rather than substitution from other forms of saving. We can also
use the survey data to test whether the increase in formal savings observed in the administrative
bank account data crowds out a particular form of informal saving: investment in durable assets.
We test whether beneficiary households are disinvesting in assets by using a measure of the stock
of assets: an asset index. We find that the difference-in-differences coefficients on this measure
are small and statistically insignificant. This suggests that, at least in the first year after receiving
a card, beneficiaries are not substituting informal savings in assets to formal savings in the bank.
Nevertheless, it does not rule out that they might do so in the future, or that they might intend to
spend their account savings on durable assets in the future, such that we might see an effect on
assets if we had survey data over a longer time horizon.

33 As

usual, ∆ is computed relative to the preceding four-month period. The change in ∆Savingsit is relative to
the period before receiving cards (when, in any event, beneficiaries were not accumulating savings in their accounts).
Since the change in the flow of savings in pesos is calculated for a four-month period, we convert monthly income
from the survey to four-month income before dividing.

22

7

Mechanisms

The card decreases indirect transaction costs to both access savings and monitor account balances.
In this section we provide evidence that both mechanisms are at work in causing the increased
active use of the accounts and the large increase in savings. We also explore other potential mechanisms such as learning the ATM technology.
7.1

Transaction Costs to Access Account

Consistent with economic theory on the effect of an immediate decrease in transaction costs (Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956), we observe an immediate increase in the number of withdrawals per period (Figure 6). The percentage of clients who use their debit card to make at least one withdrawal
at an ATM or convenience store instead of going to the bank branch also increases immediately
after receiving the card—to about 85% of beneficiaries—and then is fairly stable in subsequent
periods (Figure 4). We also observe that 16% of beneficiaries were not saving prior to receiving
a debit card and begin saving immediately after receiving the card, likely due to the change in
transaction costs (Figure 8a).
The immediate decrease in transaction costs provided by debit cards cannot, however, explain
the gradual increase over time in the proportion of beneficiaries who save in their Bansefi accounts
after receiving cards (Figure 8a). The only way transaction costs could solely explain the increase
in savings caused by debit cards—and in particular the gradual increase over time with the card
in the proportion of beneficiaries who save—would be if transaction costs were also gradually
changing over time. This, however, would be inconsistent with the immediate increase and then
relatively flat time profile of both the proportion of beneficiaries who withdraw their benefits at
ATMs (Figure 4) and the number of withdrawals per period (Figure 6).
In addition, there is substantial direct evidence that changing transaction costs over time cannot
explain the gradual increase in the proportion who save. First, we test and rule out that banks
disproportionately expanded complementary infrastructure (e.g., the number of ATMs) in treated
localities, which would further decrease the transaction cost of accessing funds in a way that is
geographically correlated with the debit card expansion. We use quarterly data on the number
of ATMs and bank branches by municipality from the Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores
(CNBV), from the last quarter of 2008—the first quarter with available data—through the last

23

quarter of 2011. We estimate a difference-in-differences specification with six leads and lags,
6

ymt = λm + δt +

∑

βk Dm,t+k + εmt ,

(6)

k=−6

where ymt is the number of total ATMs, total bank branches, Bansefi ATMs, or Bansefi branches
in municipality m in quarter t, and Dmt equals one if at least one locality in municipality m has
Oportunidades debit cards in quarter t. We conduct an F-test of whether lags of debit card receipt
predict banking infrastructure (i.e., whether there is a supply-side response by banks to the rollout
of debit cards: β−6 = · · · = β−1 = 0), and an F-test of whether leads of debit card receipt predict
banking infrastructure (i.e., whether debit cards were first rolled out in municipalities with a recent
expansion of banking infrastructure: β1 = · · · = β6 = 0). We find evidence of neither relationship
(Table B.2).
Second, we test whether the increase in the proportion of savers over time with the card could
be explained by a concurrent increase in the number of ATMs across all localities. Only beneficiaries in treatment localities can access money at ATMs and hence take advantage of an expansion
of ATMs. If the gradual increase in the proportion saving over time is due to a gradual decrease
in transaction costs that is uncorrelated with the geographical expansion of debit cards, we would
also expect savings to increase among Bansefi debit card holders who are not Oportunidades beneficiaries. We look at mean savings among non-Oportunidades debit card account holders who
opened their accounts in 2007 and hence have had the account for about two years when our study
period begins. Figure B.7 shows that savings among non-Oportunidades debit card holders do not
increase over the study time period, and instead stay relatively flat. This suggests that the increase
over time in the proportion who save cannot be explained by a gradual decrease in transaction costs
over time.
Third, beneficiaries’ perceptions of transaction costs might change even if transaction costs
remain constant over time with the card. For example, perhaps they are checking balances to learn
about direct transaction costs (i.e., fees), in which case they would check balances less frequently
once transaction costs are learned. We directly test and rule out this hypothesis using the Payment
Methods Survey, which asks beneficiaries how much the bank charges them for (i) a balance check
and (ii) a withdrawal after the initial free withdrawals. We find that beneficiaries get the level of
these fees about right and, more important, that there is no difference across beneficiaries who have
had the card for less vs. more than the median time (Figure B.8a).
24

In sum, the debit cards lead to an immediate change in transaction costs to access savings,
which causes an immediate increase in the number of withdrawals per period and an immediate
increase in the proportion who save. However, the proportion who save continues to increase over
a two-year period, and this effect cannot be explained solely by transaction costs to access money.
7.2

Monitoring Costs and Trust

Trust in financial institutions is low worldwide (Figure B.9) and is positively associated with saving
in formal bank accounts (Figure B.10). Furthermore, a lack of trust in banks is frequently cited
by the poor as a primary reason for not saving (Dupas et al., 2016; FDIC, 2016). The time delay
between receiving the debit card and starting to save (for most beneficiaries) is consistent with
the hypothesis that the debit card reduces the indirect cost of checking account balances, leading
to an increase in balance checks to monitor that the bank is not regularly reducing beneficiaries’
account balances. Although a beneficiary could check her balance at Bansefi branches prior to
receiving the card, the debit card makes it much more convenient since it allows balance checks
at any bank’s ATM. The median household lives 4.8 kilometers (using the shortest road distance)
from the nearest Bansefi branch, compared to 1.3 kilometers from an ATM (Bachas et al., 2018).
Under this hypothesis, each additional balance check provides additional information about the
bank’s trustworthiness. With simple Bayesian learning, balance checks have a decreasing marginal
benefit as a beneficiary updates her beliefs about the bank’s trustworthiness, which would lead to
a decrease in the number of balance checks over time. Hence, over time with the card, we expect
the number of balance checks to fall and trust to rise.
We test this mechanism in three steps. First, we show that balance checks fall over time in
both administrative and survey data. Second, we examine whether higher savings balances are
negatively correlated with the number of balance checks within accounts in the administrative
data, as they should be if beneficiaries begin saving once they’ve used the card to monitor the bank
and build trust through balance checks. Third, we use survey data to test whether self-reported
trust in the bank increases over time with the card.
7.2.1

Balance Checks Fall Over Time with the Debit Card

We first use the Bansefi transactions data to test whether balance checks fall over time with the
card. We only observe balance checks once beneficiaries have debit cards, which restricts our

25

analysis to the treatment group and to periods after the card is received.34 On average (pooling
data across periods after beneficiaries receive cards), beneficiaries check their balances 1.7 times
per four-month period. To test the hypothesis of a decreasing time trend in balance checking, we
regress the number of balance checks on account fixed effects and event-time dummies (omitting
the last period with the card):
ki −1

Balance Checksit = λi +

∑ πk Dkit + εit .

(7)

k=0

The πk coefficients estimate the number of balance checks k periods after receiving the card relative to the last period in the sample (July–October 2011), which depending on the beneficiary
corresponds to one to two years after receipt of the card.35
Figure 10a plots the πk coefficients using any balance check to construct the dependent variable,
and shows that the number of balance checks in the periods following receipt of the debit card is
higher than in later periods. For example, in the period after receiving the card, beneficiaries make
an average of 0.9 more balance checks compared to two years after receiving the card. After having
the card for about one year, this falls to about 0.4 more checks.
For learning to occur, beneficiaries need a positive balance in their account at the time of
checking. We find that in the four months after getting the card, 89% of accounts have a positive
(small) balance at the time of a balance check after receipt of the transfer: the 25th percentile of
balances at the time of a balance check is 20 pesos, the median is 55 pesos, and the 75th percentile
is 110 pesos.36
To ensure that a balance check constitutes bank monitoring and not just checking that the
Oportunidades deposit arrived, we additionally use two alternative, more restrictive definitions of

34 We do not observe balance checks at Bansefi branches in the transaction data since these are not charged a fee.
However, it is unlikely that many beneficiaries used this mechanism to monitor the bank prior to receiving a card due
to the high costs of traveling to the nearest Bansefi branch.
35 k denotes the last period with the card for account i in our data, which varies depending on when i received
i
a card. We do not include time fixed effects since we can only include treated beneficiaries after treatment in the
regression, and the within-account trend in balance checks over time (among this group) is precisely the variation we
are exploiting. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level.
36 For these statistics, because we do not have initial January 2007 balance (and hence do not know the precise
balance at any point in time), we take the conservative approach of defining a balance as positive if the cumulative
transfer amount minus the cumulative withdrawal amount in the bimester is positive at the time of the balance check.
This is a sufficient but not necessary condition for the balance to be positive.

26

a balance check.37 The first alternative definition excludes all balance checks that occurred prior
to the transfer being deposited that bimester, and also excludes balance checks that occur on the
same day as a withdrawal. The idea is that if a beneficiary is checking whether the transfer has
arrived, and she finds that it has, she would likely withdraw it that same day. An even more
conservative definition only includes balance checks that occur after that bimester’s transfer has
arrived and the client has already made a subsequent withdrawal. Because the next transfer would
not arrive until the following bimester and the beneficiary has already made a withdrawal after the
transfer arrived in the current bimester, the beneficiary knows that the current bimester’s transfer
has arrived. Hence, these checks cannot be an attempt to see if the transfer has arrived. Figures 10b
and 10c plot the results with these two alternative definitions and show a very similar decrease in
balance checks over time.
We validate the above results using survey data from the Payment Methods Survey. Specifically, we estimate (4) using the self-reported number of balance checks without withdrawing cash
over the past four-month period as the dependent variable. Figure 10d shows that those who have
had the card for more than the median time (12 months) report making 31% fewer trips to the ATM
to check their balances without withdrawing money than those who have had the card for less time.
The self-reported survey responses thus confirm the findings from the administrative data, and also
show that balance checking behavior is salient for beneficiaries.
7.2.2

Negative Correlation between Balance Checks and Savings Balances

Our hypothesis—that monitoring balances leads to increased trust which leads to increased savings
—predicts that there will be a negative correlation between balance checks and savings within
accounts. To test this, we estimate
Savingsit = λi + ∑ ηc I(Checksit = c) + εit ,

(8)

c6=0

where Savingsit is the end-of-period balance in account i at time t, the λi are account-level (i.e.,
beneficiary) fixed effects, and Checksit is the number of balance checks in account i over period t,
which we top code at 5 to avoid having many dummies for categories of high numbers of balance

37 Note

that beneficiaries were given calendars with exact transfer dates and hence should know the dates on which
transfers are deposited; see Figure C.3. Figure B.11 illustrates the three definitions of balance checks that we use.

27

checks with few observations.38 The ηc coefficients thus measure the within-account correlation
between the stock of savings and number of balance checks, relative to the omitted zero balance
checks (c = 0) category. Our hypothesis suggests that ηc < 0, and that ηc is decreasing (i.e.,
becoming more negative) in c.
Figure 11 shows the results. Account balances are indeed negatively correlated with the number
of balance checks within accounts. Using any of the three definitions of balance checks described
earlier, ηc is less than 0 and decreasing in c. Furthermore, the negative correlation between savings
and balance checks is stronger when we restrict the definition of balance checks to those that we
argued earlier are more likely to be the type of checks used to monitor the bank. Using balance
checks that occur only after the beneficiary has already made a withdrawal in the same bimester
(panel c), we find that beneficiaries who make one balance check save 300 pesos less than those
who make no balance checks, while beneficiaries who make 3 or more balance checks save nearly
500 pesos less.
7.2.3

Trust Increases over Time with the Debit Card

We now test the hypothesis that longer tenure with the debit card induces higher trust in the bank.
As described in Section 3.2, the Trust Survey first asks the beneficiary if she saves in her Bansefi
bank account, and if she answers no, it asks why not. If she does not save in the account and
indicates that she does not trust the bank, we code lack of trust as 1; otherwise (including if the
beneficiary saves in the account) we code lack of trust as 0.
We estimate (4) with lack of trust as the dependent variable, again exploiting the exogenous
variation in the length of time beneficiaries have had the card. As explained in Section 4, to
interpret γ in (4) as a causal effect we need to assume that time with the card is orthogonal to our
potential outcomes of interest. The balance tests conducted for the Trust Survey sample support
this assumption (Table 3a), as does the finding that conditional on being included in the debit card
rollout, the timing of when cards were distributed to the locality is uncorrelated with observables
(Table 2 and Figure 3). Figure 12 shows that trust increases over time: beneficiaries with more
than the median time with the card are 33% less likely to report not saving due to low trust.39
38 We do not include time fixed effects since we can only include treated beneficiaries after treatment in the regression, and the within-account changes in the stock of savings over time (among this group) is precisely the variation we
are exploiting. Furthermore, we restrict to beneficiaries who save at some point after receiving a debit card, as other
beneficiaries have no variation over time in the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level.
39 Note that because of the timing of the Trust Survey, those with the card for less than the median time have still
had the card for at least 9 months, meaning that some of them would have likely developed trust in the bank prior to

28

For comparison, Figure 12 also shows results for two alternative forms of learning discussed in
Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2: learning to use the technology and learning that the program will not drop
beneficiaries who accumulate savings. Few beneficiaries report these as reasons for not saving, and
the proportion does not change over time with the card.
7.3

Learning

The time delay for many beneficiaries between getting the card and saving suggests some type of
learning. Monitoring the bank and building trust is one type of learning; in this section we explore
evidence that other types of learning are occurring. We do not find evidence of these other types
of learning.
7.3.1

Learning the Technology

Learning how to use the technology would have to occur gradually over time to explain our results.
However, in addition to the survey evidence against this form of learning that we present below,
learning the technology is inconsistent with the result from the administrative data that the number
of withdrawals and use of ATMs increase immediately after receiving the card and remain fairly
stable over time afterwards.
Beneficiaries could be learning how to use their debit cards over time. The Payment Methods
Survey asks each respondent whether (i) it is hard to use the ATM, (ii) she gets help using the
ATM, and (iii) she knows her PIN by heart. We use these three questions as dependent variables in
(4). Figure B.8b shows that there is no statistically significant difference between the group who
have had the card for less vs. more than the median time. Beneficiaries could instead be learning
how to save in the account (rather than how to use the card). This is unlikely as these beneficiaries
have already had the account for years prior to receiving a debit card. Consistent with this, less
than 2% respondents to the Trust Survey cite not saving due to lack of knowledge.40 Moreover,
there is no difference between those who have had the card for less vs. more than the median time
(Figure 12).

being surveyed. Those with more than the median time with the card have had it for 5 months longer on average. If
anything, this may bias our results downward relative to what we would find if it were possible to compare those who
have a sufficient tenure with the card to those who have not yet received the card.
40 Examples of responses coded as lack of knowledge are “I don’t know how to use the card so I withdraw everything
at once” and “I don’t know how [to save in the account].”

29

7.3.2

Learning the Program Rules

Beneficiaries may have initially thought that saving in the account would make them ineligible
for the program, but learned over time that this was not the case. In the Trust Survey, there are
some responses along these lines such as “because if I save in the account, they can drop me from
Oportunidades.” We thus estimate (4) with the dependent variable equal to 1 if respondents do not
save for this reason. Less than 4% of beneficiaries do not save due to fear of being dropped from
the program, and the proportion does not change when comparing those who have had the card for
less vs. more than the median time (Figure 12).
7.3.3

Time with the Bank Account

Experience with the savings account rather than time with the debit card itself cannot explain
the delayed savings effect. First, savings accounts were rolled out between 2002 and 2005, and
therefore beneficiaries had several years of experience with the account when debit cards were first
introduced in 2009. Second, both treatment and control accounts are accumulating time with their
savings accounts simultaneously, and have had accounts for the same amount of time on average.
Third, our results from Section 5 include account fixed effects, so any time-invariant effect of
having the account for a longer period of time would be absorbed.
8

Conclusion

Debit cards tied to savings accounts could be a promising avenue to facilitate formal savings, as
debit cards reduce transaction costs and provide a mechanism to check balances and build trust in
financial institutions. We find large effects of debit cards on savings. The debit cards were rolled
out over time to beneficiaries of Mexico’s cash transfer program Oportunidades, who were already
receiving their benefits in a bank account, but who—for the most part—were not saving in their
accounts. After two years with a debit card, beneficiaries increase their stock of savings by 2% of
annual income. Extrapolating our estimates from a precautionary savings model to future periods,
we predict that beneficiaries are saving towards an equilibrium buffer stock of 2.7% of annual
income. The effect we find is larger than that of various other savings interventions, including
offering commitment devices, no-fee accounts, higher interest rates, lower transaction costs, and
financial education. Furthermore, this effect arises in an at-scale policy change affecting hundreds
of thousands of cash transfer beneficiaries across the country.
Both low transaction costs to access savings and trust in banks appear to be necessary but
not (individually) sufficient conditions to save in formal financial institutions. Thus, high indirect
30

transaction costs and low trust could potentially explain why a number of studies offering savings
accounts with no fees or minimum balance requirements have found low take-up and, even among
adopters, low use of the accounts.
While we are not able to directly assess the welfare implications of this policy, a growing literature suggests that enabling the poor to save in formal financial institutions leads to increased
welfare through greater investment, wealth accumulation, and ability to cope with shocks, leading
to higher long-term consumption. It is worth noting that beneficiaries with the debit card voluntarily use the technology and accumulate savings in their accounts (whereas they could continue
withdrawing all of their benefits from the bank branch, as they did prior to receiving the card); this
indicates a revealed preference for saving in formal financial institutions once transaction costs are
lowered and trust is built. Furthermore, beneficiary survey responses in the Trust Survey indicate
that satisfaction with the payment method is higher after receiving the debit card, particularly for
those who have had the card longer: 75% of beneficiaries who have had the card for at least 14
months (the median time) indicate that receiving payment by debit card is better than before.41
Taken together, these results suggest that combining debit cards (or other financial technologies that reduce transaction costs of accessing money and monitoring the bank) with government
cash transfer programs or direct deposit from employers could be a promising channel to increase
financial inclusion and enable the poor to save.

41 Another

13% report that being paid by debit card is the same as before, and 5% worse than before.

31

References
Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martínez, and Dean Yang. 2015. “Savings in Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among Migrants From El Salvador.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97: 332–351.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Luigi Guiso, and Tullio Jappelli. 2002. “The Demand for Money, Financial
Innovation, and the Welfare Cost of Inflation: An Analysis With Household Data.” Journal of
Political Economy, 110: 317–351.
Bachas, Pierre, Paul Gertler, Sean Higgins, and Enrique Seira. 2018. “Digital Financial Services Go a Long Way: Transaction Costs and Financial Inclusion.” American Economic Association Papers & Proceedings, 108: 444–448.
Baumol, William J. 1952. “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66: 545–556.
Borusyak, Kirill, and Xavier Jaravel. 2016. “Revisiting Event Study Designs.”
Breza, Emily, and Arun G. Chandrasekhar. 2019. “Social Networks, Reputation, and Commitment: Evidence From a Savings Monitors Experiment.” Econometrica, 87: 175–216.
Bruhn, Miriam, and Inessa Love. 2014. “The Real Impact of Improved Access to Finance: Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Finance, 69: 1347–1376.
Callen, Michael, Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff. forthcoming.
“What Are the Headwaters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence From Sri Lanka.” Review
of Economic Studies.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 1–55.
CGAP. 2012. “Social Cash Transfers and Financial Inclusion: Evidence From Four Countries.”
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) Focus Note 77.
Célérier, Claire, and Adrien Matray. forthcoming. “Bank Branch Supply, Financial Inclusion
and Wealth Accumulation.” Review of Financial Studies.
Cole, Shawn, Xavier Giné, Jeremy Tobacman, Peta Topalova, Robert Townsend, and James
Vickery. 2013. “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence From India.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5: 104–135.
Deaton, Angus. 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica, 59: 1221–1248.
de Janvry, Alain, Kyle Emerick, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2015.
“Delinking Land Rights From Land Use: Certification and Migration in Mexico.” American
Economic Review, 105: 3125–3149.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess. 2018.
“The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution.”
World Bank Report.
Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. 2018. “Banking the Unbanked? Evidence From Three Countries.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
10: 257—-297.
32

Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson. 2016. “Challenges
in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence From Kenya’s Western Province.” In Modernization and
Development. , ed. Sebastian Edwards, Simon Johnson and David N. Weil. Chicago:University
of Chicago Press.
FDIC. 2016. “Bank Efforts to Serve Unbanked and Underbanked Consumers.”
Federal Reserve. 2017. “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016.”
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul Gertler, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality.” Journal of Political Economy,
113(1): 83–120.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development.” American Economic Review, 49: 526–556.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Trusting the Stock Market.” Journal
of Finance, 63: 2557–2600.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional
Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence From Kenya.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131: 1973–2042.
Higgins, Sean. 2019. “Financial Technology Adoption.”
Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2014. “Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence From
Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution.” American Economic Review, 104: 183–223.
Johnson, Eric J, Stephan Meier, and Olivier Toubia. 2019. “What’s the Catch? Suspicion of
Bank Motives and Sluggish Refinancing.” Review of Financial Studies, 32: 467–495.
Karlan, Dean, Aishwarya Lakshmi Ratan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Savings by and for
the Poor: A Research Review and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth, 60: 36–78.
Karlan, Dean, Jake Kendall, Rebecca Mann, Rohini Pande, Tavneet Suri, and Jonathan
Zinman. 2016. “Research and Impacts of Digital Financial Services.”
Karlan, Dean, Markus Mobius, Tanya Rosenblat, and Adam Szeidl. 2009. “Trust and Social
Collateral.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124: 1307–1361.
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz. 2018. “Saving More in Groups: Field Experimental Evidence From Chile.” Journal of Development Economics, 133: 275–294.
Labonne, Julien, and Robert Chase. 2010. “A Road to Trust.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 74: 253–261.
McCrary, Justin. 2007. “The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and
Quality of Police.” American Economic Review, 97: 318–353.
Mehrotra, Rahul, Lore Vandewalle, and Vincent Somville. forthcoming. “Increasing Trust in
the Bank to Enhance Savings: Experimental Evidence from India.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change.
Morduch, Jonathan, and Rachel Schneider. 2017. The Financial Diaries: How American Families Cope in a World of Uncertainty. Princeton University Press.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2016. “Building State Capacity: Evidence From Biometric Smartcards in India.” American Economic Review, 106: 2895–
33

2929.
Nickell, Stephen. 1981. “Biases in Dynamic Models With Fixed Effects.” Econometrica,
49: 1417–1426.
Osili, Una Okonkwo, and Anna Paulson. 2014. “Crises and Confidence: Systemic Banking
Crises and Depositor Behavior.” Journal of Financial Economics, 111(3): 646–660.
Parker, Susan W., and Petra E. Todd. 2017. “Conditional Cash Transfers: The Case of Progresa/Oportunidades.” Journal of Economic Literature, 55: 866–915.
Schaner, Simone. 2017. “The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining, and Savings
Account Use in Kenya.” Journal of Human Resources, 52: 919–943.
Somville, Vincent, and Lore Vandewalle. 2018. “Saving by Default: Evidence From a Field
Experiment in Rural India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10: 39–66.
Stein, Luke C., and Constantine Yannelis. 2019. “Financial Inclusion, Human Capital, and
Wealth Accumulation: Evidence from the Freedman’s Savings Bank.”
Suri, Tavneet, and William Jack. 2016. “The Long-Run Poverty and Gender Impacts of Mobile
Money.” Science, 354(6317): 1288–1292.
Tobin, James. 1956. “The Interest-Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 38: 241–247.
Zinman, Jonathan. 2009. “Credit or Debit?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 33: 358–366.

34

Figure 1: Comparison with Other Studies
Study

Intervention

Country

Months

Panel A: Studies with about 1 year duration
Drexler, Fischer, and Schoar, 2014
Financial education
Karlan and Zinman, 2018
Interest rate
Kast, Meier, and Pomeranz, 2018
Savings group
Karlan et al., 2016
Reminders
Kast and Pomeranz, 2014
Account
Somville and Vandewalle, 2018
Payment default
Dupas and Robinson, 2013
Account or lockbox
Prina, 2015
Account
This paper (1 year)
Debit card
Seshan and Yang, 2014
Financial education

Dominican Republic
12
Philippines
12
Chile
12
Philippines
9−12
Chile
12
India
8
Kenya
12
Nepal
13
Mexico
12−15
India (migrants to Qatar) 13−17

Panel B: Studies with longer duration
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin, 2006
Dupas et al., 2018
Karlan et al., 2017
Dupas et al., 2018
Schaner, 2018
This paper (2 years)

Philippines
32
Malawi
24
Ghana, Malawi, Uganda 22−30
Uganda
24
Kenya
36
Mexico
20−23

Deposit collection
Account
Savings group
Account
Interest rate
Debit card

−0.02

Effect Size

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

Stock of Savings as Proportion of Annual Income

Notes: This figure compares the results from our study after 1 and 2 years with a debit card (orange squares) to other
studies of savings interventions, and shows that we find larger effects than most studies with a comparable duration.
Panel (a) shows studies with about a 1 year duration and panel (b) studies with a longer duration. The effect sizes
are intent-to-treat effects of the intervention on the stock of savings, measured as a proportion of annual income.
Appendix A details the selection criteria to determine which studies could be included and how we obtained their
effects on the stock of savings as a proportion of annual income. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Black
circles indicate results that are significant at the 5% level, gray circles at the 10% level, and hollow circles statistically
insignificant from 0.

35

Figure 2: Debit Card Rollout over Time and Space
(a) Timing of Rollout and Administrative Data
Oportunidades bank accounts with cards
Bansefi account balances and transactions
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000

Jan 02
May 02
Sep 02
Jan 03
May 03
Sep 03
Jan 04
May 04
Sep 04
Jan 05
May 05
Sep 05
Jan 06
May 06
Sep 06
Jan 07
May 07
Sep 07
Jan 08
May 08
Sep 08
Jan 09
May 09
Sep 09
Jan 10
May 10
Sep 10
Jan 11
May 11
Sep 11
Jan 12
May 12

0

(b) Geographic Coverage

Notes: This figure shows the number of Oportunidades bank accounts with debit cards over time (using administrative
data from Bansefi) and across space (using administrative data from Oportunidades). This was determined by the
staggered rollout of debit cards, which generated variation across space and time in having a debit card tied to the
bank account in which beneficiaries receive their benefits. Panel (a) compares the timing of the rollout to the timing
of the administrative bank account data and panel (b) shows the rollout across space.

36

Figure 3: Parallel Pre-trends
(a) Microdata from INEGI and Central Bank
Log wage

Log food prices

0.1

0.1

0.0

Log POS terminals
0.1

0.0

−0.1
−36

−24

−12

0

0.0

−0.1
−36

−24

−12

0

−0.1
−36

Months relative to switch to cards

Months since card shock

−24

−12

0

Months since card shock

(b) Municipality-level data from CNBV
Log ATMs

Log bank branches

Log debit and credit cards

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

−0.2

−0.3

−0.3

−0.3

−0.4
−24

−0.4
−24
0

−12

−12

0

−0.4
−24

Months relative to switch to cards

Months relative to switch to cards

−12

0

Months relative to switch to cards

(c) Microdata from Bansefi
Log stock of savings

Stock of savings (pesos)
100

Number of withdrawals

0.6

0.2

0.4
50

0.1
0.2

0

0.0

0.0

−0.2
−0.1

−50
−0.4
−100
−36

−24

−12

0

Months relative to switch to cards

−0.6
−36

−24

−12

0

Months relative to switch to cards

−0.2
−36

−24

−12

0

Months relative to switch to cards

Notes: This figure shows parallel pre-trends in variables from (a) microdata on wages from INEGI’s ENOE labor
force survey, food prices from 4 million product by store by month price quotes from INEGI, and point-of-sale terminal adoptions from Mexico’s Central Bank; (b) municipality-level data on financial variables from CNBV; and (c)
microdata from beneficiaries’ bank accounts. Point estimates are φk for k < 0 from (1), where k = −1 is the omitted
period. In the wage regression, i in (1) is a worker; in the food price regression, i is a product by store; in the POS
terminals regressions the data are aggregated to the locality level and i is a locality; in panel (b) the data are aggregated
to the municipality level and i is a municipality; in panel (c) i is a Bansefi account. The frequency of φk coefficients
depends on the frequency of each data set. Panel (b) only includes 24 rather than 36 months of pre-trends because the
CNBV data begin in the last quarter of 2008, so the sample of localities with more than 24 months pre-treatment is
very small. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level in panels (a) and (c), and at the municipality level—since
the data are only available by municipality, which is slightly larger than locality—in panel (b). Black circles indicate
results that are significant at the 5% level, and hollow circles
37 statistically insignificant from 0.

Figure 4: Share of Clients Using Debit Cards to Withdraw at ATMs
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
−9 −8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

5

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards
Notes: This figure shows the share of clients using their debit card for at least one withdrawal during a four month
period. It shows that beneficiaries immediately adopt the new technology and use their cards to withdraw their transfers, instead of going to the Bansefi bank branch. Note that in periods before the card the share of clients using debit
cards to withdraw at ATMs or convenience stores is necessarily zero. N = 3,362,690 account-period observations from
250,792 treated beneficiaries. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence
intervals. Dashed vertical line indicates timing of debit card receipt.

38

Figure 5: Distribution of Withdrawals and Client Deposits per Bimester
(a) Distribution of withdrawals

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0

1

2

3

0.0

4 or more

(b) Distribution of client deposits

Control
Treatment before cards
Treatment after cards

0

1

2

3

4 or more

Notes: This figure shows that after receiving a card, a substantial portion of beneficiaries began making 2, 3, or 4 or
more withdrawals per bimester rather than one. It shows the distribution of withdrawals per bimester in panel (a) and
of client deposits (i.e., excluding Oportunidades deposits) per bimester in panel (b). The three categories represent
accounts in the control group, the treatment group before receiving the cards and the treatment group after receiving
the card. Within each group, all account-bimester observations are included. Based on N = 35,236,129 transactions
from 348,802 beneficiaries over 5 years.

39

Figure 6: Effect of Debit Cards on Number of Withdrawals per Bimester
0.4

0.2

0.0

−0.2 −9 −8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

5

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards
Notes: This figure shows the effect of the debit card on the number of withdrawals per bimester. It plots the φk
coefficients from equation (1), where the dependent variable is number of withdrawals. N = 4,740,331 account-period
observations from 348,802 beneficiaries. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95%
confidence intervals. Black circles indicate results that are significant at the 5% level, and hollow circles statistically
insignificant from 0.

40

Figure 7: Effect of Debit Cards on the Stock of Savings (Pesos)
800

600

400

200

0
−9 −8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

5

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards
Notes: This figure shows the effect of debit cards on the stock of savings and the proportion who save. Dashed
vertical lines indicate timing of debit card receipt. It plots the φk coefficients from equation (1), where the dependent
variable is net savings balance. N = 4,664,772 account-period observations from 348,802 beneficiaries. Standard
errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Black circles indicate results that
are significant at the 5% level, and hollow circles statistically insignificant from 0.

41

Figure 8: Decomposition of Savings Effect
(a) Proportion Who Save

(b) Stock of Savings Conditional on Saving (Pesos)

1.0

800

0.8
600
0.6
400
0.4
200

0.2
0.0
−9 −8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

5

0

0

1

2

Four−month periods relative to starting to save

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards

Notes: This figure decomposes the effect of the debit card on the stock of savings into the extensive margin effect on
the proportion who save over time, and the intensive margin effect on the stock of savings conditional on saving. Panel
(a) shows the proportion of treated beneficiaries who save in each period relative to when they receive a debit card.
N = 3,183,050 account-period observations for 255,784 treated beneficiaries. Panel (b) plots φk from (1) with the
event time dummies redefined relative to when an individual starts saving in the account, and we impose a zero pretreatment trend by setting a = 0 (for reasons explained in Section 5.3). N = 4,416,750 account-period observations
from 348,802 beneficiaries. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence
intervals. Black circles indicate results that are significant at the 5% level.

42

Figure 9: Savings Rate Conditional on Saving (Proportion of Income)
0.045

0.040

0.035

0.030
1

0

2

Four−month periods relative to starting to save
Notes: This figure shows the savings rate conditional on saving, which we use as an input to estimate the equilibrium
buffer stock. N = 4,048,978 account-period observations for 348,774 beneficiaries. The lower number of accountperiod observations compared to Figure 7 is due to omitting a period to include lagged end-of-period balance. Standard
errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Black circles indicate results that
are significant at the 5% level.

43

Figure 10: Number of Balance Checks Over Time
(a) All Balance Checks

(b) Checks After Transfer Receipt

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards

1

2

3

4

5

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards

(c) Checks After 1st Withdrawal of Bimester

(d) Self-Reported Balance Checks
**

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards

5

Debit card < median time

Debit card > median time

Four−month periods relative to switch to cards

Notes: This figure shows the number of balance checks over time after receiving the card. Panels (a), (b), and (c) use
the administrative transactions data and express the number of balance checks relative to the last period in the data for
each observation. They plot the πk coefficients from (7). Dashed vertical lines indicate timing of debit card receipt.
Periods before receiving the card are not included since it was only possible to check balances at Bansefi branches,
and these balance checks are not recorded in our data. Each panel corresponds to a narrower definition of balance
checks, where the narrower definitions attempt to rule out balance checks for purposes other than monitoring the
bank. Panel (a) includes all balance checks, panel (b) balance checks after the transfer was received and on a different
day than a withdrawal, and panel (c) after the first withdrawal occurred in the bimester and on a different day than a
withdrawal (see Section 7.2.1). N = 848,664 account-period observations from 223,788 unique treated beneficiaries
with cards. Accounts in which cards are received in the last period of our data must be excluded in order to omit
a Dkit dummy; we also exclude those who receive the card in the second-to-last period in our data since they only
have one additional post-card period. Black circles indicate results that are significant at the 5% level, and hollow
circles statistically insignificant from 0. Panel (d) shows how self-reported balance checks without withdrawing cash
(from the Payment Methods Survey) differ based on time with the debit card, estimated with equation (4). Answers
are normalized to also cover four-month periods for comparability with the administrative results. It shows the
statistical significance of the difference in means, where ∗ indicates p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. N = 1,617
households in the survey. In all panels, standard errors are
44 clustered at the locality level and whiskers denote 95%
confidence intervals.

Figure 11: Within-Account Relation Between Balance Checks and Savings
Savings relative to 0 checks

(a) All Balance Checks

(c) After 1st Withdrawal

(b) After Transfer

0

0

0

−100

−100

−100

−200

−200

−200

−300

−300

−300

−400

−400

−500

−400
−500

−500
0

1
2
3
4
Number of Balance Checks

5

0

1
2
3
4
Number of Balance Checks

5

0

1
2
3
4
Number of Balance Checks

5

Notes: This figure shows the negative within-account correlation between the number of balance checks and savings
in the account, using the administrative savings and transactions data. It plots the nc coefficients from (8) Savingsit =
λi + ∑c6=0 ηc I(Checksit = c) + εit . Each panel corresponds to a narrower definition of balance checks, where the
narrower definitions attempt to rule out balance checks for purposes other than monitoring the bank. Panel (a) includes
all balance checks, panel (b) balance checks after the transfer was received and on a different day than a withdrawal,
and panel (c) after the first withdrawal occurred in the bimester and on a different day than a withdrawal. N = 577,295
account-bimester observations from 139,205 treated beneficiaries who began saving at some point after receiving a
debit card. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Black
circles indicate results that are significant at the 5% level, gray circles at the 10% level, and hollow circles statistically
insignificant from 0.

45

Proportion

Figure 12: Self-Reported Reasons for Not Saving in Bansefi Account
**
Debit card < median time
0.3
Debit card > median time

0.2

0.1

0.0

Lack of knowledge

Fear of ineligibility

Lack of trust

Reason for not saving in Bansefi account
Notes: This figure compares reasons for not saving in the Bansefi bank account among Oportunidades beneficiaries
who have had a debit card for less than vs. more than the median time. It compares the proportion of respondents
in each group who have provide the corresponding reason for not saving in response to the questions “Do you leave
part of the monetary support from Oportunidades in your bank account?” and if not, “Why don’t you keep part of the
monetary support from Oportunidades in your Bansefi savings account?” Beneficiaries who report saving are coded
as 0 for each reason for not saving and still included in the mean proportion measures and regressions. The statistical
significance of the difference in means is estimated with (4) and displayed at the top of the figure, where N = 1, 694
beneficiaries. ∗ indicates p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level.
Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals.

46

Table 1: Summary of Data Sources and Identification
Data Source

# Benef.

Period

Main Variables

Variation Used

(1) Administrative
bank account data
from Bansefi

348,802

Continuous panel:
Jan 2007–Oct 2011

Balances, transactions,
balance checks

Generalized differencein-differences (event study
with control) using phased
geographic rollout

(2) Household Panel
Survey from
Oportunidades
(ENCELURB)

2,868

Panel (four waves):
2002, 2003, 2004,
and Nov 2009–Feb
2010

Consumption, income, assets

Difference-in-differences:
received card in 2009
versus received card later

(3) Trust Survey
from Oportunidades
(ENCASDU)

1,694

Cross-section:
Oct–Nov 2010

Self-reported reasons for not
saving: e.g. lack of trust, lack
of knowledge

Tenure with card
below/above median time
in survey (median = 14
months)

(4) Payment
Methods Survey
from Oportunidades

1,617

Cross-section:
Jun 2012

Self-reported number of
balance checks, knowledge
of technology

Tenure with card
below/above median time
in survey (median = 12
months)

Notes: This table presents details for the four main data sources included in our paper.

47

Table 2: Summary Statistics and Discrete Time Hazard of Locality Characteristics
(1)

(2)

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Log point-of-sale terminals

4.47

2.11

∆ Log point-of-sale terminals

0.81

0.38

Log bank accounts

9.27

3.27

∆ Log bank accounts

1.78

3.61

Log commercial bank branches

2.58

1.42

∆ Log commercial bank branches

0.61

0.95

Log Bansefi bank branches

0.58

0.41

Log commercial bank ATMs

3.15

1.74

Log population

11.26

1.24

Mayor = PAN

19.58

39.77

−12.08

57.67

% illiterate (age 15+)

6.14

3.69

% not attending school (age 6-14)

4.15

1.65

% without primary education (age 15+)

40.98

9.59

% without health insurance

45.68

16.15

% with dirt floor

5.28

4.83

% without toilet

5.89

3.60

% without water

6.45

9.12

% without plumbing

3.94

6.39

% without electricity

4.29

2.24

% without washing machine

33.64

14.33

% without refrigerator

16.80

9.73

Variable

∆ Mayor = PAN

(3)
(4)
Discrete Time Hazard
Linear
Proportional
Probability
Hazard
0.0002
(0.0095)
−0.0260
(0.0185)
0.0061
(0.0052)
0.0049
(0.0065)
−0.0225
(0.0187)
−0.0215
(0.0240)
0.0033
(0.0241)
0.0130
(0.0103)
0.0117
(0.0159)
−0.0003
(0.0003)
0.0002
(0.0002)
0.0004
(0.0048)
0.0003
(0.0094)
0.0018
(0.0019)
−0.0011
(0.0008)
0.0051∗∗
(0.0024)
−0.0063
(0.0040)
−0.0007
(0.0010)
0.0021
(0.0015)
0.0052
(0.0048)
−0.0006
(0.0010)
0.0010
(0.0017)

0.0043
(0.0842)
−0.2360
(0.1601)
0.0537
(0.0435)
0.0495
(0.0558)
−0.2160
(0.1508)
−0.2267
(0.2178)
0.0420
(0.2001)
0.1203
(0.0997)
0.1072
(0.1317)
−0.0027
(0.0023)
0.0021
(0.0016)
0.0049
(0.0417)
0.0063
(0.0848)
0.0145
(0.0169)
−0.0099
(0.0066)
0.0513∗∗
(0.0209)
−0.0526
(0.0335)
−0.0058
(0.0094)
0.0180
(0.0122)
0.0430
(0.0394)
−0.0071
(0.0098)
0.0068
(0.0153)

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show summary statistics of locality-level financial infrastructure, trends in financial infrastructure, and other locality characteristics. Columns 3 and 4 test whether these characteristics predict the timing of
when localities receive debit cards as part of the debit card rollout, using a discrete time hazard model. Column 3
shows results from a linear probability discrete time hazard model. Column 4 shows results from a discrete proportional hazard using a complementary log-log regression. Both models also include a 5th-order polynomial in time as
in Galiani, Gertler and Schargrodsky (2005); time is measured in two-month periods. The dependent variable in the
discrete time hazard model is a dummy variable indicating if locality j has been treated at time t. A locality treated in
period t drops out of the sample in period t + 1 since it is a hazard model. All variables are measured prior to the debit
card rollout. The financial variables come from various sources, and are each measured in the last day or quarter of
2008 (just prior to the debit card rollout); pre-rollout trends (variables with a ∆) compare the last day or quarter of 2006
to the last day or quarter of 2008. The number of point-of-sale (POS) terminals is from Mexico’s Central Bank and
includes POS terminals from all merchant categories; checking accounts, commercial bank branches, and commercial
bank ATMs are from CNBV; Bansefi bank branches are from
48 a data set of Bansefi branch geocoordinates. We do not
include trends in Bansefi bank branches or commercial bank ATMs because these variables are first available in 2008.
The non-financial locality characteristics include all characteristics that are used to measure locality-level development
by Mexico’s national statistical institute (INEGI) and its National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development
(CONEVAL), and come from publicly available locality-level totals from the 2005 Population Census published by
INEGI. N = 240 localities in the debit card rollout, and 1851 locality by two-month-period observations in columns 3
and 4.

Table 3: Balance and Parallel Trends in Survey Data
Panel (a):
Cross-Sectional Data

# Household members
Age
Male
Married
Education level
# Children
Occupants per room
Health insurance
Asset index
Income
Panel (b):
Panel Data

Consumption
Income
Asset Index

Trust Survey
(1)
(2)
α (Mean for card γ (Difference card
> median time)
≤ median time)
5.18
(0.08)
44.73
(0.08)
0.01
(0.00)
0.69
(0.03)
6.17
(0.17)
2.19
(0.08)
3.50
(0.07)
0.59
(0.02)
0.04
(0.04)
3193.93
(47.53)
(1)
Control
Mean
2725.87
(78.54)
3150.82
(88.37)
0.50
(0.09)

(3)
P-value of
difference

0.26
0.114
(0.15)
0.96
0.246
(0.80)
0.00
0.946
(0.01)
0.03
0.332
(0.03)
−0.33
0.193
(0.24)
0.03
0.743
(0.10)
−0.03
0.801
(0.11)
0.05
0.165
(0.03)
−0.04
0.605
(0.08)
222.55
0.151
(147.11)
Household Panel Survey
(2)
(3)
ωk (Placebo DD)
2003
2004
2.61
(80.88)
263.20
(218.88)
−0.03
(0.05)

9.74
(85.11)
273.82
(224.00)
−0.02
(0.05)

Payment Methods Survey
(4)
(5)
(6)
α (Mean for card γ (Difference card P-value of
> median time)
≤ median time)
difference
4.78
(0.07)
40.21
(0.49)
0.03
(0.01)
0.73
(0.02)
6.01
(0.20)

−0.04
(0.13)
−1.18
(0.80)
0.00
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.29)

0.767
0.146
0.874
0.867
0.910

(4)
Parallel
p-value
0.949
0.476
0.672

Notes: This table tests for balance between those who have had a debit card for more vs. less than the median time in
the two cross-sectional surveys, and for parallel trends in the panel survey. Panel (a) shows results from (4): column
1 shows the mean for those with a card for more than the median time (α), column 2 the difference in means for
those with the card less than the median time (relative to those with the card more than the median time; γ), and
column 3 reports the p-values for a test of γ = 0. In the Trust Survey, individual sociodemographic characteristics
refer to those of the household head (but the program beneficiary responded to the trust questions). The Payment
Methods Survey was a more focused survey that included fewer sociodemographic questions, which is why some
rows are blank in the columns corresponding to that survey; individual sociodemographic characteristics are those of
the program beneficiary. N = 1,694 beneficiary households for the Trust Survey and 1,617 for the Payment Methods
Survey. Panel (b) shows the control mean and a parallel trend test for each of the outcome variables used in the
household panel survey. The parallel trends test is from (3); we additionally include household baseline characteristic
by time fixed effects to increase power (which works against finding parallel trends), as in our preferred specification
in Table 4. The “Placebo DD” columns (where DD = difference-in-differences) show ω2003 and ω2004 (k = 2002 is
the omitted reference period), while the “Parallel p-value” column is from an F-test of ω2003 = ω2004 = 0. N = 7,754
household-period observations from 2,200 households in the Household Panel Survey as in column 4 of Table 4.

49

Table 4: Effect of Debit Cards from Household Panel Survey

Consumption

Income

Asset index

P-value Consumption vs. Income
Number of households
Number of observations
Time fixed effects
Household fixed effects
Household characteristics × time
Winsorized

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

–175.36∗∗

–150.51∗∗

–136.52∗∗

(81.31)
[–353.11, –1.52]
98.16
(170.03)
[–290.77, 486.11]
0.06
(0.08)
[–0.12, 0.24]

(70.43)
[–306.24, –2.30]
106.01
(150.31)
[–230.64, 468.97]
0.06
(0.08)
[–0.12, 0.24]

(61.75)
[–276.37, –4.75]
75.50
(127.77)
[–219.75, 376.72]
0.07
(0.07)
[–0.08, 0.23]

–154.80∗∗
(62.04)
[–288.09, –33.00]
38.59
(106.02)
[–172.05, 251.23]
0.03
(0.08)
[–0.20, 0.24]

[0.047]
2,868
9,246
Yes
Yes
No
No

[0.041]
2,868
9,246
Yes
Yes
No
1%

[0.056]
2,868
9,246
Yes
Yes
No
5%

[0.062]
2,200
7,754
Yes
Yes
Yes
5%

Notes: This table shows the effect of the debit cards on consumption, income, and assets using the Household Panel
Survey combined with administrative data from Oportunidades on the debit card rollout, estimated using (2). Each
row label is the dependent variable from a separate regression; each column is a different specification. Means for each
dependent variable can be found in Table 3b. Asymptotic cluster-robust standard errors (clustered at the locality level,
using pre-treatment locality) are included in parentheses; wild cluster bootstrap percentile-t 95% confidence intervals
are included in square brackets. Dependent variables are measured in pesos per month, with the exception of the asset
index. Asset index is the first principal component of assets that are included in both the early (2002, 2003, 2004) and
post-treatment (2009–2010) versions of the survey: car, truck, motorcycle, television, video or DVD player, radio or
stereo, washer, gas stove, and refrigerator. For column 4, household characteristics are measured at baseline (2004, or
for households that were not included in the 2004 wave, 2003). They include characteristics of the household head
(working status, a quadratic polynomial in years of schooling, and a quadratic polynomial in age), whether anyone
in the household has a bank account, a number of characteristics used by the Mexican government to target social
programs (the proportion of household members with access to health insurance, the proportion age 15 and older that
are illiterate, the proportion ages 6-14 that do not attend school, the proportion 15 and older with incomplete primary
education, the proportion ages 15-29 with less than 9 years of schooling), dwelling characteristics (dirt floors, no
bathroom, no piped water, no sewage, and number of occupants per room), and pre-trends in the dependent variables
(consumption, income, and asset index). The number of households in column (4) is lower because households have
missing values for one of the household characteristics included, or are not included in enough pre-treatment waves
to construct household-level pre-trends of the outcome variables, which are interacted with time fixed effects in that
specification.

50

Internet Appendix
Appendix A

Comparison with Other Studies (Internet Appendix)

The savings rates in Figure 1 are drawn form papers which meet the following five criteria.
1. We try to include all studies measuring the impact of savings interventions on the stock
of savings. This includes offering accounts or other savings devices, deposit collection,
financial education, and savings group interventions, as well as sending reminders, changing
the interest rate, and defaulting payments. We exclude studies which measure the impact of
income shocks and cash transfers on savings, since these are not savings interventions.
2. We only include studies with a duration of at least 6 months.
3. We focus on interventions aimed at adults.
4. Finally, to estimate the savings rate we need to divide the change in savings by total household income. We therefore only include studies that include average household income in
their tables, or a household income variable in the replication data. We exclude studies that
only provide labor income of the respondent rather than total household income.
5. We include papers published or accepted for publication in peer-reviewed journals, NBER
working papers, and other working papers listed as “revise and resubmit” on authors’ websites. This filter intends to avoid using preliminary results.
Most papers report the impact of savings interventions on the stock of savings (i.e., savings
balances), which we divide by annual household income. We use intent-to-treat estimates. In the
cases that replication data are available, we use the replication data to replicate the studies’ findings
and compute the intent-to-treat impact of the intervention on the savings rate. When possible, we
use total savings; when this is not available, we use savings in the savings intervention being
studied (e.g., in the bank). This appendix provides more detail on how the savings effects in
Figure 1 were computed for each study. We also provide details about some studies that were
excluded because they did not meet all of the above criteria.
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006). This study looks at the effect of a deposit collection service in
the Philippines after both 12 and 32 months. We use the effect on bank savings after 32 months
(since the effect on total savings after 32 months is not available). The effect on bank savings
IA-1

after 32 months is 163.52 pesos (Table 6), which we divide by annual household income (129,800
pesos; Table 1, column 2 of the December 2005 version but not included in the final version).
Beaman, Karlan, and Thuysbaert (2014). This study looks at the effect of introducing rotating
savings and credit association (ROSCA) groups in Mali to new techniques in order to improve their
flexibility, namely allowing members to take out loans from the group savings rather than waiting
for their turn to take home the whole pot. We exclude this study from the comparison because it
does not include a measure of total household income.
Blumenstock, Callen, and Ghani (2018). This study looks at the effect of default savings contributions out of salary payments in Afghanistan. We exclude this study from the comparison
because it includes a measure of salary, but not a measure of total household income.
Breza and Chandrasekhar (2019). This study looks at the effect of using savings monitors from
individuals’ social networks as a commitment device to increase savings in India. We exclude this
study from the comparison because it does not include a measure of total household income.
Brune et al. (2016). This study looks at the effect of allowing farmers in Malawi to channel
profits from their harvests into formal bank accounts; some farmers are also offered a commitment
account. We exclude this study from the comparison because it does not include a measure of total
household income.
Callen et al. (forthcoming). This study looks at the effect of offering deposit collection to rural
households in Sri Lanka. We exclude this study from the comparison because it measures the effect
of the intervention on the flow of savings, but not on the stock. (Note that the flow of savings is
self-reported and has a minimum of 0 in the replication data, which means that using the estimate
on the flow of savings to estimate the stock could be inaccurate if the flow of savings is negative in
some accounts during some months.)
Cole, Sampson, and Zia (2011). This study looks at the effect of subsidies and financial literacy
training on the opening and use of bank accounts in Indonesia. We exclude this study from the
comparison because it uses opening of an account and a dummy variable for positive savings in
the account as outcome variables, but does not look at the stock of savings.
Drexler, Fischer, and Schoar (2014). This study looks at the effect of financial literacy training
in the Dominican Republic. In the study, neither the standard accounting nor rules of thumb
treatment arms have a statistically significant impact on savings. We use the replication microdata
IA-2

to replicate their results from Table 2 of the impact of training on savings; we then estimate the
pooled treatment effect. Because the paper and data set do not include total household income, we
use microenterprise sales in the denominator (the sample consisted entirely of microentrepreneurs).
We calculate average annual sales among the treatment group at endline in the microdata.
Dupas and Robinson (2013). This study looks at the effect of providing different savings tools
to ROSCA members in Kenya: a savings box, locked savings box, health savings pot, and health
savings account. We used replication data to replicate the result s in the paper and estimate a
pooled treatment effect for the three interventions in which savings could be directly measured:
the savings box, lockbox, and health savings account. We divide the savings effect by average
income among the treatment group (which we calculate using the replication data).
Dupas et al. (2018). This study looks at the impact of providing access to formal savings accounts to households in three countries: Chile, Malawi, and Uganda. In Chile, an endline survey
was not conducted due to low take-up, so we cannot include results for this country. For Malawi
and Uganda, we use the intent-to-treat impact of treatment on total monetary savings of $1.39 in
Uganda and $4.98 in Malawi (Table 4, column 7). We divide by the sum of income of the respondent and income of the spouse (to approximate total household income), which is given in footnote
27.
Karlan et al. (2016). This study looks at the effect of text message reminders to save in Bolivia,
Peru, and the Philippines. Because the Philippines is the only country for which income data was
collected, it is the only country from the study for which we estimate the effect of treatment on
the savings rate. We use replication data to estimate the effect of treatment on the level of savings.
(The paper uses a log specification, but for consistency with the other studies we use levels; in
both cases, the effect is statistically insignificant for the Philippines.) We divide by average annual
income of the treatment group (estimated using the replication data).
Karlan et al. (2017). This study looks at the effect of savings groups on financial inclusion,
microenterprise outcomes, women’s empowerment, and welfare. Using the replication data, we
replicate the results in Table S3 on the effect of savings groups on total savings balance, and divide
this by endline average annual income for the treatment group (estimated using the replication
data).
Karlan and Zinman (2018). This study looks at the effect of increased interest rates offered by
a bank in the Philippines. Using the replication data, we replicate the results in Table 3 for the
IA-3

effect in the various treatment arms; the results for both the unconditional high interest rate and
commitment “reward” interest rate treatment arms are statistically insignificant from 0. We then
estimate the pooled treatment effect, using the variable for savings winsorized at 5% (since this is
consistent with the winsorizing we perform in this paper). We divide by average annual income of
the treated (estimated using the replication data).
Kast, Meier and Pomeranz (2018). This study looks at the effects of participating in a self-help
peer group savings program in Chile. We use the intent-to-treat estimate of self-help peer groups
on average monthly balance, 1871 pesos (Table 3, column 7). Although we would prefer to use
the effect on ending balance, Figure 3b shows that average monthly balance is similar to ending
balance. We use the estimate winsorized at 5% (since this is consistent with the winsorizing we
perform in this paper). We divide the savings effect by average number of household members
times average per capita household monthly income (Table 1) times 12 months.
Kast and Pomeranz (2014). This study looks at the effects of removing barriers to opening
savings accounts for low-income members of a Chilean microfinance institution, with a focus on
the impacts on debt. Because of the focus on debt, we estimate the effect of treatment on net
savings, or savings minus debt. To obtain estimates of the intent-to-treat effect, we multiply the
average savings balance of active account users, 18,456 pesos, by the proportion of the treatment
group who are active users (39%) and add the minimum balance of 1000 pesos times the proportion
who take up but leave only the minimum balance (14%), all from Table 2. We then subtract the
intent-to-treat effect on debt, −12, 931 pesos. This gives an effect of 18, 456 · 0.39 + 1000 · 0.14 −
(−12, 931) = 20, 251.76 pesos. We divide this by the average number of household members times
average per capita household monthly income (Table 1) times 12 months.
Prina (2015). This study looks at the effects of giving female household heads in Nepal access
to savings accounts. We use the replication data to estimate the intent-to-treat effect on savings
account balances after 55 weeks, the duration of the study. While the paper shows average bank
savings among those who take up accounts, to estimate the intent-to-treat effect we take the bank
savings variable and recode missing values (assigned to those who do not take up the account or
are in the control group) as zero, then regress this variable on a treatment dummy. We divide
by average annual income among the treatment group from the endline survey (available in the
replication data).

IA-4

Schaner (2018). This study looks at the effects of offering very high, temporary interest rates in
Kenya. We use the effect on bank savings (Table 3, column 2) and divide it by average monthly
income of the treatment group (Table 4, column 6) times 12 months.
Seshan and Yang (2014). This study looks at the effects of inviting migrants from India working in Qatar to a motivational workshop that sought to promote better financial habits and joint
decision-making with their spouses in India. The intent-to-treat effect on the level of savings
comes from Table 3, column 1. We divide this by total monthly household income (constructed
by adding the migrant’s income and wife’s household’s income from Table 1, column 3) times 12
months.
Somville and Vandewalle (2018). This study looks at the effects of defaulting payments into an
account for rural workers in India. We use the effect of treatment on savings balances 23 weeks
after the last payment, or 33 weeks after the beginning of the study (Table 5, column 3). We divide
this by average weekly income (given in the text of the 2016 working paper version, p. 20) times
52 weeks.
Suri and Jack (2016). This study looks at the effects of mobile money access in Kenya. The
authors find that an increase in the penetration of mobile money agents within 1 kilometer of a
household increases their log savings by 0.021 per agent for male-headed households and 0.032
per agent for female-headed households (Table 1). We exclude this study from the comparison
because it does not include a measure of total household income.

IA-5

Appendix B

Additional Figures and Tables (Internet Appendix)

Figure B.1: Distribution of Timing of Card Receipt in Household Panel Survey
1000

Frequency

800

600

400

200

0
Jan 2009

Jan 2010

Jan 2011

Jan 2012

Date received cards

Notes: This figure shows when households in the Household Panel Survey received debit cards relative to the time
of the survey, using survey data merged with administrative data on time of switch to debit cards. For the results
using the Household Panel Survey, those who received cards prior to the survey are the “treatment” group and those
who received cards after the survey are the “control.” Dashed vertical line indicates timing of survey. N = 2,942
households. In the analysis we drop the small group of households that receive cards shortly before the survey seen in
this figure, resulting in a sample size of 2,868 households.

IA-6

Figure B.2: Distribution of Months with the Card at Time of Payment Methods Survey
600

Frequency

400

200

0

0

10

20

30

40

Months with card when surveyed

Notes: This figure shows how long ago households had received Bansefi debit cards before being surveyed in the
Payment Methods Survey. We use self-reported months with the card from the survey. N = 1,617 beneficiaries.

IA-7

Figure B.3: Distribution of Timing of Card Receipt in Trust Survey
400

Frequency

300

200

100

0
Jan 2009

Jan 2010

Jan 2011

Date received cards

Notes: This figure shows when households in the Trust Survey received debit cards relative to the time of the survey,
using survey data merged with administrative data on time of switch to debit cards. Dashed vertical line indicates
timing of survey. N = 1,694 beneficiaries.

IA-8

Figure B.4: Number of Beneficiaries Not Correlated with Rollout
0.4

0.2

0.0

−0.2
−3

−2

−1

0
1
Years since card shock

2

3

Notes: This figure shows that the rollout of debit cards is not correlated with changes in the number of beneficiaries.
It shows the coefficients from (1), where the outcome is the log number of Prospera beneficiaries in locality i at the
end of year t. The estimation uses administrative data from Prospera on the number of beneficiaries in each locality
and the method by which they are paid. N = 2590 locality by year observations in 259 localities. Standard errors
are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Hollow circles indicate results that are
statistically insignificant from 0.

IA-9

Figure B.5: Political Party Not Correlated with Rollout
0.4

0.2

0.0

−0.2

−0.4
−3

−2

−1

0
1
Years since card shock

2

3

Notes: This figure shows that the rollout of debit cards is not correlated with whether the party in power at the local
level is the same party as the one in power nationally. It shows the coefficients from (1), where the outcome is a
dummy variable equal to one if municipal president is from the PAN, the party of the country’s president during the
card rollout, in municipality i during year t. The estimation uses data from municipal elections that we digitized.
N = 2805 locality by year observations in 255 municipalities. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.
Whiskers denote 95% confidence intervals. Hollow circles indicate results that are statistically insignificant from 0.

IA-10

Figure B.6: Number of Withdrawals Over Calendar Time in the Control Group
2

1.5

1

Sep 11

May 11

Jan 11

Sep 10

May 10

Jan 10

Sep 09

May 09

Jan 09

Sep 08

May 08

Jan 08

Sep 07

May 07

0

Jan 07

.5

Notes: This figure shows the number of withdrawals in the control group per bimester over time using the administrative transactions data. Since the control did not receive cards during our study period, the x-axis is in calendar time
rather than in time relative to the switch to cards. The shaded area denotes the 95% confidence interval. Standard
errors are clustered at the locality level. N = 2,584,375 account-bimester observations from 93,018 unique control
beneficiaries.

IA-11

Figure B.7: Savings among Non-Oportunidades Debit Card Account Holders (Pesos)
2000
1600
1200
800

Jul−Oct 2011

Mar−Jun 2011

Nov 2010−Feb 2011

Jul−Oct 2010

Mar−Jun 2010

Nov 2009−Feb 2010

Jul−Oct 2009

0

Mar−Jun 2009

400

Notes: This figure shows mean savings per four-month period among non-Oportunidades beneficiaries with a debit
card who opened accounts in 2007 (in pesos). Savings among non-Oportunidades debit card holders were not increasing over time during the period of our study, which suggests that our results are not driven by a decrease in
transaction costs over time. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95% confidence
intervals. N = 2721 non-Oportunidades accounts opened at a sample of 117 Bansefi branches in the year 2007.

IA-12

Figure B.8: Self-Reported Knowledge of Technology and Fees
(a) Fees
25

(b) Debit Card Technology
0.6

Debit card < median time
Debit card > median time

Proportion

Pesos

20
15
10

0.4

0.2
5
0

Fees to
check balance

0.0

Fees to
withdraw

Hard to
use ATM

Gets help
using ATM

Knows
PIN

Notes: N = 1, 617 from the Payment Methods Survey. In some regressions if there were respondents who reported
“don’t know” or refused to respond N can be smaller. It plots the outcome variable among those who have had a card
for less vs. more than the median time, and shows the statistical significance of the difference in means, estimated
with equation (4). In Panel (a) outcomes are self-reported transaction fees and in Panel (b) outcomes are self-reported
knowledge of how to use the debit card. Standard errors are clustered at the locality level. Whiskers denote 95%
confidence intervals. None of the differences in means is statistically significant from 0.

Figure B.9: Low Trust in Banks Around the World

Percent with low trust
(60,100]
(50,60]
(40,50]
(28,40]
[0,28]
No data

Notes: This figure shows that trust in banks is low across the world. Low trust in banks is defined as “not very much
confidence” or “none at all” in response to the following question from the World Values Survey, Wave 6 (2010–
2014): “Could you tell me how much confidence you have in banks: a great deal, quite a lot, not very much or none at
all?” Darker shades indicate countries with a higher share of the population reporting low trust in banks. N = 82,587
individuals in 60 countries.

IA-13

Proportion that save in financial institutions (residuals)

Figure B.10: Cross-Country Trust in Banks and Saving in Financial Institutions
THA

KOR
NGA

0.2

TTO

NZL

MYS
CHN
GHA
SGP

ZWE
RWA
SWE

ZAF
KWT

DEU

HKG
EST

JPN
USA

LBN

0.0

ESP

NLD

PHL

ECU
AUS
MEX MAR

CYP

PER
SVN
COL
YEM JOR
UKRIRQ
KGZ
DZA
BLR PAK
GEO RUS
KAZ
POL
CHL
BRA
TUR
UZB
ROM
AZE
EGY

IND

BHR
ARM

ARG

−0.2
−0.3

URY

0.0

0.3

Proportion that trust banks (residuals)

Notes: This figure shows that internationally, the proportion of adults who save in financial institutions is associated
with the proportion that trust banks. The y-axis plots residuals from a regression of the proportion saving financial
institutions (from Global Findex) on controls (average age, education, and perceived income decile from the World
Values Survey Wave 6, GDP per capita levels and growth from World Development Indicators). The x-axis plots
residuals from a regression against the same controls of the proportion that respond “a great deal of confidence” or
“quite a lot of confidence” in response to the WVS question “could you tell me how much confidence you have in
banks?” The solid line shows a kernel-weighted local polynomial regression, while the gray area is its 95% confidence
interval. N = 56 countries.

IA-14

Figure B.11: Stylistic Illustration of Balance Check Definitions
Bimester

Transfer

First withdrawal
of the transfer
Definition 1: All Balance Checks
Definition 2: Checks After Transfer Receipt
Definition 3: Checks After First Withdrawal

Notes: This figure illustrates the three definitions of balance checks that we use. For illustration we use the scenario
where one withdrawal is made during the bimester. The first definition includes all balance checks in the bimester.
The second definition includes balance checks that occur after the transfer, not including checks on the same day as a
withdrawal (hence the hollow circle in the bracket for definition 2). The third definition includes only balance checks
that occur after the first withdrawal of the bimester, when it is not conceivable that the beneficiary could be checking
if the transfer has arrived.

IA-15

Table B.1: Baseline Summary Statistics from Administrative Account Data

Number of client deposits
Number of withdrawals
Made exactly 1 withdrawal
Made exactly 2 withdrawals
Made 3 or more withdrawals
% of transfer withdrawn
Size of Oportunidades transfer (pesos)
End-of-period balance (pesos)
Years with account

(1)
Mean

(2)
Standard
Deviation

(3)
25th
Percentile

(4)
Median

(5)
75th
Percentile

0.01
1.10
0.90
0.09
0.01
99.51
1539.96
123.85
3.49

0.11
0.29
0.30
0.28
0.10
3.24
1029.94
181.49
1.50

0
1
1
0
0
100
470.00
1.86
2.63

0
1
1
0
0
100
1315.00
41.68
3.43

0
1
1
0
0
100
2180.00
161.62
5.19

Notes: This table shows means and standard deviations for account use summary variables constructed from the
transactions-level data, measured at baseline (i.e., before the debit card rollout started). Specifically, data from the first
bimester of 2008 is used, so each measure can be interpreted as the average across accounts in a single bimester before
the rollout began. Based on data from N = 268,222 beneficiary accounts, which is the subset of accounts that existed
at the beginning of 2008.

IA-16

Table B.2: Supply-Side Response by Banks

ATMs
Current quarter
1 quarter lag
2 quarter lag
3 quarter lag
4 quarter lag
5 quarter lag
6 quarter lag
1 quarter lead
2 quarter lead
3 quarter lead
4 quarter lead
5 quarter lead
6 quarter lead
Mean control group
F-test of lags
[p-value]
F-test of leads
[p-value]
Municipality fixed effects
Quarter fixed effects

Total
Branches

Bansefi
ATMs Branches

−0.37
(1.51)
−1.79
(2.49)
2.04
(3.72)
−0.57
(1.11)
2.29
(2.54)
−1.13
(2.56)
−0.31
(3.60)
0.66
(1.74)
3.96
(3.65)
−0.06
(4.18)
−2.50
(4.04)
3.97
(3.19)
5.18
(3.03)

−0.01
(0.34)
0.10
(0.37)
0.12
(0.39)
−0.01
(0.29)
−0.28
(0.64)
0.08
(0.81)
0.94
(0.67)
−0.25
(0.40)
0.11
(0.40)
0.26
(0.65)
0.83
(0.78)
0.27
(0.40)
−0.98
(0.97)

0.00
(0.00)
−0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.02)
−0.04
(0.03)

46.08
0.59
[0.74]
0.87
[0.52]

37.13
0.60
[0.73]
1.00
[0.42]

0.09
0.73
[0.63]
1.24
[0.29]

1.42
1.15
[0.33]
0.79
[0.58]

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Notes: This table shows that there was no supply-side response of banking infrastructure to the debit card expansion,
using data on ATMs and bank branches by municipality by quarter from CNBV. It also shows that the debit card
rollout did not follow a recent expansion of banking infrastructure. Each column is a separate regression with a
different dependent variable; the table shows βk from (3). The F-test of lags tests β−6 = · · · = β−1 = 0; the F-test of
leads tests β1 = · · · = β6 = 0. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. N = 2, 491 municipality-quarter
observations from 199 municipalities.

IA-17

Appendix C

Sample of Materials Received by Beneficiaries (Internet Appendix)
Figure C.1: Flyer Provided with the Debit Card (Front)

Notes: This flyer is provided by Oportunidades together with the debit card. The front of the flyer provides activation
instructions and security tips regarding the PIN and debit card.

IA-18

Figure C.2: Flyer Provided with the Debit Card (Back)

Notes: The back of the flyer provides instructions on using the card to withdraw money at ATMs and to make
purchases. It clarifies that the card can be used to withdraw money at any ATM within the networks RED and PLUS
(which cover almost all ATMs in Mexico) and at major grocery store chains.

IA-19

Figure C.3: Sample Calendar of Transfer Dates Given to Beneficiaries

Notes: This is a sample of the calendars that provide the transfer dates to recipients. For each bimester in the
following year, it states the corresponding payment date. It reminds recipients that they should use their debit cards
after the indicated date at ATMs or establishments accepting Visa. It also reminds them that they are allowed two free
transactions per bimester at ATMs.

IA-20

Appendix D Mechanical Effect (Internet Appendix)
This appendix defines the “mechanical effect,” which we use to compute end-of-period balances. Section 5.2 explains why we cannot instead compute end-of-period balances by simply
taking beginning-of-period balance, adding all deposits, and subtracting all withdrawals. We explain the logic behind the mechanical effect, present an example, and provide a step by step guide
for its computation, summarized in Table D.1. Our measure of end-of-period balance is equal to
the account’s average balance over the period (provided by Bansefi) minus the mechanical effect
(computed from the Bansefi transactions data).
D.1

Logic of the Mechanical Effect

The mechanical effect is the contribution to average balances from the transit of transfers in recipients’ accounts. Since the mechanical effect does not represent net (long-term) savings, or even
saving from one period to the next, our goal is to net it out from average balances and construct a
measure of end-of-period balance. Changes in the mechanical effect can arise due to changes in
the frequency of withdrawals. For example, if client A begins the period with 0 balance, receives
2,000 pesos in her account, and withdraws 1,000 pesos on the first day of the period, and the other
1,000 pesos midway through the period, her average balance will equal 1, 000 ∗ 0 + 1, 000 ∗ 21 = 500
pesos. Compared to client B who also began the period with 0 balance then withdrew the entire
2,000 pesos on the first day of the period, client A’s average balance is 500 pesos higher, but both
end the period with a balance of zero. Their end-of-period balances, constructed as average balance
minus mechanical effect, are both equal to zero.
Changes in the mechanical effect can also arise from changes in the timing of withdrawals,
compared to the deposit dates. The deposit date is usually known by the recipients: Oportunidades
generally disburses transfers within the first week of the bimester, and the program distributes
calendars stating the dates when accounts will be credited. Nevertheless, beneficiaries may not
withdraw their benefits on the day they are deposited, which also leads to a mechanical effect
that contributes to the average balance. In our data, the mechanical effect can thus change for
debit card recipients relative to the control group as a result of increased withdrawal frequency of
smaller amounts and changes in time between the deposit and first withdrawal.
Finally, we need to compare not only the timing of deposits and withdrawals, but also their
relative sizes. Although the calculation is simple, there are several cases to consider depending on
the number of withdrawals, when they occur, and whether they exceed the amount deposited that

IA-21

period. We use an example to exemplify the steps involved.
D.2

Example:

1. Select a pattern where clients received a single deposit (the most common, although as
explained previously, beneficiaries receive more than one Oportunidades deposit in some
bimesters)
2. Select a pattern with one deposit followed by two withdrawals (DWW)
3. The pattern with one deposit and two withdrawals (DWW), must fit in one of the following
three scenarios: (a) the deposit is less than the first withdrawal (W1 ≥ D), (b) the deposit is
larger than the first withdrawal but smaller than the sum of the two withdrawals (W1 < D &
W1 +W2 ≥ D), (c) the deposit is larger than the sum of withdrawals (W1 +W2 < D).
4. Compute the mechanical effect, at the individual level, for each of the three scenarios discussed above:
(a) The deposit is less than the first withdrawal ⇒ the mechanical effect is just the time
lapse between the deposit and the first withdrawal times the deposit amount (lapseDW1 ∗
D).
(b) The deposit is larger than the first withdrawal but smaller than the sum of the two
withdrawals ⇒ the mechanical effect is the time lapse between the deposit and the first
withdrawal times the amount of the first withdrawal, plus the time lapse between the
deposit and the second withdrawal times the remaining deposit amount after subtracting
the first withdrawal (lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗ (D −W1 )).
(c) The deposit is larger than the sum of the withdrawals ⇒ the mechanical effect is the
time lapse between the deposit and the first withdrawal times the amount of the first
withdrawal, plus the time lapse between the deposit and the second withdrawal times
the amount of the second withdrawal (lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗W2 ).
Table D.1 shows the most common of the cases we considered as well as their prevalence in
the data.

IA-22

Table D.1: Computation of Mechanical Effect
Pattern

% Total

Conditions

Mechanical Effect

Panel A. Regular patterns: single deposit into account in the bimester
(1)
DW
73.4
W ≤D
lapseDW ∗W
W >D
lapseDW ∗ D
(2)

DWW

9.1

W1 ≥ D
W1 < D & W1 +W2 ≥ D
W1 +W2 < D

lapseDW1 ∗ D
lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗ (D −W1 )
lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗ (W2 )

(3)

DWWW

1.7

W1 ≥ D
lapseDW1 ∗ D
W1 < D & W1 +W2 ≥ D
lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗ (D −W1 )
W1 +W2 < D & W1 +W2 +W3 ≥ D lapseDW1 ∗W1 + lapseDW2 ∗W2
+ lapseDW3 ∗ (D −W1 −W2 )

Panel B. Irregular patterns: multiple deposits into account in the bimester
(4) DDWW
3.1
W1 ≤ D1 & W2 ≤ D2
lapseD1W1 ∗W1 + lapseD2W2 ∗W2
W1 > D1 & W2 ≤ D2
lapseD1W1 ∗ D1 + lapseD2W2 ∗W2
W1 ≤ D1 & W2 < D2
lapseD1W1 ∗W1 + lapseD2W2 ∗ D2
W1 > D1 & W2 > D2
lapseD1W1 ∗ D1 + lapseD2W2 ∗ D2
(5)

DWD

3.0

W ≤ D1
W > D1

lapseD1W ∗W
lapseD1W ∗ D1

(6)

DDW

2.7

W ≥ D1 + D2
W < D1 + D2 & W ≤ D2
W < D2

lapseD1W ∗ D1 + lapseD2W ∗ D2
lapseD1W ∗ (W − D2 ) + lapseD2W ∗ D2
lapseD2W ∗W

(7)

DWDW

1.6

W1 ≤ D1 & W2 ≤ D2
W1 > D1 & W2 ≤ D2
W1 ≤ D1 & W2 < D2
W1 > D1 & W2 > D2

lapseD1W1 ∗W1 + lapseD2W2 ∗W2
lapseD1W1 ∗ D1 + lapseD2W2 ∗W2
lapseD1W1 ∗W1 + lapseD2W2 ∗ D2
lapseD1W1 ∗ D1 + lapseD2W2 ∗ D2

Notes: Di indicates the ith deposit and Wi indicates the ith withdrawal within a bimester. lapseDiW j measures the
number of days between the ith deposit and the jth withdrawal, divided by the number of days in the bimester. The
patterns listed here represent 95% of all bimonthly patterns, but all patterns representing at least 0.01% of all
account-bimester pair patterns have been coded to obtain an estimate of the mechanical effect.

D.3

Steps

More generally we follow the steps below:
1. We separate the sample based on the number of transfers received by Opportunidades’ beneficiaries: 85% of beneficiary-bimester pairs receive a single transfer in the bimester and 15%
received two transfers in the same bimester. See Appendix E for a description of the reasons
IA-23

some benefeciary-bimester pairs include more than one transfer.
2. We determine the pattern of transactions: for example, a beneficiary who first received a
deposit and then performed two withdrawals has a sequence (D,W1 ,W2 ), or DWW for short.
3. We compare the size of the deposit to the withdrawals, and generate different scenarios.
These scenarios depend on the relative size of the deposit and withdrawals: each withdrawal
could be larger than the deposit, their sum might be larger, or the deposit is larger than the
sum of withdrawals.
4. We compute the mechanical effect. To do this, we measure the lapse of time, in days, which
passes between the deposit and each withdrawal, and multiply the time lapses by the amount
of the transfer which only transited through the account, and was not kept in the account
through the end of and into the next bimester.
Appendix E Reasons for Variance in Transfers (Internet Appendix)
When there is an election, federal law requires Oportunidades to give the transfer in advance
so that there is no payment close to the election month. In practice, this means that beneficiaries
receive no payment in the bimester of the election and an additional payment in the preceding
bimester. If a family does not comply with program conditions such as school attendance and
health check-ups, the payment is suspended, but if the family returns to complying with the conditions, the missed payment is added into a future payment. Payments also vary systematically
by time of year, as the program includes a school component that is not paid during the summer,
and a school supplies component that is only paid during one bimester out of the year. Finally,
changes in family structure affect the transfer amount because one child might age into or out of
the program, for example.
Appendix References (Internet Appendix)
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Deposit collectors,” Advances in Economic Analysis
& Policy, 6 (2006), 635–672.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, and Bram Thuysbaert, “Saving for a (not so) rainy day: A randomized
evaluation of savings groups in Mali,” NBER Working Paper 21169, 2014.
Blumenstock, Joshua, Michael Callen, and Tarek Ghani, “Why do defaults affect behavior? Experimental evidence from Afghanistan,” American Economic Review, 108 (2018), 2868–2901.
IA-24

Breza, Emily, and Arun G. Chandrasekhar, “Social Networks, Reputation and Commitment: Evidence From a Savings Monitors Experiment,” Econometrica, 87 (2019), 175–216.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang, “Facilitating savings for agriculture:
Field experimental evidence from Malawi,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 64
(2016), 187–220.
Callen, Michael, Suresh de Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff, “What are the headwaters of formal savings? Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka,” Review of Economic Studies,
(forthcoming).
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia, “Prices or knowledge? What drives demand for
financial services in emerging markets?,” Journal of Finance, 66 (2011), 1933–1967.
Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer, and Antoinette Schoar, “Keeping it simple: Financial literacy
and rules of thumb,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6 (2014), 1–31.
Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal, “Banking the unbanked?
Evidence from three countries,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10 (2018),
257—297.
Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson, “Why don’t the poor save more? Evidence from health
savings experiments,” American Economic Review, 103 (2013), 1138–1171.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Getting to the
top of mind: How reminders increase saving,” Management Science, 62 (2016), 3393–3411.
Karlan, Dean, Beniamino Savonitto, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry, “Impact of savings
groups on the lives of the poor,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114 (2017),
3079–3084.
Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman, “Price and control elasticities of demand for savings,” Journal
of Development Economics, 130 (2018), 145–149.
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz, “Saving more in groups: Field experimental
evidence from Chile,” Journal of Development Economics, 133 (2018), 275–294.
Kast, Felipe and Dina Pomeranz, “Saving more to borrow less: Experimental evidence from access
to formal savings accounts in Chile,” Harvard Business School Working Paper 14-001, 2014.
Prina, Silvia, “Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment,” Journal
of Development Economics, 115 (2015), 16–31.
Schaner, Simone, “The persistent power of behavioral change: Long-run impacts of temporary
savings subsidies for the poor,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10 (2018),
IA-25

67–100.
Seshan, Ganesh and Dean Yang, “Motivating migrants: A field experiment on financial decisionmaking in transnational households,” Journal of Development Economics, 108 (2014), 119–127.
Somville, Vincent and Lore Vandewalle, “Saving by default: Evidence from a field experiment in
rural india,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10 (2018), 39–66.
Suri, Tavneet and William Jack, “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money,”
Science, 354 (2016), 1288–1292.

IA-26

