                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ANNUITY OPTIONS IN PUBLIC PENSION PLANS:
                 THE CURIOUS CASE OF SOCIAL SECURITY LEVELING

                                       Robert L. Clark
                                     Robert G. Hammond
                                      Melinda S. Morrill
                                     David Vanderweide

                                      Working Paper 23262
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23262


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




An earlier version of this paper was prepared for presentation at the 2016 SIEPR Conference on
Working Longer. This research is part of an on-going project that is being conducted in
partnership with the North Carolina Retirement Systems Division and is being funded by the
Sloan Foundation, Grant Number 2013-10-20. The authors gratefully acknowledge the help and
support of Janet Cowell, North Carolina State Treasurer, Steven C. Toole, Director of the
Retirement Systems Division, Mary Buonfiglio, Deputy Director of Supplemental Retirement
Plans, and Sam Watts, Policy Director of the Retirement Systems Division. The authors would
like to thank Nino Abashidze, Bryan Allard, Emma Hanson, Christelle Khalaf, and Aditi Pathak
for research assistance. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the
authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of the North Carolina Retirement System, any
other institution with which the authors are affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, Melinda S. Morrill, and David Vanderweide.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Annuity Options in Public Pension Plans:¸˛The Curious Case of Social Security Leveling
Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, Melinda S. Morrill, and David Vanderweide
NBER Working Paper No. 23262
March 2017
JEL No. H55,J26,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

Social Security Leveling is an annuity option that allows participants to receive a level income
before and after age 62. The retiree receives a larger pension benefit prior to age 62, but then the
pension benefit is lowered at age 62 when the individual is expected to claim Social Security
benefits. This option is not uncommon in public pension plans, yet little is known about how this
option is used in practice and its impact on well-being in retirement. Our study uses a
combination of administrative records and survey data from recent North Carolina public sector
retirees. We find that one-third of all retirees selecting a single life annuity between 2009 and
2014 opted for Social Security Leveling. The evidence suggests that individuals are choosing this
option in a way that is consistent with their stated preferences and a consumption smoothing
motive. However, we also see higher rates of ex post “regret” in the annuity choice among those
choosing the level income option.

Robert L. Clark                                  Melinda S. Morrill
Poole College of Management                      Department of Economics
Box 7229                                         North Carolina State University
North Carolina State University                  Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695                                Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
and NBER                                         melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu
robert_clark@ncsu.edu
                                                 David Vanderweide
Robert G. Hammond                                Fiscal Analyst
Department of Economics                          Fiscal Research Division
North Carolina State University                  North Carolina General Assembly
Raleigh, NC 27695                                Raleigh, NC 27601
robert_hammond@ncsu.edu                          david.vanderweide@ncleg.net
                       ANNUITY OPTIONS IN PUBLIC PENSION PLANS:
                   THE CURIOUS CASE OF SOCIAL SECURITY LEVELING


      I.      Introduction

           One of the most important but understudied choices participants in defined benefit

pension plans must make concerns the disposition of funds at retirement. Prior research has

explored the tendency of individuals to under-annuitize wealth.1 The choice of annuity type in

the private sector is heavily influenced by default options as required by the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). Public sector plans are not subject to ERISA, and in

many states there is no default to a joint and survivor option. Defined benefit plans in the public

sector typically allow career retirees to begin full or unreduced benefits at relatively young ages.

Individuals retiring in their 50s must determine the best way to receive pension payouts that

maximizes well-being over 30 or so years of retirement. These young retirees must also consider

the need to finance consumption prior to commencing Social Security benefits as well as in later

years of retirement.

           This paper explores an annuity option available in some defined benefit plans that allows

individuals retiring before Social Security eligibility age to opt to receive a higher initial

payment in order to receive a “level” retirement income before and after they start receiving

Social Security benefits. In other words, the employer pension benefit received prior to age 62 is

equal to the pension plus Social Security benefits after age 62. This annuity option is designed to

help retirees smooth consumption, but might have unintended consequences if it encourages


1
    For example, see Benatzi, Previtero, and Thaler 2011; Brown et al. 2008; Brown 2001; Chalmers and
Reuter 2012; and Butler and Teppa 2007.



                                                    1
overconsumption in the early years of retirement or discourages work after leaving one’s career

job. It might also encourage earlier than optimal retirement or Social Security claiming. The

benefit of this type of borrowing from the pension system, receiving higher benefits prior to age

62, will be a function of personal preferences over the timing of consumption as well as market

interest rates governing the value of spending down wealth to finance consumption.

          An option that levels retirement benefits with Social Security benefits is called by various

names in defined benefit pension plans including ‘Social Security Leveling,’ ‘Level-up,’ ‘Level

Income,’ or ‘Accelerated’ options. There is limited evidence of some use of this type of annuity

option by private plans toward the end of the twentieth century as reported in several articles in

the Monthly Labor Review; however, we could find no systematic data indicating the incidence

Social Security level income options.2 Conversations with senior managers in the Bureau of

Labor Statistics and the Office of Policy and Research of the Department of Labor confirm that

there were no recent data on private sector defined benefit plans offering Social Security

Leveling, and the general assessment was that it is rare to find this type of annuity option in a

private plan. In contrast, as shown below, Social Security level income options are rather

common in large state-managed public plans.




2
    Wiatrowski (1990) reported that data from the 1988 Employee Benefits Survey indicated that one in
eight defined benefit plan participants was in a plan that offered a transitional benefit to early retirees;
however, these benefits were typically in the form of a “uniform dollar amount for all plan participants
regardless of salary or length of service.” This type of early retirement incentive is not the same as the
annuity option we are examining. Blostin (2003) has a brief statement that indicates that Social Security
Leveling was used by some plans but provides no data on how frequent this option is offered and when
offered it is selected.



                                                       2
       This paper first documents that Social Security level income options are used by about

one-third of public defined benefit plans whose participants are also covered by Social Security.

We then explore the Social Security Leveling annuity option available to state and local

government retirees in North Carolina using both administrative and survey data. We focus on

public sector retirees that initiated retirement benefits between 2009 and 2014 and were younger

than age 62 at the time of claiming. This analysis indicates that about one-third of those

selecting a single life annuity opted for the leveling option, or approximately one quarter of all

retirees during this period. In North Carolina, leveling is not an option for retirees who have

selected a joint and survivor annuity.

       The idea behind offering a level income with Social Security is to allow individuals to

borrow against future pension benefits in order to smooth consumption throughout the remaining

years of life. However, this option might also appeal to individuals with time-inconsistent

preferences or those who see a larger dollar value today without properly considering that

claiming will lead to a lower benefit in the future. We provide an example of how personal

discount rates will affect the present value of the two benefit options. Similarly, those with

shorter life expectancies are likely better off accessing more benefits sooner. We test these

predictions using data on recent retirees between 2009 and 2014. We combine administrative

records with detailed information from a survey conducted in 2015. These data include

subjective life expectancy, household composition, wealth, and self-reported preferences. We

observe many of the predicted patterns if individuals selected leveling due to a fully rational

consumption-smoothing motive. However, we also find some anomalies that suggest an

alternative decision-making rule for some retirees. For example, those individuals who claim the




                                                 3
level income option report not having enough information when they made retirement-related

decisions.

          In this study, we focus on individuals who have chosen a single life annuity. 3 The choice

between a single life relative to a joint and survivor annuity is likely to be driven by the value

that an individual places on survivor benefits. The importance of survivor benefits is

heterogeneous in ways that are complex and would confound the estimation of the choice of

interest. By considering only the decision to take the Social Security Leveling option among

those who have chosen a single life annuity, we are able to isolate a sample of individuals for

whom the importance of a level income before and after age 62 is a predominant motive in their

choice of annuity type.4

          Our analysis illustrates that discount rates used in practice to price the Social Security

Leveling option constitutes a relatively expensive way to finance consumption in the period prior

to Social Security eligibility. In our setting, the pension system uses a discount rate of 7.25

percent, which is considerably higher than current market interest rates. We find that, if an

individual can afford to self-finance consumption in the early years of retirement (i.e., has a

personal discount rate below 7.25 percent), the implied cost of borrowing from future benefits

yields a lower present discounted value of total pension benefits. This is similar to work by

Shoven and Slavov (2014a, 2014b), Goda, et al. (2015), and Bronshtein, et al. (2016), who show

3
    Individuals, and their spouses, must make numerous decisions as they near retirement including
retirement timing, Social Security claiming, work after retirement, and disposition of wealth from
retirement saving plans. Throughout this analysis, we also do not explicitly consider these decisions.
4
    We document that the fraction of benefit claimants choosing a single life annuity is nearly constant over
age at claiming, supporting the assertion that individuals first make the choice over single life or joint and
survivor annuity and then among the types of annuity in their given choice.



                                                       4
that claiming Social Security early is akin to borrowing from future benefits at a higher than

market discount rate.

            Our work also contributes to the debate on the welfare implications of the age of Social

Security claiming. Shoven and Slavov (2014a, 2014b) argue that, in the current low interest rate

environment, it is present-value maximizing for most individuals to delay claiming Social

Security, in some cases to delay until age 70. Here “borrowing” from Social Security by

claiming benefits at age 62 is costly if one can afford to self-finance consumption until later

years and reap the benefit of the delayed retirement credit. Our findings are similar in that it is

not beneficial for individuals to borrow from future benefit streams if consumption can be self-

financed at a rate that is favorable compared with the rate of borrowing. The crucial question is

how an individual should finance consumption in the early years of retirement and how this

impacts future retirement income security. At near-zero real interest rates, liquidating retirement

savings (e.g., IRAs) is preferable to early Social Security claiming (Shoven and Slavov, 2014a,

2014b and Goda, et al., 2015). In this study, we illustrate that the key is the relative interest rate

of borrowing. For individuals with little to no assets who retire prior to Social Security

eligibility might benefit from leveling in order to finance consumption in early retirement years

at a rate that is lower than high-interest loans such as credit card debt.

      II.      Background on Public Sector Annuity Options

A. Is Social Security Leveling a Widely Offered Annuity Option?

            Clark and Cowell (2016) reviewed the annuity options of 85 large state-managed public

plans which cover teachers, state, and/or local employees and found that 20 of these plans

offered a Social Security Leveling annuity option.5 Employees and teachers in 17 of the plans
5
    These plans are described in bi-annual reports by the Wisconsin Legislative Council (2013).



                                                      5
are not covered by Social Security and so none of these plans offer a leveling option. Thus,

about 30 percent of the 68 plans in which participants are included in the Social Security system

offer a Social Security Leveling option.

          Table 1 lists each public plan with this annuity option along with the type of employees

covered by the plan, the number of active workers covered by the plan, and the age at which the

pension benefit is reduced if Social Security Leveling is chosen. In total, these plans covered 2.3

million active workers in 2012. Fifteen of the twenty plans specify age 62 as the age at which

benefits are reduced while two plans set age 65, one age 66, one uses the full retirement age for

Social Security benefits, and Virginia allows retirees to select any age between age 62 and the

full retirement age for Social Security benefits.6 Obviously, only plans in which participants are

also covered by Social Security have a level income option. In addition, rules regarding normal

and early retirement ages will influence whether the plans will offer a benefit option that links

pension benefits to Social Security claiming.

                                                       [Table 1]

B. North Carolina Retirement Plans and Annuity Options

          The retirement plan for teachers and state employees and the state-managed pension plan

for local employees in North Carolina are typical of state and local pension plans across the

country. Teachers and state employees in North Carolina are covered by the Teachers’ and State

Employees’ Retirement System (TSERS), while local government workers participate in the




6
    In addition to these 20 plans, Georgia offers its retirees an “Accelerated Benefit” option which if chosen
provides a monthly benefit equal to 135 percent of the single life benefit for the first five years of
retirement after which time benefits are actuarially reduced.



                                                       6
Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System (LGERS).7 Participants in both plans are

also generally covered by Social Security. The parameters of the two plans are very similar.8 In

order to qualify for normal or unreduced benefits, the employee must have satisfied one of three

criteria: reached age 65 with 5 years of membership service; reached age 60 with 25 years of

service; or have attained 30 years of service at any age. Early retirement with reduced benefits

are available to those who have reached age 50 and completed 20 years of creditable service and

those who have reached age 60 and completed 5 years of service. Thus, for many public

employees in North Carolina, these plans provide a strong economic incentive to retire in their

50’s well before qualifying for Social Security at age 62.

          Upon termination and achieving the age and service requirements, retirees must request

from the retirement system that their benefits begin and the annuity option they desire. This is a

one-time option and no benefits are paid until the benefit request has been finalized. In other

words, there is no default benefit, retirees must submit a request for benefits to be paid, and a

choice of payout must be made. Both plans have the same six annuity options which include a

single life annuity, a 100% Joint and Survivors (J&S), a 50% J&S, Social Security Leveling, and




7
    The important characteristics of TSERS and LGERS are described in:
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/TSERShandbook.pdf and
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/LGERShandbook.pdf
8
    Both plans have five-year vesting, the same eligibility and retirement requirements, and are managed by
the Department of State Treasurer. There is a slight difference in the generosity of the two plans in that
the benefit formula for LGERS is 1.85 percent of final average salary per year of service while the
TSERS formula is 1.82 percent of final average salary per year of service. Final average salary is
determined by the four highest consecutive years of earnings.



                                                      7
two additional J&S options with a pop-up provision if the retiree’s spouse dies first. Plan

actuaries set the terms of all annuity options so that they are present value neutral to the system.9

          There is also an option to take a lump sum withdrawal. Public sector retirement plans are

not subject to ERISA rules regarding the calculation of a lump sum distribution or the

requirement that joint and survivor annuities be the default annuity option. Similar to most

public defined benefit plans, in TSERS and LGERS lump sum distributions are based solely on

employee contributions plus accrued interest. Most benefit claimants with long careers who

have attained retirement eligibility find that the present value of the annuity greatly exceeds the

lump sum distribution amount (see Clark, Morrill, and Vanderweide, 2014).

          The Social Security Leveling option was added to the two North Carolina plans in 1955.

In the 1955 leveling option, the benefit assumed Social Security claiming at age 65, which at that

time was the earliest age at which one could collect Social Security benefits. In 1959, the target

age for leveling was reduced to age 62 for women but age 65 was retained for men. Finally, the

terms of the annuity option were amended in 1963 so that both men and women could select

Social Security Leveling with the leveling age set at 62.10 While we have found no record

confirming the reason why the state modified the Social Security Leveling option to target age

62 instead of 65, one can speculate that the modification was influenced by the change in federal

law allowing early claiming at age 62 and the subsequent surge in Social Security claiming age

at age 62.

9
    Historically, the General Assembly has awarded cost-of-living adjustments to retirees in both systems
that averaged close to the annual increase in CPI; however, in recent years, there have been few increases
in benefits.
10
     These changes were driven by changes in federal legislation which first introduced early retirement
benefits for women in 1956 and then for men in 1961.



                                                       8
      III.      Modeling the Social Security Leveling Benefit

A. Calculating the Relative Value of the Social Security Leveling Benefit

             The first step in determining the value of the leveling benefit is to calculate the single life

annuity benefit, known as the ‘maximum benefit,’ which is derived directly from the benefit

formula specified by the retirement system. The maximum benefit calculation is:




We refer to the maximum benefit level as BMAX. YOS is the number of years of service at

separation, and AFC is the average final compensation calculated using the highest four years of

earnings. The pension multiplier, M, is 0.0182 for workers in TSERS and 0.0185 for workers in

LGERS. Early is an early retirement reduction factor that is imposed for an individual claiming

benefits prior to attaining the age and service requirements for unreduced benefits. The

reduction factor is a function of claiming age and the number of years the retiree is short of

qualifying for unreduced benefits.11

             Retirees selecting the Social Security Leveling option must submit an estimate of the

anticipated Social Security benefit that they will be eligible to receive at age 62 provided by the

Social Security Administration based on the assumption that they will not have any further

earnings between their retirement and age 62.12 The retirement system then calculates an initial


11
     For most employees, Early is one minus the lesser of 5 percent per year prior to 30 years of service and
3 percent per year between age 60 and 65 plus 5 percent per year prior to age 60.
12
     The request for an estimate of the Social Security benefit beginning at age 62 is described in page 35 of
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Employers/TSERSEmployerManual.pdf “If, at retirement, the member
wants an estimate under Option 4, he or she must furnish the Retirement Systems Division with an
estimate, obtained by the member from the Social Security Administration, of the Social Security benefit
available to him or her at age 62. The member should request the age 62 Social Security estimate, in


                                                        9
retirement benefit that can be paid immediately to the retiree and a lower benefit that will be paid

after age 62. The leveling benefits in these two periods are priced relative to the maximum

benefit. Before age 62 (period 1), the pension benefit amount is equal to the maximum benefit

plus the expected Social Security payment (SS) times a leveling factor, F. After age 62 (period

2), the Social Security Leveling pension benefit is equal to the period 1 benefit minus the

expected Social Security benefit, thus providing a ‘level’ income throughout retirement of

pension plus Social Security payments.

                 (1)

                 (2)

The calculation of the leveling benefit does not depend on whether the individual actually

intends to claim Social Security at age 62. The system does not check to see if Social Security

benefits are initiated at age 62 or whether the benefit received is equal to the estimated value

used for leveling.

        The leveling factor is a function of the gender-specific mortality experience of the

system, the ratio of male to female retirees, and the interest rate specified by the system. The

objective is to determine the period 1 and period 2 benefit amounts so that the present value of

the Social Security Leveling option is equal to the present value of the maximum benefit from

the perspective of the retirement system. The benefit calculations use gender-specific mortality

rates that are then combined using proportions of males and females that reflect the participants

in the plan. This process yields a gender-neutral factor.


today’s dollars, if he or she stops working at the age he or she will be on his or her effective date of
retirement. This estimate should be obtained within 2 years prior to his or her effective date of
retirement.”



                                                      10
          To calculate the present value of the two benefit streams, the retirement system uses

survival probabilities taken from the retirement system’s experience study reports and the

mortality tables referenced therein.13 Both of the North Carolina retirement plans assume that

they will earn an annual return on investments of 7.25 percent so that benefit adjustments in the

leveling option are made using the expected value of the return that the system could have earned

if they had not moved payments forward using the leveling option.14 Thus, theoretically the

Social Security Leveling option is cost-neutral to the retirement system relative to the Maximum

Benefit option, using the assumptions established by the Board of Trustees of the plans.

          A simple example illustrates the impact of Social Security Leveling on the amount and

time pattern of the pension benefit. Details are provided in Appendix A. We consider a

hypothetical retiree claiming benefits at age 57. We suppose the individual is eligible for a

pension of $2,000 with the Maximum Benefit option. The retiring worker reports to the

retirement system that her expected Social Security benefit at age 62 is $1,200. Using this

information and the leveling factor, the system would determine that the benefit would be $2,761

per month until age 62 and then $1,561 per month for the rest of the life of the retiree. Together

with a Social Security benefit of $1,200, the post-62 total retirement income is ‘level’ at $2,761.

Figure 1 illustrates the values of the two options for this hypothetical retiree.
13
     Appendix A describes the calculation of the leveling benefit in detail by discussing the development of
the leveling factor and how it has changed over time. The system updated its mortality experience in 2012
to reflect improvements in life expectancy, which resulted in higher leveling factors. This change may
have made leveling slightly more appealing for post-2012 retirees by a very small amount, but take-up
rates for leveling actually dropped slightly.
14
     Most public defined benefit plans assume that they will earn an annual return of between 7.0 and 8.5
percent on their investments. These relatively high assumed returns have been criticized by many
economists (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2011).



                                                      11
                                                      [Figure 1]

          This calculation does not yield clear guidance on whether the individual is ‘better off’

receiving a total of $2,761 per month beginning when the pension benefit is first claimed for the

remainder of her life or receiving $2,000 per month in pension benefits prior to age 62 and then a

total of $3,200 per month after age 62 (i.e., $1,200 per month from Social Security and $2,000

per month from the pension). Answering this welfare question is complicated by a number of

factors. If an individual plans to continue paid employment after claiming a pension benefit,

then she may not need to access pension benefits early to smooth consumption. If an individual

has a shorter than average life expectancy due to poor health, she may benefit from receiving the

higher benefit earlier. And, of course, a high personal discount rate will lead one to more highly

value the near term larger income stream.

          By design, Social Security Leveling and Maximum Benefit options are supposed to be

cost neutral to the system. Thus, if an individual has a personal discount rate of 7.25 percent, the

present value of leveling would be the same as that for the Maximum Benefit option.

Economists have argued that a lower personal discount rate such as 2.9 percent would be a more

reasonable representation of the rate used by the average retiree.15 This rate is also more closely

aligned with potential market yields to an individual investor. The assumed lower discount rate

used by the retiree results in a higher present value of both benefit options. However, under

lower personal discount rates the present value of the Maximum Benefit would be higher than

that of the Social Security Leveling option. Clearly the relative “value” to the retiree of the two

options hinges on an individual’s personal discount rate and need to smooth consumption.



15
     See Shoven and Slavov (2014a, 2014b) for a discussion of appropriate discount rates for recent retirees.



                                                      12
       Table 2 illustrates the relative value of Social Security Leveling and the Maximum

Benefit Option for the hypothetical retiree described above. We calculate the present value of

each annuity stream using a series of personal discount rates ranging from zero to 14.5 percent.

These discount rates can be thought of as reflecting preferences and/or market conditions for

borrowing. Given that the formula used to determine the relative value assumes a 7.25 percent

discount rate, it should not be surprising that at a personal discount rate of 7.25 percent the

Leveling and Maximum Benefit options are basically equivalent. Individuals with lower

discount rates should prefer the benefit option that yields a higher value in the later years of

retirement. For example, if this individual had a 2.9 percent discount rate, she would have a 7.0

percent higher lifetime present value if she selected the Maximum Benefit instead of Social

Security Leveling option. This difference is even larger with no discounting where Maximum

Benefit is 11 percent higher. On the other hand, for very high personal discount rates, the

present value of the lifetime benefit will be higher for Social Security Leveling. High personal

discount rates could be due to time preferences or due to lack of liquidity in the pre-age 62 years.

                                                  [Table 2]

       If an individual believes she has a higher life expectancy than the retirement system’s

assumptions, she will clearly receive a higher lifetime benefit from choosing the Maximum

Benefit option. However, the prediction for age at claiming is less clear. As shown in Appendix

A, if an individual has a discount rate below 7.25 percent, then the “penalty” associated with

leveling is more pronounced for those that claim benefits at younger ages. However, claiming

benefits at younger ages is associated with individual characteristics that might otherwise affect

the relative weighting of the two plans including subjective life expectancy and personal




                                                 13
discount rates. Thus, the simulation exercise does not yield a clear prediction on how the choice

of leveling is related to age at claiming.

B. Theoretical Predictions Regarding Saving and Borrowing in Retirement

       The calculations described above support the prediction that individuals with higher

personal discount rates and lower life expectancies will be more likely to choose leveling. To

test this empirically, we now describe how these and some related theoretical predictions

translate into testable hypotheses in our data. Table 3 summarizes the predictions under a

consumption smoothing motive for choosing the Social Security Leveling option.

                                                 [Table 3]

       First, there are several factors that contribute to how individuals weigh present versus

future income and consumption. Time preferences matter explicitly such that an individual who

discounts the future more highly is more likely to choose leveling. Similarly, those who are time

impatient are less likely to invest in human capital, thus we predict that those with lower

education and poorer health are more likely to choose leveling due to underlying time

preferences. One related factor that contributes to time impatience is the lack of liquidity or

access to borrowing. If an individual has ample retirement savings, she may access these funds

at little or no cost. Thus, we predict that individuals who have accumulated retirement wealth

are less likely to choose leveling. These factors are summarized in the first row of Table 3.

       Liquidity itself will be related to the choice of the leveling option. An individual that has

other sources to borrow from will be less likely to elect for the leveling option if the implied

discount rate is lower than 7.25 percent. To the extent that pension size and final average salary

are correlated with having accumulated significant supplemental retirement wealth, we predict

that those with larger pension benefits are less likely to choose leveling due to the outside



                                                 14
options for borrowing. Holding constant wealth, the absolute size of the pension should only be

related to the choice of leveling if an individual is liquidity constrained and finds the pension

benefit insufficient to finance current consumption.

       An individual who is married to someone who is currently employed or who has

previously been employed is likely to have other options for smoothing consumption. However,

an individual who is the primary earner in the household might have a stronger incentive to

borrow, particularly if his/her spouse is in poor health or has immediate consumption needs.

Thus, we expect single individuals and primary earners to be more likely to elect for leveling

relative to married individuals who are not the primary or sole earner. Finally, the prediction for

years of service is ambiguous in this context. On the one hand, longer tenures are associated

with higher pension benefits and more human capital. However, a shorter tenure might be due to

prior work experience or could reflect an endogenous choice to retire early and pursue a second

career. These factors are summarized in the second row of Table 3.

       Next, all else equal, those with lower life expectancies should prefer Social Security

Leveling. Given that the retirement system prices the plans based on a blended life expectancy

between men and women, the leveling option is relatively more favorably priced for men with

average life expectancy than for women with average life expectancy. Gender may also proxy

for other characteristics, however, so must be interpreted with caution. Similarly, those without

a college degree have lower life expectancies, so lower educated may be more likely to choose

leveling due to shorter life expectancy. And, to the extent that race/ethnicity correlates with life

expectancy, we expect that non-Hispanic blacks are more likely to choose leveling than non-

Hispanic whites. These factors are summarized in the third row of Table 3.




                                                 15
        The prediction for the relationship between age at retirement and the choice of leveling is

more complicated, as discussed in Section III.A. Empirically, we fix the age at claiming benefits

and so are comparing only individuals at the time when they are making the claiming choice.

Individuals that work during retirement or have access to other sources of income are more likely

to prefer the Maximum Benefit. And, individuals that retire at younger ages could plan to work

in retirement. However, a longer time until retirement might mean more of a need to smooth

consumption. Holding constant subjective mortality expectations, personal discount rate, and the

absolute level of benefits, we find no clear prediction on the relationship between age at claiming

and annuity option choice.

        Next, while individuals in poor health may have lower life expectancies, even controlling

for years spent in retirement (i.e., age at claiming and subjective mortality), the prediction for the

relationship between poor health and annuity choice is ambiguous. Individuals may require

additional funds for medical expenditures if they are in poor health. Similarly, individuals in

good health may wish to “save” more by not choosing leveling guaranteeing a higher income in

later years when health may be worse. Or, individuals may want to consume more during a

period of good health.

        Some more ambiguous predictions arise from considering additional individual

characteristics. Risk aversion could manifest itself in a preference for leveling if near-term

consumption shocks are predominant in one’s decision process. However, if mortality risk (i.e.,

dying young) is predominant, then one is likely to prefer immediate consumption and therefore

choose leveling. If instead an individual is worried about longevity risk (i.e., outliving one’s

savings), the individual is less likely to prefer leveling so that the benefit in later years is higher.

Thus, the prediction on risk preferences is ambiguous. Finally, we note here that financial



                                                   16
knowledge yields no prediction under consumption smoothing. The consumption smoothing

framework assumes perfect information and rational decision-making. Thus, if financial

knowledge were related to the choice of leveling, we would interpret that as evidence of an

alternative decision-making rule.

      IV.      Social Security Leveling Option Choice Among Recent Retirees

            A. North Carolina Retirement Systems Data

            To shed some light on the relative importance of the hypotheses described in Section III,

we analyze data on older public sector workers in the North Carolina Teachers’ and State

Employees’ Retirement System (TSERS) and Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement

System (LGERS). We perform our analysis using a matched dataset of administrative records

and survey data. We obtained administrative data files for all participants in TSERS and LGERS

who initiated pension benefits between 2009 and 2014. The administrative records contain

detailed information about each retiree including earnings, job information, years of service,

creditable service, year of retirement, annuity option chosen, and benefit amount. From the

universe of recent retirees, we sent a survey to a random sample in Spring 2015. The survey

obtained additional personal information not contained in the administrative questions about

race/ethnicity, education level, household income and wealth, work status after claiming

retirement benefits and marital status, along with questions about their spouses’ characteristics

(if applicable) and time spent caregiving. In addition, the survey included questions on retiree

well-being and satisfaction with retirement-related decisions.16

            It is important to note that the survey responses were received in 2015 one to five years

after the retiree had made their choice of the pension annuity. Thus, some answers (such as


16
     Appendices B and C provide detail on the data and survey instrument.


                                                     17
wealth and health) may differ from those the individual might have given at the time of the

retirement decision.

           Table 4 presents the means of the full administrative dataset along with the subset of

individuals that were sent and then responded to the survey. The total number of recent benefit

claimants is 72,350, shown in Table 4, Column (1). Of these, 36,883 retired prior to age 62 and

were thus eligible for the leveling option (see Column (2)). Column (3) reports means when the

sample is further limited to only individuals who selected a benefit based on a single life annuity

(in other words, the Maximum Benefit or Social Security Leveling options). We then merge this

set of records with the survey data. The survey was sent to 9,650 individuals from the

population in Column (3). Our estimation sample includes 2,256 useable responses, which

represents a survey response rate of roughly 23%.17 Column (4) provides sample means for our

survey respondent. Comparing Columns (3) and (4), we see that our survey sample is reasonably

representative of the population of interest. Some notable differences are that the survey

respondents tended to have higher final average salary and maximum initial benefit amounts and

were more likely to have more than 30 years of service at retirement.

                                                   [Table 4]

           Considering the means reported in Table 4, Column (2), we see that almost two-thirds of

individuals retiring before age 62 had sufficient years of service to be eligible for an unreduced

retirement benefit. About 80 percent of all retirees were state employees and teachers with the

remainder being city and county employees throughout the state. The average age of starting
17
     The survey is part of a larger project and covers all benefit claimants from 2009 to 2014. Our overall
response rate on the survey was 22%. For more detail on the larger project, please see our website:
https://sites.google.com/site/publicsectorretirement/. Note that Column 4 excludes two survey
respondents who met all other criteria but who have both a TSERS and LGERS account.



                                                      18
retirement benefits for all retirees is 60.7 and for those that retired prior to age 62, the mean age

is 56.9. In general, the public sector tends to be majority female as the modal occupation is

teacher. The North Carolina data are consistent with this observation as about two-thirds of the

retirees during the sample period were women. Interestingly, when comparing Columns (2) and

(3), we note that a higher percentage of women compared to men select a single life annuity.

       The initial question for this research is whether Social Security Leveling is an important

annuity option for retirees. In other words, is Social Security Leveling simply a curious anomaly

made available to public employees or an important annuity choice that demands attention and

therefore should be a topic for policy review? We do find evidence that North Carolina public

sector retirees utilized this annuity option. At the bottom of Table 4, we see that 23.4 percent of

retirees younger than age 62 chose the leveling option. If the sample is restricted to individuals

who chose a single life annuity, in Table 4, Column (3), we see 33.4 percent of these retirees

opted for Social Security leveling.

       To illustrate the pattern of annuity choice by age, Figure 2 plots the annuity type chosen

by age at benefit claiming. Here the annuity types are grouped in three categories: (1) Social

Security Leveling, (2) Maximum Benefit, or (3) a Joint and Survivor Option. We can see that

the ratio of single life to joint and survivor annuity options is relatively constant. Above, we

describe how our prediction for the relationship between age at claiming and selection of

leveling was ambiguous, holding all else equal. We see in Figure 2 that about half of all

individuals claiming a single life annuity prior to age 55 chose Social Security Leveling. This

rate declines by age at claiming, with very few selecting leveling at age 61. This relatively high

rate of selecting Social Security Leveling among younger retirees highlights the importance of an

analysis of why retirees find this to be their preferred form of income in retirement.



                                                  19
                                             [Figure 2]

       An individual makes many decisions leading up to the point of choosing Social Security

Leveling. Near the end of her career, she chooses the timing of separation and retirement benefit

claiming. At that point, she chooses whether to withdraw funds as a lump sum, take a joint and

survivor annuity, or take a single life annuity. We assume that once a retiree has decided on a

single life annuity, she then decides between the Maximum Benefit option, which provides a

constant monthly benefit for life, or the Social Security Leveling option, which offers a higher

benefit before age 62 followed by a lower benefit after age 62. Although we model only the

decision made between the Maximum Benefit and the Social Security Leveling options once all

other decisions have been made, we note that any parameters that impact prior choices will in

turn affect the sample composition of who might be facing the Social Security Leveling option

choice. We make this restriction because for this sample the importance of a level income before

and after age 62 is a predominant motive in their choice of annuity type. In contrast, we

anticipate heterogeneity in the importance of survivor benefits offered in the joint and survivor

annuity options in ways that would confound the estimation of the choice of interest. Thus, we

estimate the how individual characteristics predict the choice of taking the leveling option among

only those that have elected for a single life annuity.

       B. Social Security Leveling Uptake Among Retiring Workers in North Carolina

       In Section III and Table 3, we outlined several characteristics that we predict would lead

individuals to select the Social Security Leveling option over the Maximum Benefit option. We

predict that individuals with higher personal discount rates and lower life expectancies will be

relatively more likely to choose the leveling option. We anticipate that unobserved personal

discount rates and predicted life expectancy are correlated with observable demographic and



                                                 20
socioeconomic characteristics. We thus predict higher take-up of leveling among men, non-

Hispanic black individuals, those with lower education levels, and those with less wealth

accumulated. We find support for all of these hypotheses in our regression analysis described

below.

           Our main regression analysis is estimated using data that consists of survey responses

merged with administrative data, as shown in Table 4, Column (4). Our main sample is

individuals who claimed benefits at an age younger than 62 and selected a single life annuity

(i.e., either the Maximum Benefit or Social Security Leveling options). The survey of retirees

provides us with the opportunity to examine annuity choice process utilizing personal

information that is not available in the administrative records. As noted above, individuals were

surveyed in 2015, so the responses are between one to five years after initiating retirement

benefits. Tables 5-7 present regression estimates from a linear probability model of selecting the

leveling option among those who selected a single life annuity at retirement.18 Table 5, Column

(1) presents results from the baseline specification. This specification is repeated in Tables 6 and

7 for reference. Tables 5 and 6 allow us to assess consumption smoothing as a motivation for

choosing Social Security Leveling.

                                                        [Table 5]




18
     In addition to the covariates presented in the table, the regression model also includes indicators for
having multiple benefit accounts. As described in more detail in the appendix, individuals have the
option to combine accounts or to claim accounts separately. If an account has been combined, we only
observe the merged account in the data. Thus, opting to keep the accounts separate indicates something
about an individual’s preferences regarding pension payouts. The baseline specification also includes
controls for five agency categories and for the year of benefit claiming.



                                                        21
          First in Column (1) of Table 5, as predicted, men are 4.7 percentage points more likely to

choose leveling. This is consistent with the fact that men have shorter life expectancies, on

average, so that the ratio of the present value of leveling relative to maximum benefit is higher

for men than women.19 We see no differences by marital status.20 Non-Hispanic black retirees

are significantly more likely to choose leveling, perhaps again due to shorter anticipated life

expectancies. Individuals with at least a Bachelor’s degree are 6.6 percentage points less likely

choose leveling, which is consistent with lower life expectancy and a higher personal discount

rate.

          There is a clear age pattern as each year of age at the time of claiming results in a lower

probability of choosing leveling of 3.6 percentage points. While this is consistent with

individuals further from Social Security eligibility age having a stronger need to smooth

consumption, it is not consistent with younger individuals having a higher potential to engage in

post-retirement work. Note that the estimated coefficient on age at claiming is holding constant

years of service and benefit amount. For years of service, the omitted category is having at least

30 years of service. We see no statistically significant differences by years of service when

controlling for age and benefit amount. We observe that a higher maximum initial benefit

amount is associated with a lower take-up of leveling. As discussed in Section III, liquidity

constraints would suggest that those with a lower pension benefit, all else equal, would be more

likely to choose leveling.

19
     To measure the magnitude of this gender difference, we compare the present value difference between
the maximum benefit and the leveling annuity for a man and woman both of whom have a personal
discount rate of 2.9 percent. Using the same characteristics as described above, the present value of gain
of the maximum benefit compare to the leveling option is $30,000 for women and $24,000 for men.
20
     Recall that the estimation sample excludes individuals choosing a Joint & Survivor annuity option.



                                                      22
       The baseline results presented in Column (1) of Table 5 suggest those with statistically

lower life expectancies (men, lower educated, non-Hispanic black) are all more likely to choose

the leveling option. While we do have survey responses on health status and subjective survival

expectations, these are measured in our survey some time after the annuity decision was made. It

may be that causality flows from having chosen leveling to health. For example, the higher

short-run benefit received under leveling could lead to a more muted health decline in retirement.

Prior literature has found that health declines around the time of retirement and that this is

probably both a cause of retirement and an effect of retirement (see, e.g., McGarry 2014). Our

theoretical prediction is that those in poorer health will be more likely to choose leveling because

they have a shorter life expectancy. The estimated coefficients on demographic characteristics

presented above are consistent with this prediction. But, if having a higher benefit in retirement

allows levelers to insulate themselves better from post-retirement health shocks, then the

estimated coefficient on health status measured ex post will confound both underlying health

prior to retirement and post retirement health status. Thus, we cannot directly interpret the

coefficients on health or subjective mortality expectations when measured ex post.

       However, we can consider whether the estimated coefficients on demographic

characteristics are altered when including ex post health and mortality measures. In Column (2)

of Table 5, we include self-reported health status and perceived life expectancy. We include a

dummy variable for reporting being in “fair” or “poor” health (relative to reporting “good,”

“very good,” or “excellent” health). We also report the estimated coefficient on a dummy

variable for having skipped the health status question. We observe that those in poor health in

retirement are less likely to have chosen the leveling option, consistent with the prediction that

ex post health is improved for levelers. High life expectancy is defined as predicting one’s



                                                 23
mortality as greater than 80 years. We do not observe a statistically significant relationship with

self-reported (ex post) subjective mortality and choosing the leveling option. The estimated

coefficients on the demographic characteristics are basically unchanged when adding the health

and mortality covariates to the model. To the extent that our health and mortality measures are

correlated with pre-retirement health status, they cannot explain the associations observed

between choosing leveling and being male, lower educated, and not white.

       Next, we explore the role of time and risk preferences in Column (3) of Table 5. Once

again, we are using ex post measures of risk and time preference. We are assuming that over the

interval between retirement and the survey, these preferences would have remained relatively

stable. We have two measures of time preferences drawn from Health and Retirement Study-

style hypothetical choice survey questions. We include three dummy variables to capture

individuals who are classified as impatient on only one frame or both, relative to the omitted

group of patient on both. Risk preferences are proxied using similar questions; these were also

designed to match questions in the Health and Retirement Study and are used to construct binary

measures similar to what we use for time preferences. Appendix C provides more information

on our time and risk questions. In Section III and in Table 3, we discuss how the predictions for

time impatience are clear: those who prefer immediate consumption to delayed consumption

should prefer Social Security Leveling. However, the prediction for risk preferences is

ambiguous.

       As predicted by consumption smoothing, impatient individuals are more likely to choose

leveling because it is associated with higher monthly benefits in the near term. Those who were

found to be impatient on both frames are the most likely to choose leveling but the differences

across frames are not large. In contrast, there is less of a clear pattern in the choice of leveling



                                                  24
for more or less risk averse individuals across our two risk frames. All point estimates are

consistent with more risk averse individuals choosing leveling more often but the standard errors

are large. Further, the differences in coefficients for each risk dummy are not statistically

significant. In total, we find strong support for a preference for leveling among the impatient and

directional support for a preference for leveling among the risk averse. While the estimated

coefficients on education and race do drop slightly, suggesting preferences play some role in

explaining the differences across these groups, the coefficient on male actually increases slightly.

       Next, in Table 6, we explore whether accumulated wealth is associated with the decision

to take the Social Security Leveling annuity option. Again, these measures are gathered in

retirement and must be interpreted with some caution. However, if individuals who chose the

Maximum Benefit option have already spent down wealth, then the association between low

levels of wealth and leveling choice will be diminished. In Table 6, Column (1), we repeat the

baseline specification for reference. In Column (2), we add measures of self-reported retirement

saving plan balances and summary wealth variables. We see that those reporting smaller account

balances and lower wealth levels are significantly more likely to have chosen the Social Security

Leveling option at retirement. Note that, to the extent that wealth will decline more for those not

choosing leveling, the wealth results are potentially biased towards, not away, from zero. Again,

we see that wealth explains little of the demographic group differences.

                                                 [Table 6]

       The results discussed thus far provide some evidence of consumption smoothing as a key

factor in explaining the choice of a leveling annuity option. However, while several groups with

lower life expectancy are more likely to choose leveling (men, non-Hispanic blacks, and

individuals without a college degree), we find no association between (ex post) self-reported life



                                                 25
expectancy and choosing leveling. Individuals who appear more impatient are also more likely

to choose leveling, which is again consistent with a consumption smoothing motive. Next, we

ask whether a behavioral decision rule also plays a role.

   V.      Myopic Benefit Maximization

        Individuals motivated by consumption smoothing are conforming to well-known decision

rules advocated by economists. However, questions remain about the empirical validity of

consumption smoothing as a predominant factor in explaining intertemporal consumption and

savings behavior (e.g., Angeletos, et al., 2001, and Camerer, Loewenstein, and Prelec, 2005).

Alternatively, myopic benefit maximization as a motivation for choosing Social Security

Leveling could be used to describe the behavior of some retirees. Under myopic benefit

maximization, individuals who are attracted to a higher immediate benefit (perhaps because they

place a high weight on immediate consumption needs) perceive their retirement and other asset

holdings at separation as insufficient. In short, some individuals may choose Social Security

Leveling because they feel that they need the larger benefit now without internalizing the fact

that the benefit will be lowered in the future. Here, we assess whether there is evidence that is

consistent with myopic benefit maximization, controlling for the factors predicted by

consumption smoothing.

        Myopic benefit maximization would predict that those with lower education and less

financial sophistication would be more attracted to the leveling option. The previous section has

noted that individuals with a college degree are meaningfully less likely to choose leveling. We

cannot test between a fully rational consumption smoothing rule and a myopic rule as explaining

why less educated individuals prefer leveling. Low educational attainment is consistent with

myopic decision making in other contexts (e.g., Boissiere, Knight, and Sabot 1985 and


                                                26
Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro 2013). In contrast, the smoothing explanation posits that less

educated individuals recognize their shorter life expectancy and optimally choose leveling in

response.21

          For a further look at myopic benefit maximization as explaining the choice of leveling,

we explore the role of financial literacy. Our approach builds on the growing literature on

financial literacy and retirement decision making. The myopic decision rule predicts that

leveling is more likely to be chosen by less financially literate individuals. To test this, we

introduce two measures of financial literacy drawn from the survey: objective financial literacy

and subjective financial knowledge. The objective measure includes three dummy variables for

whether the individual correctly answered questions drawn from the Health and Retirement

Study. The subjective measure is a self-reported financial literacy score on a scale from 1 to 7,

with blank responses coded as zero and a dummy variable for blank response included.

          Table 7 presents results from regressions including these variables. First, Column (1)

repeats the baseline specification for reference. Then, Column (2) includes the “objective”

financial literacy measures. The specification also includes indicators for skipping the “objective

financial knowledge” questions. The coefficients are not statistically significant and are not

presented for brevity. Individuals answering one or both of the financial knowledge questions

correctly are no more or less likely to have chosen the leveling option. Again, these responses

are measured between one and five year after the claiming decision was made and might

confound any learning that occurred in the interim.

                                                    [Table 7]

21
     The smoothing calculus for why men choose leveling more often than women is arguably more
plausible, given the gender difference in life expectancy is well known among the general public.



                                                   27
       Table 7, Column (3) includes subjective financial knowledge. We include a linear term

for self-reported financial knowledge on a scale of 1-7, with a missing value treated as zero. We

also include an indicator for skipping the self-reported financial knowledge question (which was

the last question on the survey). Individuals with high subjective financial knowledge are no

more or less likely to choose leveling. Furthermore, including both objective and subjective

financial literacy does not meaningfully alter the estimated coefficients on the other included

demographic characteristics. These results suggest that residual variation in financial literacy is

uncorrelated with the choice of leveling.

       Finally, we explore a mismatch between objective and subjective knowledge by including

a variable of “overconfidence” that is defined as not answering both financial literacy questions

correctly but reporting at least a 5 out of 7 on self-reported financial knowledge. We again see

no statistically significant relationship here. These results do not support the myopic rule as an

important factor and suggest that there is no statistically significant difference in the choice of

leveling for those with lower knowledge or financial sophistication.

       While we find no systematic evidence that those with poor financial literacy are more

attracted to the Social Security Leveling option, that does not imply that financial literacy is

unimportant in retirement-related decision making. For example, individuals with poor

understanding of pension plan incentives might be attracted to the term “Maximum Benefit”

option and take that as an implicit default. Chan and Stevens (2008) find evidence that

individuals respond to perceived pension incentives, even when ill-informed. In total, we find

limited support for an alternative, behavioral decision rule, myopic benefit maximization.




                                                  28
          D. Ex-Post Regret in Retirement

          In the survey data, we observe several measures of retirees’ satisfaction with their

retirement choices and the information available upon annuity choice. If individuals are

choosing leveling simply to receive a larger payment initially, we would observe that the ex-post

regret measures will differ for individuals who are responding to the survey before and after age

62. In contrast, if consumption smoothing explains the choice of leveling, we should observe no

large differences in post-retirement regret across annuity type and no large changes at age 62.

          Table 8 presents these results. In each column, the dependent variable is whether the

individual “strongly agrees” with statements about retirement income security and information.22

Each column presents the results from an LPM model, where the ex-post regret measures are as

follows: whether the individual reported having saved enough for retirement, reported having

been able to maintain a satisfactory standard of living, and reported that they had enough

information when making their annuity choice.

                                                     [Table 8]

          The results in Table 8 show differences in the ex-post regret measures from individuals

who chose leveling, relative to the Maximum Benefit option, separately for individuals who are

responding to the survey prior to age 62 and post 62. The pre-62 respondents that chose leveling

are currently receiving the higher benefit from the pension system, while the post-62 respondents

are currently receiving the reduced benefit. However, for levelers, their pension plus Social

Security income is equivalent before and after age 62. On the other hand, those choosing the

Maximum Benefit option will be receiving a higher level of income from pension plus Social

Security after age 62.


22
     The wording of these questions is included in Appendix C.


                                                     29
       In Table 8, Column (1), we observe that a higher proportion of those that selected Social

Security Leveling felt that they had not saved enough for retirement. For retirees who responded

after age 62, levelers are around nine percentage points less likely than those choosing the

Maximum Benefit option to say they saved enough for retirement. This is a large difference and

is consistent with myopic behavior playing a role in the choice of leveling.

       In Table 8, Column (2), for pre-62 respondents, levelers are around eight percentage

points more likely to report being able to maintain their standard of living in retirement.

However, for post-62 respondents, levelers and non-levelers report being able to maintain their

standard of living at similar rates. Thus, for those individuals whose pension benefit has been

reduced at age 62, the perceived benefit to standard of living afforded by Social Security

Leveling has gone away. When considering the role of information in Column (3), we see that

those retirees that have passed the age 62 threshold are 6 percentage points less likely to report

having had enough information about their annuity options at retirement if they leveled. A

significant group of levelers who are now in the lower-benefit period (i.e., post-62) no longer

believe they had enough information when they chose their benefit, which is consistent with

regret. Note that the mean of the dependent variable is 0.841 indicating that the majority of

respondents did feel that they had sufficient information at the time of decision-making.

       We interpret the results in Table 8 as suggestive evidence of ex-post regret associated

with the choice of Social Security Leveling. There are meaningful differences at age 62 in

respondents’ perceived satisfaction with their standard of living and the information available at

the time of annuity choice. These facts undermine a fully rational model of the choice of

leveling based on consumption smoothing.




                                                 30
         In total, the results in Table 7 provided only limited support for an alternative, behavioral

model of the choice of leveling. While less educated individuals are significantly more likely to

choose leveling, there is no evidence that low levels of financial literacy are the cause. But, from

Table 8, individuals who chose leveling report that they had not saved enough and, once the

benefit drops at age 62, do not feel they had enough information when they chose leveling. The

richness of our data allow us to combine the evidence from these two approaches to assess the

residual explanatory power of an alternative, behavior decision rule. We conclude that myopic

benefit maximization does play a role in understanding which individuals select the Social

Security Leveling annuity option.

   VI.      Discussion and Future Work

         Social Security Leveling is an annuity option offered by 20 large public defined benefit

plans. The experience of recent retirees in North Carolina shows that a substantial proportion of

younger retirees are selecting this option, which changes the lifetime pattern of their retirement

income. Clearly, Social Security Leveling is not merely just a curious oddity but instead is a

significant policy issue that merits consideration and review.

         We have documented that the retirement system offers leveling in a manner that is cost

neutral to the system. The pricing is based on an interest or discount rate of 7.25 percent. This is

the same rate that the system assumes that it will make on its investments. It seems unlikely that

individuals in today’s economic climate would use such a high discount rate for future income

when market interest rates hover near zero. Our calculations show that when individuals use a

lower discount rate, the present value of the Social Security Leveling annuity is less than the

present value of the Maximum Benefit annuity. Thus, for a typical retiree, Social Security

Leveling would seem to be a suboptimal choice from a present-value perspective.


                                                  31
        Despite this finding, it is easy to see why some retirees will select the leveling option.

Individuals that are liquidity constrained or do not have access to low interest debt may find that

leveling is a better option than other sources of credit. Individuals with shorter than average

expected lifetimes will have a higher present value of benefits paid under leveling compared to

the maximum benefit. Retirees with immediate income needs may also find leveling a superior

choice. Thus, individual and household differences can explain some of the sorting of retirees

into those selecting leveling as their best option. We report evidence that suggests those with

lower levels of wealth and groups with lower life expectancies are more likely to choose the

leveling option. We also observe that individuals exhibiting time impatience are more likely to

choose leveling. We do not find strong evidence that leveling is more popular among those with

lower levels of financial literacy. However, we do find evidence of ex post “regret” in retirement

among levelers.

        Is Social Security Leveling at age 62 a wise public policy? The answer to this question

depends on how having the option to level income affects other choices by retirees. Using our

combined administrative records and survey data, we provide a detailed analysis of annuity

choice in a setting where there is no default annuity option. We find evidence that is consistent

with the choice of Social Security Leveling as part of a fully rational consumption-smoothing

plan. However, we also find some evidence that myopic benefit maximization is a component of

the choice of the leveling option for at least some retirees. In total, our interpretation is that the

evidence is mixed in terms of how well Social Security Leveling works for retirees in this

setting. One message of these results is for an emphasis (or further emphasis) on the potential

advantages and disadvantages of particular annuity options in the information provided to

retirees by the retirement system.



                                                  32
REFERENCES


Angeletos, G.M., Laibson, D., Repetto, A., Tobacman, J. and Weinberg, S., 2001. “The
       hyperbolic consumption model: Calibration, simulation, and empirical evaluation,”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), pp.47-68.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Alessandro Previtero, and Richard Thaler. 2011. “Annuitization puzzles,”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 143-164.

Benjamin, D.J., Brown, S.A. and Shapiro, J.M., 2013. “Who is ‘behavioral’? Cognitive ability
       and anomalous preferences,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(6),
       pp.1231-1255.

Blostin, Allan. 2003. “Distribution of retirement income benefits,” Monthly Labor Review, April,
       pp. 3-9.

Boissiere, M., Knight, J.B. and Sabot, R.H., 1985. “Earnings, schooling, ability, and cognitive
       skills.” American Economic Review, 75(5), pp.1016-1030.
Bronshtein, Gila, Jason Scott, John Shoven, and Sita Slavov. 2016. “Leaving big money on the
       table: Arbitrage opportunities in delaying Social Security” NBER Working Paper #22853,
       November 2016.
Brown, Jeffrey. 2001. “Private pensions, mortality risk, and the decision to annuitize,” Journal of
       Public Economics, 82(1): 29 - 62.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. “Why
       Don’t People Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-
       Annuitization Puzzle,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 98:2, 304-
       309.

Bütler, M., and Teppa, F. 2007. “The choice between an annuity and a lump sum: Results from
       Swiss pension funds.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(10), 1944-1966.

Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G. and Prelec, D., 2005. “Neuroeconomics: How neuroscience can
       inform economics.” Journal of Economic Literature, 43(1), pp.9-64.

Chalmers, J., and Reuter, J. 2012. “How do retirees value life annuities? Evidence from public
       employees,” The Review of Financial Studies, 25(8): 2601-2634.

                                                33
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “What you don’t know can’t help you: Pension
       knowledge and retirement decision-making,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
       90(2): 253-266.

Clark, Robert and Janet Raye Cowell. 2016. “Annuity Options in Public Pension Plans,” Pension
       Research Council Annual Conference, May.

Clark, Robert, Melinda Morrill, and David Vanderweide. 2014. “Defined Benefit Pension Plan
       Distribution Decisions by Public Sector Employees,” Journal of Public Economics, 116:
       73-88.

Goda, Gopi, Shanthi Ramnath, John Shoven, and Sita Slavov. 2015. “The Financial Feasibility
       of Delaying Social Security: Evidence from Administrative Tax Data,” NBER Working
       Paper #21544, September 2015.

Local Government Employees’ Retirement System. “Your Retirement Benefits.”
       https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/LGERShandbook.pdf

McGarry, Kathleen. 2014. “Health and retirement: Do changes in health affect retirement
       expectations?” Journal of Human Resources, 39(3): 624-648.
Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh. 2011. “Policy options for state pension systems and their
       impact on plan liabilities,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(2): 173-194.
Shoven, John and Sita Slavov. 2014a. “Does It Pay to Delay Social Security?” Journal of
       Pension Economics and Finance, 13(2): 121-144.
Shoven, John and Sita Slavov. 2014b. “Recent Changes in the Gains from Delaying Social
       Security,” Journal of Financial Planning, 27(3): 32-41.
Teachers’ and State Employees’ Retirement System. “Your Retirement Benefits”
       https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/TSERShandbook.pdf

Wiatrowski, William. “Supplementing retirement until Social Security begins,” Monthly Labor
       Review, February 1990 pp. 25-28.

Wisconsin Legislative Council. “2012 Comparative Study of Major Public Employee Retirement
       Systems,” December 2013.
       http://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/misc/lc/comparative_retirement_study/2012_retirement.p
       df

                                              34
Figure 1. Illustration of Single Life Annuity Options for a Hypothetical Retiree

                           Pre-62 Leveling Benefit = $2,761


                                                             Max Benefit = $2,000 Monthly


                                                         Post-62 Leveling Benefit = $1,561


                 Age 62                               Current Age


Notes: Calculations are provided in Appendix A. The numbers assume a retiree claims benefits
at age 57 and is eligible for a maximum single life benefit of $2,000 per month. We assume the
retiree is eligible for a reduced Social Security benefit of $1,200 at age 62 (this implies a PIA of
$1,600). The Social Security Leveling benefit would then be $2,761 prior to age 62 and $1,561
after age 62 ($1,561 + $1,200 yield a level income of $2,761).




                                                 35
Figure 2. Age and Time Pattern of Social Security Leveling




Notes: Sample is all benefit claimants from 2009 to 2014 who were ages 48 to 70 at the time of
claiming, N = 64,784.




                                              36
Table 1. State Annuity Options Social Security Leveling
State Plan          Age       Covered Employees                           Plan Information
Alaska PERS         65        State and local employees, 11,688           Left SS in 1986, DC in
                              actives                                     2006. Leveling only for DB.
Idaho PERS          SS FRA State, local, and teachers, 65,270 actives
Illinois SRS        66        State employees, 62,732 actives
Illinois MRF        62        Locals, 174,381 actives
Indiana PERF        62        State and local employees, 145,519          Hybrid plan annuity from
                              actives                                     DB component.
Indiana TRF         62        Teachers, 72,872 actives                    Hybrid plan annuity from
                                                                          DB component.
Kentucky KERS       62        State employees, 46,282 actives
Kentucky CERS       62        Local employees, 92,182 actives
Michigan SERS       65        State employees                             DB plan frozen 1997, New
                                                                          hires in DC plan.
Michigan PSERS      62        Teachers, 236,660 employees
North Carolina      62        State employees and teachers, 310,627
TSERS                         actives
North Carolina      62        Local employees, 121,638 actives
LGERS
North Dakota TRF 62 or  Teachers, 10,138 actives
                 SS FRA
Rhode Island ERS    62        State employees and teachers, 24,378
                              actives
South Dakota        62        State and local employees and teachers,
SDRS                          38,207 actives
Tennessee CRS       62        State and local employees and teachers,
                              214,860 actives
Vermont SRS         62        State employees, 8,158 actives
Vermont TRS         62        Teachers, 10,101 actives
Virginia SRS        62 - SS   State and local employees and teachers,     Retiree chooses age between
                    FRA       341,826 actives                             62 and SS FRA
Wisconsin WRS       62        State and local employees and teachers,
                              257,254 actives
Similar Annuity Option
Georgia ERS         Accelerated Benefit. A monthly benefit equal to 135% of the Maximum Plan
                    Benefit, payable for the first five continuous years of your retirement. After 5
                    years, monthly benefit is actuarially reduced.
Notes: This information is based on a review of retirement system websites. The numbers of active
employees covered are provided in the 2012 report by the Wisconsin Legislative Council,
https://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/misc/lc/comparative_retirement_study/2012_retirement.pdf.

                                                   37
Table 2: Hypothetical Relative Value of Benefits by Personal Discount Rates


                Present Value of Pension Benefits Claimed at Age 57
              Social Security: $1,200; Maximum Benefit Pension: $2,000


                                        Assumed Personal Discount Rate

                              0%              2.9%            7.25%            14.5%

SS Leveling                $569,834         $401,727         $272,972        $179,203

Maximum Benefit            $639,017         $429,908         $273,024        $163,598

Percent Difference: (Maximum – Leveling)/Maximum

                              11%              7%               0%             -10%


Notes: Details of the calculations are provided in Appendix A. The example is for a retiree
claiming benefits at age 57, with a maximum single life benefit of $2,000 per month, and a
reduced Social Security benefit of $1,200 at age 62. Present values are calculated using the
mortality assumptions from the retirement system and the assumed personal discount rate as
indicated in column headings.




                                               38
Table 3: Theoretical Predictions of Consumption Smoothing
Category          Description                           Predictions for Higher Probability
                                                        of Choosing Leveling
Time Preference   Individuals may discount the future   Time impatient preferences
and Personal      due to preferences or might have a    Lower educated
Discount Rate     high discount rate because of lack    Poorer health
                  of liquidity or access to wealth.     Less wealth accumulated

Wealth and        Those with other sources of income    Less wealth accumulated
Liquidity         have less need to borrow. Those       Smaller pension benefit
                  lower levels of human capital may     Low skilled/lower educated
                  have more difficulty finding work.    Single individuals
                  Lower levels of wealth result in      Tenure (ambiguous)
                  greater need to borrow.


Life Expectancy   Leveling is more appealing to those Men
                  with shorter life expectancies.     Lower educated
                                                      Non-Hispanic black
                                                      Self-reported life expectancy

Age at            Longer time until retirement means    Younger at retirement (ambiguous)
Retirement        more need to smooth, conditional
                  on not working.
Health            Those in poor health may require      Poor health (ambiguous)
                  additional funds immediately and
                  have lower life expectancy.

Risk Preference   Insure against future risks.          Ambiguous
                  But less trust in future benefits
                  implies desire for more money
                  now.


Financial         No prediction under consumption
Knowledge         smoothing




                                               39
Table 4. Means of Individuals Claiming Retirement Benefits between 2009 and 2014
Variables                              All           Claiming      Claiming       Survey
                                     Retirees        Before 62     Before 62     Respondents
                                                                 and Selecting   (Response
                                                                 a Single Life   Rate 23%)
                                                                    Annuity
                                       (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)
Number of Benefit Accounts           72,350           36,883        25,839          2,256

Age at Claiming                       60.7             56.9          56.9            56.6
Age at Termination                    60.7             56.8          56.8            56.6
Early Retirement                     36.1%            37.3%         39.8%           34.9%
TSERS                                79.1%            80.9%         83.0%           83.2%
Community College                     4.3%             3.3%          3.2%            4.1%
Local Government                     21.0%            19.1%         17.0%           16.8%
Primary Government (and              19.7%            19.4%         18.3%           15.7%
Proprietary Unit)
Public Schools                        46.9%           51.3%         55.0%           55.6%
University                             8.1%            6.8%          6.5%            7.7%
Receiving Health Insurance 100%       78.3%           81.1%         83.1%           83.5%
Receiving Health Insurance 50%        0.02%           0.01%         0.02%           0.04%
Male                                  34.2%           31.1%         24.7%           19.1%
Years of Service                       22.9            26.9          26.51           27.45
Years of Service 5-19                 35.1%           14.6%         15.6%           13.2%
Years of Service 20-24                15.6%           13.5%         14.5%           11.6%
Years of Service 25-29                19.2%           24.9%         24.5%           22.5%
Years of Service 30+                  30.1%           47.0%         45.4%           52.7%
Final Average Salary                 $51,447         $55,208       $53,199         $61,116
Maximum Initial Benefit Amount        $1,876          $2,264        $2,142          $2,534

Annuity Type:
SS Leveling                          12.0%            23.4%         33.4%           31.8%
Max                                  56.0%            46.7%         66.6%           68.2%
OPT2                                 10.5%             8.2%
OPT3                                  3.7%             3.3%
OPT62                                11.0%            11.1%
OPT63                                 6.9%             7.4%

Has any other account               7.5%           5.5%            4.3%            1.7%
Has both TSERS/LGERS               0.13%          0.12%           0.09%            0.0%
Notes: Only primary TSERS and LGERS accounts are included in the sample, as described in
Appendix A1. The bottom row indicates the percent of the sample that has both a TSERS and
LGERS account in the data. Column (4) excludes survey respondents meeting all other criteria
but who have both a TSERS and LGERS account.



                                                40
Table 5. Choice of Social Security Leveling Among Single Life Annuitants
                                                                            Health/        Risk/Time
                                              Mean/Pct     Baseline
                                                                           Mortality       Preferences
                                                              (1)             (2)               (3)
Male                                           19.1%         0.048           0.046             0.055
                                                           (0.024)*        (0.024)*         (0.025)**
Married                                        61.0%        -0.009          -0.009            -0.008
                                                            (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.019)
Non-Hispanic Black                             16.0%         0.166            0.175            0.158
                                                          (0.026)***      (0.026)***       (0.026)***
Other Race/Ethnicity                            3.0%         0.084            0.100            0.089
                                                            (0.054)         (0.059)*         (0.057)
BA Degree or more                              72.3%        -0.068           -0.070           -0.056
                                                          (0.024)***      (0.024)***        (0.024)**
Age at Claiming                                 56.6        -0.036           -0.036           -0.036
                                                          (0.003)***      (0.003)***       (0.003)***
Years of Service 5-19                          13.2%        -0.047           -0.045           -0.041
                                                            (0.044)          (0.044)         (0.044)
Years of Service 20-24                         11.6%         0.013            0.016            0.008
                                                            (0.037)          (0.037)         (0.037)
Years of Service 25-29                         22.5%         0.035            0.036            0.037
                                                            (0.026)          (0.026)         (0.026)
Maximum Initial Benefit Amount (1K)             2.53        -0.041           -0.041           -0.039
                                                          (0.011)***      (0.011)***       (0.011)***
Self-Reported Health Fair or Poor               6.3%                         -0.090
                                                                           (0.040)**
Missing Response on Self-Reported Health        1.2%                         -0.212
                                                                           (0.106)**
Self-Reported Life Expectancy 80+              65.3%                         -0.045
                                                                             (0.030)
Impatient: Benefit Frame Only                  18.4%                                           0.055
                                                                                             (0.029)*
Impatient: Lottery Frame Only                  25.8%                                           0.066
                                                                                            (0.027)**
Impatient Both Frames                          25.1%                                           0.092
                                                                                           (0.028)***
Risk Averse: Pension Frame Only                 3.9%                                           0.104
                                                                                               (0.064)
Risk Averse: Prize Frame Only                  17.1%                                            0.038
                                                                                               (0.056)
Risk Averse Both Frames                          70.1%                                          0.068
                                                                                               (0.055)
R2                                                               0.13           0.14             0.14
Number of Obs.                                                  2,256          2,256            2,256
Notes: The dependent variable is having chosen Social Security Leveling, mean 0.317. Data are from
administrative records on pension benefit claimants merged with survey responses and include those that
chose a single life annuity at retirement. Coefficients are estimates from a LPM with standard errors in
parentheses. All specifications include agency type and year of claiming fixed effects, a dummy variable
for Hispanic ethnicity (mean 0.05) along with dummy variables for item non-response and for answering
“don’t know”. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01

                                                   41
Table 6. The Role of Wealth in the Choice of Social Security Leveling
                                                                 Baseline      Wealth
                                                      Mean/Pct      (1)           (2)
 Male                                                   19.1%       0.048         0.044
                                                                  (0.024)*      (0.024)*
 Married                                                61.0%      -0.009         0.016
                                                                   (0.019)       (0.020)
 Non-Hispanic Black                                     16.0%       0.166         0.138
                                                                 (0.026)***   (0.026)***
 Hispanic/Latino                                         0.5%      -0.032        -0.023
                                                                   (0.127)       (0.126)
 Other Race/Ethnicity                                    3.0%       0.084         0.082
                                                                   (0.054)       (0.055)
 BA Degree or more                                      72.2%      -0.068        -0.048
                                                                 (0.024)***    (0.024)**
 Age at Claiming                                        56.6       -0.036        -0.035
                                                                 (0.003)***   (0.003)***
 Years of Service 5-19                                  13.4%      -0.047        -0.021
                                                                   (0.044)       (0.044)
 Years of Service 20-24                                 11.6%       0.013         0.031
                                                                   (0.037)       (0.037)
 Years of Service 25-29                                 24.4%       0.035         0.042
                                                                   (0.026)       (0.026)
 Maximum Initial Benefit Amount (1K)                     2.53      -0.041        -0.031
                                                                 (0.011)***   (0.011)***
 Amount in Retirement Saving Plans: Less than $25K      21.2%                     0.099
                                                                              (0.029)***
 Amount in Retirement Saving Plans: $25K- $99K          25.0%                     0.063
                                                                               (0.026)**
 Amount in Retirement Saving Plans: N/A or blank        19.3%                     0.109
                                                                              (0.031)***
 All other wealth: Less than $25K                       43.0%                     0.062
                                                                               (0.026)**
 All other wealth: $25K-$100K                           21.2%                     0.065
                                                                               (0.028)**
 All other wealth: Blank                                10.2%                    -0.023
                                                                                 (0.040)
 R2                                                                0.13            0.15
 Number of Obs.                                                    2,256          2,256
Notes: See Table 5. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 42
Table 7: The Role of Financial Literacy in the Choice of Social Security Leveling
                                         Baseline        Objective       Subjective        Over-
                                                         Financial       Financial       confidence
                             Mean/                       Literacy         Literacy
                              Pct           (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
Male                         19.1%          0.048            0.050            0.052           0.050
                                          (0.024)*        (0.025)**        (0.025)**       (0.025)**
Married                      61.0%         -0.009           -0.009           -0.008          -0.009
                                           (0.019)         (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.019)
Non-Hispanic Black           16.0%          0.166            0.161            0.162           0.161
                                         (0.026)***      (0.027)***       (0.027)***      (0.027)***
Hispanic/Latino               0.5%         -0.032           -0.030           -0.031          -0.031
                                           (0.127)         (0.127)          (0.127)         (0.127)
Other Race/Ethnicity          3.0%          0.084            0.086            0.087           0.087
                                           (0.054)         (0.056)          (0.057)         (0.057)
BA Degree or more            72.2%         -0.068           -0.067           -0.066          -0.067
                                         (0.024)***      (0.024)***       (0.024)***      (0.024)***
Age at Claiming                56.6        -0.036           -0.036           -0.036          -0.036
                                         (0.003)***      (0.003)***       (0.003)***      (0.003)***
Years of Service 5-19        13.4%         -0.047           -0.045           -0.043          -0.045
                                           (0.044)         (0.044)          (0.044)         (0.044)
Years of Service 20-24       11.6%          0.013            0.015            0.016           0.015
                                           (0.037)         (0.037)          (0.037)         (0.037)
Years of Service 25-29       24.4%          0.035            0.037            0.037           0.037
                                           (0.026)         (0.026)          (0.026)         (0.026)
Maximum Initial Benefit        2.53        -0.041           -0.040           -0.039          -0.040
Amount (1K)                              (0.011)***      (0.011)***       (0.011)***      (0.011)***
Financial Knowledge:          8.3%                           0.027            0.027           0.027
   Compounding Only                                        (0.055)          (0.055)         (0.055)
Financial Knowledge:         11.6%                          -0.002           -0.003          -0.002
   Inflation Only                                          (0.062)          (0.062)         (0.062)
Financial Knowledge:         66.2%                          -0.036           -0.036          -0.038
   Both                                                    (0.061)          (0.061)         (0.063)
Self-Reported Financial        4.27                                          -0.006
   Knowledge Score                                                          (0.008)
Self-Reported Financial       2.6%                                           -0.030         -0.003
   Knowledge Blank                                                          (0.085)         (0.078)
Overconfident Financial      12.6%                                                          -0.002
   Knowledge                                                                                (0.034)

R2                                            0.13            0.13             0.13            0.13
Number of Obs.                               2,256           2,256            2,256           2,256
Notes: See Table 5. Dummy variables for objective financial knowledge item non-response and responses
of “don’t know” are included but not reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 43
Table 8. Ex-Post Regret in Retirement
                                                                  Maintain
                                                    Saved                       Had Enough
                                                                 Standard of
                                                   Enough                          Info
                                                                    Living
                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)
 SS Leveling * Current Age < 62                     -0.054           0.076          -0.002
                                                   (0.028)*       (0.031)**         (0.022)
 SS Leveling * Current Age >= 62                    -0.090          -0.015          -0.060
                                                  (0.036)**         (0.039)       (0.029)**
 Current Age >= 62                                   0.061           0.069           0.030
                                                   (0.037)*        (0.040)*         (0.029)
 Male                                                0.081           0.062          -0.047
                                                 (0.026)***       (0.028)**       (0.021)**
 Married                                             0.088           0.092          -0.028
                                                 (0.021)***      (0.022)***        (0.016)*
 Non-Hispanic Black                                 -0.139          -0.066          -0.092
                                                 (0.028)***       (0.031)**      (0.022)***
 Hispanic/Latino                                    -0.098          -0.198           0.128
                                                    (0.132)         (0.143)         (0.105)
 Other Race/Ethnicity                               -0.020          -0.147          -0.048
                                                    (0.067)       (0.073)**         (0.053)
 BA Degree or more                                   0.055          -0.021          -0.007
                                                  (0.026)**         (0.028)         (0.021)
 Age at Claiming                                     0.008           0.008           0.002
                                                   (0.005)*         (0.005)         (0.004)
 Years of Service 5-19                               0.161           0.025          -0.038
                                                 (0.047)***         (0.051)         (0.037)
 Years of Service 20-24                              0.050          -0.046          -0.022
                                                    (0.040)         (0.043)         (0.032)
 Years of Service 25-29                              0.064          -0.009          -0.015
                                                  (0.028)**         (0.030)         (0.022)
 Maximum Initial Benefit Amount (1K)                 0.053           0.048           0.017
                                                 (0.012)***      (0.013)***        (0.010)*
 Agency Controls                                       X               X               X
 Year of Claiming                                      X               X               X

 R2                                                     0.09           0.04             0.03
 Number of Obs.                                        2,146          2,138            2,151
 Mean Dependent Variable                               0.335          0.530            0.841
Notes: Data are from a survey of individuals who initiated retirement benefits from 2009-2014, chose a
single life annuity option (max benefit or SS leveling), and were younger than age 62 at the time of
claiming. Administrative records and survey responses are as of spring 2015. Dependent variables are
indicated in the column headings. Details are provided in the appendix. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  44
Appendix A: Social Security Leveling Calculations
           In this appendix, we present detailed calculations on how the North Carolina retirement
systems derive the initial benefit at retirement for the two single life annuity options offered to
retirees: the maximum benefit and the Social Security Leveling annuity. The initial monthly
benefit amount at retirement for individuals selecting the Social Security Leveling benefit is
calculated relative to the initial maximum benefit available to the retiree, as described in the
manuscript text. Throughout this exercise, we assume no cost of living increases (COLAs) in
future benefits to be consistent with the way that the retirement system performs their valuations
for all annuity options.23 The administrative records combined with plan documents include
information on all inputs to this benefit formula, as well as the value for BMAX.
           The leveling factor, F, is derived from taking a present value calculation of the maximum
benefit option taken at different ages. We define Ann(A,C) as the present value at retirement age
A of the maximum benefit annuity claimed at the age of starting Social Security, C. This value is
then compared to the present value of an immediate maximum benefit annuity at age A, referred
to as Ann(A,A). In the current policy, the age of assumed Social Security claiming, C, is age
62. To calculate the present values, the retirement system uses an assumed maximum lifespan of
120 years with survival probabilities taken from the retirement system’s experience study reports
and the mortality tables reference therein. Prior to 2012, the retirement system used the 1984
experience study estimates, (“Early and Optional Retirement Factor Tables”, October 1, 1984).
Beginning in 2012, the retirement system now uses the 2012 experience study report estimates.24
The discount rate, rN, was 7.5% prior to 2012 and was modified to 7.25% in 2012.
           The present value of an annuity deferred to age C calculated at age A is:

           (A.1)



23
     An assumption of no COLAs is also appropriate given the recent historical rates at which COLA’s have
been given; specifically, COLAs of 1% were given in both 2012, and 2014, while inflation averaged 1.6%
since July 2007.
24
     In 2017, the retirement system is adopting new estimates, but this is outside the timeframe studied in
this paper.



Appendix Page 1
The value of Ann(A,C) is calculated separately for men and women and then the rates are
“blended” by multiplying male by 0.4 and female by 0.6 and summing together.25 The annuity
values are also adjusted by the industry-standard 11/24ths adjustment for monthly payment,
denoted CtsAdj in equation (A.1).        Thus, theoretically the Social Security Leveling option is
cost-neutral to the retirement system relative to the maximum benefit option, using the
assumptions established by the Board of Trustees of the two retirement plans. However, the
discount rates used in the calculation, rN, are 7.25% from 2012-2014 or 7.5% from 2009-2011.
These are quite high relative to market rates, so the two options are not necessarily identical in
present value terms for the retiree unless she also has a high personal discount rate. See Figure 2
for an illustration of this.
          To construct the factor that is applied to the maximum benefit, the retirement system
takes the ratio of the present value of the annuity benefit deferred to age C relative to the present
value of the annuity benefit claimed at the current age, A.
          (A.2)                                                  )
Thus, the Social Security Leveling factor is only a function of age at initial claiming and age at
deferral, since the benefit level BMAX will cancel out.
Present Value:
          For present value calculations, we retain the pension system experience study survival
rates and use alternative personal discount rates ri. In calculating the present value of the benefit
streams, we vary the personal discount rate used. Note that the discount rate employed by the
retirement system to calculate the leveling benefit, 7.25 percent, should yield an identical present
value of the leveling and maximum benefit options holding constant the other system
assumptions. We calculate present values using lower rates, including the rate of 2.9 percent
adopted by Shoven and Slavov (2014a) in their analysis of the present value of Social Security
benefits.
          The calculations are presented below. Here A denotes the age at claiming the retirement
pension and C denotes the age at claiming Social Security. The notation uses ri for the discount

25
     The convention of using a fixed proportion of males and females could lead to an underestimate of the
true cost-neutral discounting since we find about three-quarters of those selecting a single-life annuity are
women.



Appendix Page 2
rate used in the present value calculation and rN for the discount rate used by the retirement
system for calculating the leveling factors. We adopt the retirement system’s approach of using
mortality tables to derive a probability of survival and sum the present value until age 120.
       Because the maximum benefit is simply the same dollar value monthly until death, the
present value can be written as:

   (A.3)

The present value of the leveling option must consider separately the two time periods:
   (A.4)




Here, F is the ratio of the present value of benefits at age A of an annuity claimed at age C to the
present value of benefits at age A claimed immediately. Thus, if the personal discount rate and
subjective survival probabilities are identical to the assumptions used in calculating F, then the
second two terms basically cancel out and the present value of the Maximum Benefit and Social
Security Leveling options are nearly identical.
Simulation Exercise:
       For this exercise, we create a hypothetical retiree that is eligible for an immediate TSERS
Maximum Benefit of $2,000 and an early retirement estimate of $1,200. Using the notation from
the equations above, Appendix Table A1 presents the comparison between the Maximum Benefit
option and the Social Security Leveling option. The present values are calculated as above and
include both the pension and Social Security benefit. We calculate this separately for an
individual claiming at age 52 and an individual claiming at age 57.




Appendix Page 3
Definitions:
rN: Discount rate used by the retirement system to price the factors.
A: Age at pension benefit claiming.
C: Age at Social Security benefit claiming.
B1: Pension benefit during time period 1 (before Social Security Claiming)
B2: Pension benefit during time period 2 (after Social Security Claiming)
SS: Social Security benefit starting at age C.
ri: Discount rate used by the individual to weigh future benefits at time 0.


Appendix Table A1: Comparison of Max and Social Security Leveling Age 57


                               Age at Claiming: 57
Annuity
Type       rN         A         C         F           B1         B2            SS
Chosen
Max        N/A        57        62        N/A         $2,000     $2,000        $1,200
Level 62   7.25%      57        62        0.6344      $2,761     $1,561        $1,200




Appendix Table A2: Comparison of Max and Social Security Leveling Age 52


                               Age at Claiming: 52
Annuity
Type       rN         A         C         F          B1         B2         SS
Chosen
Max        N/A        52        62        N/A        $2,000     $2,000     $1,200
Level 62 7.25%        52        62        0.4147     $2,498     $1,298     $1,200




Appendix Page 4
Appendix Table A.3: Present Value Calculations Age 57 Claiming

                                  Age at Claiming: 57
              Social Security: $1,200; Maximum Benefit Pension: $2,000

                                       Assumed Personal Discount Rate
                             0%             2.9%          7.25%           14.5%
SS Leveling               $569,834         $401,727      $272,972        $179,203
Maximum Benefit           $639,017         $429,908      $273,024        $163,598
Percent Difference: (Maximum – Leveling)/Maximum
                            11%              7%             0%            -10%


Appendix Table A.4: Present Value Calculations Age 52 Claiming

                                  Age at Claiming: 52
              Social Security: $1,200; Maximum Benefit Pension: $2,000

                                       Assumed Personal Discount Rate
                             0%             2.9%          7.25%           14.5%
SS Leveling               $626,651         $432,804      $289,575        $186,527
Maximum Benefit           $747,751         $477,447      $289,535        $168,008
Percent Difference: (Maximum – Leveling)/Maximum
                            16%              9%             0%            -11%




Appendix Page 5
Appendix B: Sample construction and restrictions
1. Administrative Records
          The retirement system maintains records for several retirement plans including
firefighters, judicial classes, and the legislature. We construct our data using administrative
records on active retirement benefit accounts that were initiated between January 1, 2009 and
December 31, 2014. We only consider retirement accounts from the TSERS or LGERS
retirement systems. We exclude any accounts that are suspended. We do not include ancillary
accounts from other systems but do retain an indicator if the individual has other benefit
accounts, which might include the transfer benefit option or another retirement system such as
the legislature or firefighters.26 We also exclude any accounts that were closed for any reason,
including disability, withdrawal, or transfer of benefits. We exclude firefighters and law
enforcement officers that are within TSERS and LGERS, since the eligibility rules are different
for those plans.
          We confirm that the remaining 80,241 benefit records are unique accounts – individuals
may only receive one benefit from TSERS and one benefit from LGERS. We make further
exclusions as listed in Appendix Table B1 below. These include: recorded years of service is
less than 5 years, termination of employment before 2008, days between termination and
claiming greater than one year, and missing gender code. We end up with 72,350 unique benefit
accounts representing 72,254 individuals with one account and 96 individuals with both a
TSERS and LGERS account.
          To create the sample for Table 4, Column (2), we exclude individuals claiming at age 62
and above. We also exclude individuals whose age at claiming or years of service combination
does not match the requirements for either an early or normal benefit account. This yields
36,883 observations. To create the sample for Table 4, Column (3), we only keep those choosing
a maximum benefit or Social Security leveling option, N = 25,839. Finally, we sent a survey to

26
     While we focus solely on those accounts in TSERS and LGERS, individuals may also have accounts
with these other systems. Where relevant, we include an indicator variable for the individual having an
additional membership in another retirement plan. About 1% of our sample has both an active TSERS
and LGERS retirement benefit. For those individuals we keep both records and treat them as separate
observations but retain an indicator variable.



Appendix Page 6
9,650 of the eligible benefit claimants. Our final sample for analysis includes 2,256 respondents
for a response rate of 23%.
       Appendix Table B2 presents a comparison between our sample and data from the
American Community Survey (ACS). For the ACS data, we used the 2010-2014 5-year Public
Use Microdata Samples (PUMS). We include individuals aged 50 or older. We consider those
who report labor market participation last year that were state or local government employees
and worked full time (14+ weeks and 30+ hours per week worked). The sample is then restricted
to those that did not work last week, that last worked within the past 12 months, and that are
currently either unemployed or not in the labor force. This is an approximation to recent retirees.
Our ACS data will exclude individuals that claimed benefits from a public sector retirement
system but immediately took another job.


2. Key Policy Details
Here we outline some key policies that were in place during the 2009-2014 time period.


Return to work:
Our data will include some individuals that have “retired” but are still working within the system
according to the rules below.
       o       Pension benefits can be received while working at any other job not covered by
               that pension. This includes a TSERS employee working under LGERS and vice
               versa.
       o       Pension benefits can be received while working for a job at the prior employer as
               long as the position is not eligible for pension benefits (typically a part-time
               position).
       o       Pension benefits will be suspended if an individual works in a job that is covered
               by the same pension. After 3 years of service, the earned benefits can be
               combined into one account. If 3 years of service are not reached, the new account
               is not eligible for pension benefits and must be withdrawn as a lump sum.




Appendix Page 7
Multiple benefit accounts:
We retain individuals that have multiple benefit accounts and include TSERS and LGERS
accounts separately in the data. The rules on maintaining multiple benefit accounts are below.
       o       Each retirement benefit account can be paid separately and there are no
               restrictions on coordinating annuity type or timing. Individuals with multiple
               accounts have the option to consolidate them by transferring service from one
               account to another. The average final compensation (AFC) used is that from the
               receiving account, while the years of service is the sum of all accounts. We
               cannot track in the data whether the benefit account is the sum of multiple
               benefits earned under different retirement systems.
       o       An individual may have multiple membership accounts due to:
                        Long break in work
                        Return to work
                        Work with a different retirement system (first TSERS, then LGERS etc.)
Years of Service:
In our data, we only observe creditable service, which is a combination of tenure and optional
purchased service.
       o       Creditable service: service calculation used for determining benefit level
                        Membership service
                        Purchased service: withdrawn service, military service, out-of-state,
                         temporary, educational leave, workers’ compensation, community service,
                         parental leave, extended illness leave, etc. Also: unused sick leave and
                         vacation time.
       o       Contributory service: service calculation used for determining eligibility
Using date of hire and date of termination, which are measured with some error, we estimate that
most individuals have about 6-8 months of purchased service on top of membership service.




Appendix Page 8
Appendix Table B1: Sample Construction
Restriction                                             Count of            Sample
                                                        Observations        Size
All eligible benefit accounts                                               80,241
Reported service credit < 5 years                       368                 79,873
Terminated prior to 2008                                5,043               74,830
Days between termination and benefit claiming >= 366    2,454               72,376
Missing gender code                                     26                  72,350
Full Administrative Records                                                 72,350
Table 4, Column (1)


Remove combinations of age and YOS that are not         299                 72,051
consistent with eligibility
Only those claiming prior to 62                         35,168              36,883
Full Administrative Records for Claimants Age <62                           36,883
Table 4, Column (2)

Single life Annuity Claimants Age <62                                       25,839
Table 4, Column (3)

Single life Annuity Claimants, Age <62, Validated                           9,650
Email Address and Sent the Survey
Survey Sample Responses                                                     2,256
Completed Survey Response                                                   2,256
Table 4, Column (4)


Note: The survey response rate was 23% for the sample used in this paper.




Appendix Page 9
Appendix Table B2: Data Representativeness


Variables                                    ACS              ACS               Survey
                                         United States    North Carolina     Respondents
                                                                            (Response Rate
                                                                                23%)
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)
Number of Observations                       9,524             363              2,256

Age at Survey                                                                    60
                                                                            (40% age 62+)
Age at Claiming                                                                 56.6
Age                                          56.2              56.5
Male                                        35.0%             26.9%             19.1%
Married                                     67.1%             71.4%             61.0%

Non-Hispanic Black                          13.2%             16.9%             16.0%
Hispanic/Latino                              8.4%              0.7%              0.5%
Other Race/Ethnicity                         4.5%              2.4%              3.0%
Education
BA or above                                 47.0%             52.7%             72.3%

Notes: ACS data include individuals ages 50 to 62 who were working at a state or local
government employer last year but are not currently working. Data from our survey include
individuals that claimed retirement benefits in North Carolina and were younger than age 62.
Survey respondents are disproportionally higher educated, less likely to be married, and more
likely to be female than the population average.




Appendix Page 10
Appendix C: Definition of Key Survey Variables
Risk and Time Preferences
Impatient: Lottery Frame
Suppose that you won a prize that is worth $1000 if you take it today. Alternatively, you could
wait one year to claim the prize and be guaranteed to receive $1200. Would you claim the $1000
dollars today, or would you wait one year for the $1200?
           ଠ Claim $1000 today
           ଠ Wait one year and claim $1200
           ଠ Not sure
Impatient: Benefit Frame
Imagine you are 65 years old, and you (and your spouse/partner) are receiving $1000 per month
in Social Security benefits. Suppose you were given the choice to reduce that benefit by half, to
$500 per month. This one-half benefit reduction would continue for as long as you (and your
spouse/partner) live. In return, you would be given a one-time, lump-sum payment of $80,500.
Would you take the $1000 monthly benefit for life, or the reduced monthly benefit combined
with the lump sum payment?
           ଠ Take the $1000 monthly benefit
           ଠ Take the reduced benefit and the lump sum
           ଠ Not sure
Risk Adverse: Pension Frame
Suppose that you are about to retire and have two choices for your pension benefit. Pension A
gives you an income equal to your pre-retirement income. Pension B has a 50% chance of
providing a benefit worth double your pre-retirement income and a 50% chance of providing a
benefit worth 20% less than your pre-retirement income. Which pension benefit would you
choose?
           ଠ Pension A
           ଠ Pension B
           ଠ Not sure




Appendix Page 11
Risk Adverse: Prize Frame
Suppose that you are offered a choice between two prizes. If you choose Prize A, you are
guaranteed to receive $1000. Alternatively, if you choose prize B, you will have a 50-50 chance
of receiving $2200 and a 50-50 chance of receiving $0. Which prize would you choose -- Prize A
or Prize B?
           ଠ Prize A
           ଠ Prize B
           ଠ Not sure


Financial Knowledge
Financial Knowledge: Compounding

If you have $100 in your savings account, and the annual interest rate is 2%, how much
money will you have in your account after five years?
   ଠ More than $102            ଠ $102               ଠ Less than $102         ଠ Do not Know


Financial Knowledge: Inflation
If the current interest rate on your savings account is 1% per year, and the inflation rate is
2% per year, how much do you think you will be able to buy with your money a year from
now?
           ଠ   A larger amount than you can buy now
           ଠ   Exactly the same amount as you can buy now
           ଠ   A smaller amount than you can buy now
           ଠ   Do not know

Self-Reported Financial Knowledge:
On a scale from 1 to 7 (where 1 means very low, and 7 means very high), how would you rate
your financial knowledge?




Appendix Page 12
Well-Being Outcomes:
Financial Fragility
How confident are you that you could come up with $2,000 if an unexpected need arose
within the next month?
           ଠ   I am certain I could come up with the full $2,000.
           ଠ   I could probably come up with $2,000.
           ଠ   I probably could not come up with $2,000.
           ଠ   I am certain I could not come up with $2,000.


Dependent variable is a binary indicator of NOT choosing the first option (including skipping
the question).


The last three retiree well-being outcomes in Table 6 of the text are derived from the following
questions. The outcome is binary with a 1 for “agree” or “strongly agree” and 0 otherwise.
Please indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statements regarding your
choices at retirement [Strong Disagree; Disagree; Somewhat Disagree; Somewhat Agree;
Agree; Strongly Agree]:

I believe I had enough information to make good decisions regarding my retirement from North
Carolina public employment.
I believe I saved enough for retirement while working.
I believe my standard of living is the same as, or better than, it was before I retired from NC
public employment.




Appendix Page 13
