                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EXCHANGE RATE PREDICTION REDUX:
                     NEW MODELS, NEW DATA, NEW CURRENCIES

                                      Yin-Wong Cheung
                                       Menzie D. Chinn
                                     Antonio Garcia Pascual
                                           Yi Zhang

                                      Working Paper 23267
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23267


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We thank Luca Dedola, Michael Ehrmann, Philipp Hartmann, Nelson Mark, Barbara Rossi,
Michele Ca’ Zorzi, Kenneth West, and seminar participants at the ECB and the 2017 IEFS/AEA
International Macro and Finance session for very helpful comments. Cheung gratefully thanks
The Hung Hing Ying and Leung Hau Ling Charitable Foundation for its support. Chinn and
Zhang acknowledge the financial support of research funds of the University of Wisconsin. Part
of this paper was written while Chinn was Wim Duisenberg Fellow at the ECB. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, Antonio Garcia Pascual, and Yi Zhang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rate Prediction Redux: New Models, New Data, New Currencies
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, Antonio Garcia Pascual, and Yi Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 23267
March 2017
JEL No. F31,F47

                                           ABSTRACT

Previous assessments of nominal exchange rate determination, following Meese and Rogoff
(1983) have focused upon a narrow set of models. Cheung et al. (2005) augmented the usual
suspects with productivity based models, and "behavioral equilibrium exchange rate" models, and
assessed performance at horizons of up to 5 years. In this paper, we further expand the set of
models to include Taylor rule fundamentals, yield curve factors, and incorporate shadow rates
and risk and liquidity factors. The performance of these models is compared against the random
walk benchmark. The models are estimated in error correction and first-difference specifications.
We examine model performance at various forecast horizons (1 quarter, 4 quarters, 20 quarters)
using differing metrics (mean squared error, direction of change), as well as the “consistency”
test of Cheung and Chinn (1998). No model consistently outperforms a random walk, by a mean
squared error measure, although purchasing power parity does fairly well. Moreover, along a
direction-of-change dimension, certain structural models do outperform a random walk with
statistical significance. While one finds that these forecasts are cointegrated with the actual values
of exchange rates, in most cases, the elasticity of the forecasts with respect to the actual values is
different from unity. Overall, model/specification/currency combinations that work well in one
period will not necessarily work well in another period

Yin-Wong Cheung                                   Antonio Garcia Pascual
Department of Economics and Finance               Macro Research
City University of Hong Kong                      Barclays
Hong Kong                                         5 The North Colonnade
yicheung@cityu.edu.hk                             E14 4BB, London
                                                  UK
Menzie D. Chinn                                   Antonio.GarciaPascual@barclays.com
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin                           Yi Zhang
1180 Observatory Drive                            University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706                                 Department of Economics
and NBER                                          1180 Observatory Drive
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu                        Madison, WI 53706
                                                  yzhang237@wisc.edu
1. Introduction
Nearly fifteen years ago, three of the authors embarked upon an assessment of the then dominant
empirical exchange rate models of the time.1 Over the past decade, the consensus – such as it was
– regarding the determinants of exchange rate movements has further disintegrated. The sources of
this phenomenon can in part be traced to the realities of the new world economy, and in part to the
development of new theories of exchange rate determination. Now seems a good time to re-visit in
a comprehensive fashion the question posed in our title.
           To motivate this exercise, first consider how different the world was then. The “New
Economy” was an established phenomenon, with accelerated productivity growth in the US.
Inflation and output growth, across the advanced economies, appeared to have entered a prolonged
and durable period of relative stability, a development dubbed “The Great Moderation”. If one
were to ask a typical international finance authority what the most robust determinant of the dollar
exchange rate (shown in Figures 1-3) was, the likely answer would be “real interest differentials”.
Compare to the present situation of short term policy rates bound at zero (Figure 4) and possibly
unrepresentative of the actual stance of monetary policy (shadow rates in Figure 5), slowing
productivity growth, and repeated bouts of financial risk intolerance and illiquidity (VIX and TED
spreads in Figure 6). Observed real interest differentials at the short horizon are likely to be close
to zero, given the zero lower bound, and low inflation worldwide.
           It is against this backdrop that several new models have been forwarded in the past decade.
Some explanations are motivated by new findings in the empirical literature, such the correlation
between net foreign asset positions and real exchange rates. Others, such as those based on central
bank reaction functions have now become well established in the literature. Or models that relate
the exchange rate to interest rate differentials at several horizons simultaneously. But several of
these models have not been subjected to comprehensive examination of the sort that Meese and
Rogoff conducted in their original 1983 work. While older models have been ably reviewed
(Engel, 2014; Rossi, 2013), we believe that a systematic examination of these newer empirical
models is due, for a number of reasons.
           First, while some of these models have become prominent in policy and financial circles,
they have not been subjected to the sort of rigorous out-of-sample testing conducted in academic

1
    Published as Cheung et al. (2005). The title of that paper was appropriated from the original 1981 Meese and Rogoff


                                                            1
studies.
        Second, the same criteria are often used, neglecting many alternative dimensions of model
forecast performance. That is, the first and second moment metrics such as mean error and mean
squared error are considered, while other aspects that might be of greater importance are often
neglected. We have in mind the direction of change – perhaps more important from a market
timing perspective – and other indicators of forecast attributes.
        In this study, we extend the forecast comparison of exchange rate models in several
dimensions.
   Eight models are compared against the random walk. Of these, four were examined in our
    previous study (Cheung et al. 2005). The new models include a real interest differential model
    incorporating shadow interest rates, Taylor rule fundamentals, a sticky price monetary model
    augmented with risk proxies, and an interest rate model incorporating yield curve factors. In
    addition, we implement a different specification for purchasing power parity.
   The behavior of US dollar-based exchange rates of the Canadian dollar, British pound,
    Japanese yen, Swiss franc, and the euro are examined. The German mark has dropped out,
    while the last two exchange rates are added.
   The models are estimated in two ways: in first-difference and error correction specifications.
   Forecasting performance is evaluated at several horizons (1-, 4- and 20-quarter horizons) and
    three sample periods: post-1982, post-dot.com boom and post-Crisis onset. We have thus
    evaluated out of sample periods, spanning the times that have witnessed notable changes in the
    global environment.
   We augment the conventional metrics with a direction of change statistic and the “consistency”
    criterion of Cheung and Chinn (1998).
        It is worthwhile to stress that our study is not aimed at determining which model best
forecasts, but rather aimed at determining which model appears to have the greatest empirical
content, by which we mean the ability to reliably predict exchange rate movements. Were our
objective the former, we would not conduct ex post historical simulations where we assume
knowledge of the realized values of the right hand side variables.
        Consistent with previous studies, we find that no model consistently outperforms a random

International Finance Discussion Paper No. 184, subsequently published (1983a, b).


                                                       2
walk according to the mean squared error criterion at short horizons. Somewhat at variance with
some previous findings, we find that the proportion of times the structural models outperform a
random walk at long horizons is slightly greater than would be expected if the outcomes were
merely random, 16%, using a 10% significance level.
        The direction-of-change statistics indicate more forcefully that the structural models do
outperform a random walk characterization by a statistically significant amount. For instance,
structural models outperform a random walk 29% of the time.
        In terms of the “consistency” test of Cheung and Chinn (1998), some positive results are
obtained. The actual and forecasted rates are cointegrated much more often than would occur by
chance for all the models 60%. However, in most of these cases of cointegration, the condition of
unitary elasticity of expectations is rejected, so very few instances of consistency are found.
        We conclude that the question of exchange rate predictability (still) remains unresolved. In
particular, while the oft-used mean squared error and the direction of change criteria provide an
encouraging perspective, more so than in our previous study, the outperformance is not
dramatically in excess of what would be expected on random chance. The direction of change
results are, relatively speaking, even more positive. However, as in our previous study, the best
model and specification tend to be specific to the currency and out-of-sample forecasting period.


2. Theoretical Models
        The universe of empirical models that have been examined over the floating rate period is
enormous, and evidenced in the introduction, ever expanding. Consequently, any evaluation of
these models must necessarily be selective. Our criteria require that the models are (1) prominent
in the economic and policy literature, (2) readily implementable and replicable, and (3) rarely
evaluated in a comparative and systematic fashion. We use the random walk model as our
benchmark naive model, in line with previous work. Two “models” are merely parity conditions.


Uncovered interest rate parity
(1)              s t +k = st + iˆt,k ,

where s is the (log) exchange rate, i t,k is the interest rate of maturity k, ^ denotes the intercountry
difference. Unlike the other specifications, this relation involves no estimation in order to generate



                                                   3
predictions.2
         Interest rate parity might seem to be an unlikely candidate for predicting exchange rates,
given the extensive literature documenting the failure of interest differentials to predict the right
direction of exchange rate changes, let alone the levels. However, Chinn and Meredith (2004)
found that long maturity interest rates do tend to correctly predict subsequent long horizon
exchange rate changes. This result was verified, although in an attenuated form, in Chinn and
Zhang (2015).


Relative purchasing power parity
(2)      st =  0 + pˆ t ,

where p is log price level, and ^ denotes the intercountry difference. While the relationship
between the exchange rate and the price level is not estimated, the adjustment process in the error
correction specification over time is.3 Recent work (Jordá and Taylor, 2012, Ca’ Zorzi et al., 2016,
among others) has documented the usefulness of PPP deviations for predicting exchange rate
changes. 4


Sticky price monetary model
Our first “model” is included as a standard comparator – the workhorse model of Dornbusch
(1976) and Frankel (1979). This approach still provides the fundamental intuition for how flexible
exchange rates behave. The sticky price monetary model can be expressed as follows:
(3)                 st =  0 +  1 mˆ t +  2 yˆ t +  3 iˆt +  4 ˆ t  u t ,
where m is log money, y is log real GDP, i and π are the interest and inflation rate, respectively, and
ut is an error term. The characteristics of this model are well known, so we do not devote time to
discussing the theory behind the equation.


Behavioral equilibrium exchange rate (BEER) model

2
  Note that we use the exact formulation, rather than the log approximation, to calculate the predictions.
3
  This contrasts with the procedure in Cheung et al. (2005). In that case the constant of the real exchange rate was
iteratively estimated to generate a forecast for k steps ahead. In this paper, we estimate the adjustment pace in an error
correction specification, or relationship between changes in exchange rate and changes in price differentials.
4
  Although Jordá and Taylor show the reversion is nonlinear in nature.



                                                                     4
We examine a diverse set of models that incorporate a number of familiar variants. A typical
specification is:
(4)                  s t =  0 + pˆ t +  5ˆ t +  6 rˆt +  7 gdebt
                                                                ˆ     t +  8tot t +  9 nfa t  ut ,

where p is the log price level (CPI), ω is the relative price of nontradables, r is the real interest rate,
gdebt the government debt to GDP ratio, tot the log terms of trade, and nfa is the net foreign asset.
This specification can be thought of as incorporating the Balassa-Samuelson effect (by way of the
relative price of nontradables), real interest differential model, an exchange risk premium
associated with government debt stocks, and additional portfolio balance effects arising from the
net foreign asset position of the economy. Clark and MacDonald (1999) is one exposition of this
approach.
         Models based upon this approach have been commonly employed to determining the rate
at which currencies will gravitate to over some intermediate horizon, especially in the context of
policy issues. This approach has been often used by market practitioners to assess the extent of
currencies deviation from fair value.5
         Next are four specifications not examined in our previous study.


Taylor rule fundamentals
One major empirical innovation of the 2000’s involved taking endogeneity seriously, in particular
the presence of central bank reaction functions. Given the use of Taylor rules by central banks, it is
natural to substitute out policy rates with the objects in the Taylor rule – namely output and
inflation gaps. This procedure is first implemented by (Molodtsova and Papell, 2009). The
resulting specification is:

(5)      st  k  st  0  1 ~
                               yˆt   2ˆt  ut ,

where ~
      yt is the output gap.6

5
  We do not examine a closely related approach: macroeconomic balances approach of the IMF (see Faruqee, Isard and
Masson, 1999). This approach, and the succeeding methodology incorporated into the External Balances Approach
(EBA), requires extensive judgements regarding the trend level of output, and the impact of demographic variables
upon various macroeconomic aggregates. We did not believe it would be possible to subject this methodology to the
same out of sample forecasting exercise applied to the others. The NATREX approach is conceptually different from
the BEER methodology. However, it shares a sufficiently large number of attributes with the latter that we decided not
to separately examine it.
6
  We estimate the output gap using a Hodrick-Prescott filter applied to the full sample, extended by 6 quarters using an
ARIMA model.


                                                              5
Real interest differential
The real interest differential was one of the most widely used models of the real exchange rate,
prior to the encounter with the zero lower bound in the US, Japan, the euro area and the UK. The
innovation here is to use shadow rates for periods in which policy rates are effectively bound at
zero.7 These nominal rates are adjusted by inflation; we use lagged one year inflation as a proxy for
expected inflation. Hence:

(6)      st =  0   1(iˆt shadow  ˆt )  ut .


Sticky price monetary model augmented by risk and liquidity factors
One of the characteristics of the post-2007 period is the importance of the safe-haven character of
the US dollar and liquidity concerns, the latter particularly during the period surrounding the
Lehman bankruptcy. In order to account for these factors, we augment the standard monetary
model with proxy measures – namely the VIX and the three-month Treasury-Libor (TED) spread.
(7)      st =  0 +  1mˆ t +  2 yˆ t +  3iˆt +  4ˆt  5VIX t  6TEDt  ut .


Yield curve slope
Recent work by Chen and Tsang (2013) emphasizes the information content in the slope and
curvature of the yield curve. We implement a simpler version of their specification, incorporating
the intercountry-difference in the level of the three month interest rate, and difference in the slope
(10 year minus three month yields).8

(8)      st k  st =  0   1(iˆt )  2 (slopet )  ut .


3. Data, Estimation and Forecasting Comparison
3.1 Data
         The analysis uses quarterly data for the United States, Canada, UK, Japan, Germany, and
Switzerland over the 1973q2 to 2014q4 period. The exchange rate, money, price and income


7
  The shadow rate is used only for those periods when it is calculated; otherwise the overnight money market or policy
rate is used.
8
  Equation (8) can be taken as nesting equation (1) for the one quarter horizon. However, this is not true for the other


                                                              6
variables are drawn primarily from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics. The interest rates
used to conduct the interest rate parity forecasts are essentially the same as those used in Chinn and
Meredith (2004), Chinn and Quayyum (2012)). See the Data Appendix for a more detailed
description.
        Three out-of-sample periods are used to assess model performance: 1983Q1-2014Q4,
2001Q1-2014Q4, and 2007Q4-2014Q4. The first period encompasses the period after the end of
monetary targeting in the U.S., the second conforms to the post-dot.com period, while the third
spans the period of financial turmoil associated with the end of the US housing boom. We term
these Periods I, II, III, respectively.
        Figures 1-3 depict, respectively, the dollar based exchange rates examined in this study.
We include the Deutschemark in Figure 2 to provide context for the evolution of the euro over the
1999-2014 period. The different dashed lines denote the beginnings of Period I, II, and III. In one
sense, the longest out-of-sample period (Period I) subjects the models to a more rigorous test, in
that the prediction takes place over several large dollar appreciations and subsequent depreciations.
In other words, this longer span encompasses more than one “dollar cycle”. The use of this long
out-of-sample forecasting period has the added advantage that it ensures that there are many
forecast observations to conduct inference upon.
        In another sense, the shortest sample (Period III) confronts the models with a more
challenging test – particularly the older models, as this period is dominated by the global financial
crisis, which a priori conventional fundamentals such as money stocks, output and the like are
unlikely to fully capture developments, which may be more related to market conditions such as
volatility, risk premia and illiquidity.


3.2 Estimation and Forecasting
        We adopt the convention in the empirical exchange rate modeling literature of
implementing “rolling regressions.” That is, estimates are applied over a given data sample,
out-of-sample forecasts produced, then the sample is moved up, or “rolled” forward one
observation before the procedure is repeated. This process continues until all the out-of-sample




horizons.


                                                  7
observations are exhausted.9
         Two specifications of these theoretical models were estimated: (1) an error correction
specification, and (2) a first differences specification. Since implementation of the error correction
specification is relatively involved, we will address the first-difference specification to begin with.
Consider the general expression for the relationship between the exchange rate and fundamentals:
(9)                  st = X t   u t ,
where Xt is a vector of fundamental variables under consideration. The first-difference
specification involves the following regression:
(10)                  st = X t   ut .

These estimates are then used to generate one- and multi-quarter ahead forecasts. Since these
exchange rate models imply joint determination of all variables in the equations, it makes sense to
apply instrumental variables. However, previous experience indicates that the gains in consistency
are far outweighed by the loss in efficiency, in terms of prediction (Chinn and Meese, 1995).
Hence, we rely solely on OLS. 10
         The error correction estimation involves a two step procedure. In the first step, the long-run
cointegrating relation implied by (5) is identified using the Johansen procedure. The estimated
                           ~
cointegrating vector (  ) is incorporated into the error correction term, and the resulting equation
                                                                 ~
(11)                 s t  s t  k =  0   1 ( st  k  X t  k  )  u t
is estimated via OLS. Equation (7) can be thought of as an error correction model stripped of short
run dynamics. A similar approach was used in Mark (1995) and Chinn and Meese (1995), except
for the fact that in those two cases, the cointegrating vector was imposed a priori. 11


9
  The use of rolling estimates makes sense also in order to hold the sample size use for estimation constant, so that,
among other benefits, the power of the tests is held constant in the forecast comparison exercise.
10
   Clearly, we have restricted ourselves to linear estimation methodologies, eschewing functional nonlinearities (Meese
and Rose, 1991) and regime switching (Engel and Hamilton, 1990). We have also omitted panel regression techniques
in conjunction with long run relationships, despite evidence suggests the potential usefulness of such approaches (Mark
and Sul, 2001). Finally, we did not undertake systems-based estimation that has been found in certain circumstances to
yield superior forecast performance, even at short horizons (e.g., MacDonald and Marsh, 1997).
11
   We could have included another specification including short run dynamics, hence encompassing both error
correction and first difference specifications. We opted to exclude short-run dynamics in equation (11), first for the
sake of brevity, and second because the inclusion of short-run dynamics creates additional issues on the generation of
the right-hand-side variables and the stability of the short-run dynamics that complicate the forecast comparison
exercise beyond a manageable level. Including short run dynamics would also mean that long horizon error correction
results would not be distinguishable from integrating forecasts from a standard error correction model (Kilian and


                                                                     8
         One key difference between our implementation of the error correction specification and
that undertaken in some other studies involves the treatment of the cointegrating vector. In some
other prominent studies, the cointegrating relationship is estimated over the entire sample, and then
out of sample forecasting undertaken, where the short run dynamics are treated as time varying but
the long-run relationship is not. While there are good reasons for adopting this approach,12 we
allow our estimates of the long-run cointegrating relationship vary as the data window moves.
         It is also useful to stress the difference between the error correction specification forecasts
and the first-difference specification forecasts. In the latter, ex post values of the right hand side
variables are used to generate the predicted exchange rate change. In the former, contemporaneous
values of the right hand side variables are not necessary, and the error correction predictions are
true ex ante forecasts. Hence, we are affording the first-difference specifications a tremendous
informational advantage in forecasting.13


3.3 Forecast Comparison
         To evaluate the forecasting accuracy of the different structural models, the ratio between
the mean squared error (MSE) of the structural models and a driftless random walk is used. A value
smaller (larger) than one indicates a better performance of the structural model (random walk). We
also explicitly test the null hypothesis of no difference in the accuracy of the two competing
forecasts (i.e. structural model vs driftless random walk). In particular, we use the
Diebold-Mariano-West statistic (Diebold and Mariano, 1995; West, 1996) which is defined as the
ratio between the sample mean loss differential and an estimate of its standard error; this ratio is
asymptotically distributed as a standard normal. The loss differential is defined as the difference
between the squared forecast error of the structural models and that of the random walk. A
consistent estimate of the standard deviation can be constructed from a weighted sum of the
available sample autocovariances of the loss differential vector.14 Following Andrews (1991), a


Taylor, 2001).
12
   In particular, one might wish to use as much information as possible to obtain estimates of the cointegrating
relationships -- the asymmetry in estimation approach is troublesome, and makes it difficult to distinguish quasi-ex ante
forecasts from true ex ante forecasts.
13
   Note that excluding short run dynamics in the error correction model means that the use of equation (11) yields true
ex ante forecasts and makes our exercise directly comparable with, for example, Mark (1995), Chinn and Meese (1995)
and Groen (2000).
14
   The case of using the adjusted MSPE statistic (Clark and West, 2006) is discussed in Section 4.4.


                                                           9
quadratic spectral kernel is employed, together with a data-dependent bandwidth selection
procedure.15 See Diebold and Mariano (1995) and Andrews (1991) for a more detailed discussion
on the test and quadratic spectral kernel.
        We also examine the predictive power of the various models along different dimensions.
One might be tempted to conclude that we are merely changing the well-established “rules of the
game” by doing so. However, there are very good reasons to use other evaluation criteria. First,
there is the intuitively appealing rationale that minimizing the mean squared error (or relatedly
mean absolute error) may not be important from an economic standpoint. 16 A less pedestrian
motivation is that the typical mean squared error criterion may miss out on important aspects of
predictions, especially at long horizons. Christoffersen and Diebold (1998) point out that the
standard mean squared error criterion indicate no improvement of predictions that take into
account cointegrating relationships vis a vis univariate predictions.17
         Hence, our first alternative evaluation metric for the relative forecast performance of the
structural models is the direction of change statistic, which it is computed as the number of correct
predictions of the direction of change over the total number of predictions. A value above (below)
50 per cent indicates a better (worse) forecasting performance than a naive model that predicts the
exchange rate has an equal chance to go up or down. Again, Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West
(1996) provide a test statistic for the null of no forecasting performance of the structural model.
The statistic follows a binomial distribution, and its studentized version is asymptotically
distributed as a standard normal.
        Finally, we believe that any reasonable criteria would put some weight the tendency for
predictions from cointegrated systems to “hang together”. The third metric we use to evaluate
forecast performance is the consistency criterion proposed in Cheung and Chinn (1998). This
metric focuses on the time-series properties of the forecast. The forecast of a given spot exchange
rate is labeled as consistent if (1) the two series have the same order of integration, (2) they are
cointegrated, and (3) the cointegration vector satisfies the unitary elasticity of expectations


15
   We also experienced with the Bartlett kernel and the deterministic bandwidth selection method. The results from
these methods are qualitatively very similar.
16
   For example, Leitch and Tanner (1991) argue that a direction of change criterion may be more relevant for
profitability and economic concerns, and hence a more appropriate metric than others based on purely statistical
motivations.
17
   See Duy and Thoma (1998) for a contrasting assessment regarding the use of cointegrating relationships.


                                                        10
condition. Loosely speaking, a forecast is consistent if it moves in tandem with the spot exchange
rate in the long run. Cheung and Chinn (1998) provide a more detailed discussion on the
consistency criterion and its implementation.


4. Comparing the Forecast Performance
4.1 The MSE Criterion
       The comparison of forecasting performance based on MSE ratios is summarized in Table
1. The Table contains MSE ratios and the p-values from five dollar-based currency pairs, eight
structural models, the error correction and first-difference specifications, three forecasting
horizons, and three forecasting samples. The results for the three forecasting periods are presented
under Sub-Tables 1a, 1b, and 1c, respectively. Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one
is the MSE ratio (the MSEs of a structural model to the random walk specification). The entry
underneath the MSE ratio is the p-value of the hypothesis that the MSEs of the structural and
random walk models are the same. Obviously, because the euro only comes into existence in 1999,
there are no entries for the two earlier out-of-sample prediction periods. Moreover, because of the
lack of data, the behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model is not estimated for the dollar-Swiss
franc and dollar-yen exchange rates. Finally, the lack of earlier data for the risk and liquidity
proxies means that the augmented sticky-price monetary model predictions are only available for
the most recent sample. Altogether, there are 462 MSE ratios, with 195 (about 42%) pertaining to
the latest sample. Of these 462 ratios, 285 are computed from the error correction specification and
177 from the first-difference one.
       Note that in the tables, only “error correction specification” entries are reported for the
interest rate parity model. In fact, this model is not “estimated"; rather the predicted spot rate is
calculated using the uncovered interest parity condition. To the extent that long term interest rates
can be considered the error correction term, we believe this categorization is most appropriate.
       Overall, the MSE results are not particularly favorable to the structural models. Of the 462
MSE ratios, 266 are not significant (at the 10% significance level) and 196 are significant, about
42.4%. That is, for the majority cases one cannot differentiate the forecasting performance between
a structural model and a random walk model. There is a higher rate of rejection than would be
expected from random results. For the 196 significant cases, however, there are 124 cases in which



                                                  11
the random walk model is significantly better than the competing structural models and only 72
cases in which the opposite is true. Still, the latter represents a 16.2% rate of statistical
outperformance, using the 10% msl. This means that we are rejecting the null at a rate higher than
what one would expect from random chance. This outcome is much more positive than obtained in
Cheung et al. (2005), in which case there were essentially no instances in which the random walk
was significantly outperformed (specifically, 2 out of 216 ratios, or less than 1%).
           Inspection of the MSE ratios reveals a few obviously consistent patterns, in terms of
outperformance. The significant cases are not proportionally distributed across the three
forecasting periods. The forecasting sample that starts in 1983 has the smallest number of total
cases; of the 111 reported MSE ratios, 65 (approximately 58.6%) are significantly worse or better
than random walk. This period has the highest proportion of successes: 25.2%, and the 28 success
cases account for 38.9% of the total number of successes. In line with the results in Cheung et al.
(2005), we also find some clustering of outperformance at the long horizon. 26 entries, or 36.1%
of the total number of success cases, are at the 5 year horizon.18
           In terms of the economic models, one finding is that relative purchasing power parity,
estimated using an error correction specification, does not do too badly relative to a random walk.
Recall, this is the case where the change in the exchange rate is related to the lagged real exchange
rate; no contemporaneous information about price levels is included. The outperformance relative
to the random walk is typically greater the longer the horizon, so that at the year horizon, the
outperformance is statistically significant for all currencies for all periods (except for CAD and
JPY in Period III; even then the MSE ratio is quite low). In contrast, this pattern does not extend to
the first differences specification of relative PPP, wherein the exchange rate is allowed to move
with the inflation differential plus a drift term that is updated by rolling. Hence, the inclusion of
contemporaneous information (time t inflation differentials) does not offset the misspecification
implicit in PPP in growth rates.
           Another result is that interest rate parity seldom works well, but if it does, it does so at a
longer horizon, such as one year or 5 years. The statistically significant outperformances occur
during Period II and Period III (3 successful cases out of 12 in Period II and 4 out of 15 in Period
III, and none in Period I). It’s important to recall that this is the only specification which involves

18
     However, at the 5 year horizon, the random walk model significantly outperforms the competing structural models


                                                          12
absolutely no estimation. Thus, it’s hard to discern whether the result is driven by model validity,
or the absence of estimation uncertainty.
         With respect to the new specifications, one can make the following observations. The real
interest differential model, incorporating shadow policy rates does not do particularly well. The
greatest success is in the longest prediction period (Period I), with 2 significant cases (many entries
– 11 – significantly above unity, though). Surprisingly, use of the shadow rates does not resurrect
the real interest model for the latest prediction period.
         What about augmenting the models with risk and liquidity factors? First, note that the
workhorse model, the sticky price monetary model has an unremarkable performance in all three
periods. Adding the VIX and TED spread to this model results in some improved performance for
the JPY (error correction model), the Swiss franc at five years in Sample III. However, clearly
adding these variables in is not a panacea for the poor prediction of the model.
         The Taylor rule fundamentals model typically delivers outperformance relative to a random
walk; however, unlike previous studies, we do not find statistically significant outperformance,
except perhaps in Period I, which, out of a total of 12, registers 7 cases of outperformance (and 2
cases of underperformance).19 We attribute this differing result to the fact that we impose the same
model to all cases (in particular, we impose homogeneity of coefficients across countries, and omit
an interest rate smoothing parameter).20
         The yield curve model provides only a few statistically significant cases of outperformance.
Out of 33 yield curve cases, there are three statistically significant outperformances (all involving
the JPY in Period I).
         The group performance of these four new specifications appears to be worse than the four
specifications examined in Cheung et al. (2005). For instance, considering the reported MSE
ratios, the four new specifications in total garner 20 significant success cases against 65 significant
underperformance cases. The four “old” models, on the other hand, significantly outperformed the
random walk 50 times, while being outperformed 59 times.


in 70 cases (60.5% of the total outperformance cases).
19
   There are 3 cases of outperformance (4 cases of underperformance) and 2 cases of outperformance (4 cases of
underperformance) in Period II and Period III, respectively.
20
   Obviously, to the extent that some central banks adhere to Taylor rules and others do not, we should expect cross
country variation in the results. Also, the Taylor rule based exchange rate equation varies with the choice of the optimal
interest rate rule that may not be the same across countries (Binici and Cheung, 2012).


                                                           13
        Notice that some of our models can only be compared during the most recent prediction
period, starting in 2007 (Period III). Here, one noticeable result is that no structural model of the
euro does particularly well in out of sample forecasting. In this period, out of the 37 statistically
significant under-performances, 22 are associated with the euro. Rather than interpreting this as
necessarily a failure of the models per se, we suspect this is largely due to the brevity of the sample
period. Given the euro’s inception in 1999, we only have 8 years of data in which to estimate the
various models.
        Consistent with the existing literature, our results are supportive of the assertion that it is
difficult to find forecasts from a given structural model that can consistently beat the random walk
model using the MSE criterion. The current exercise further strengthens the assertion as it covers
three different forecasting periods, and some structural models that have not been extensively
studied before.


4.2 The Direction of Change Criterion
        Table 2 reports the proportion of forecasts that correctly predict the direction of the dollar
exchange rate movement and, underneath these sample proportions, the p-values for the hypothesis
that the reported proportion is significantly different from ½. When the proportion statistic is
significantly larger than ½, the forecast is said to have the ability to predict the direct of change.
On the other hand, if the statistic is significantly less than ½, the forecast tends to give the wrong
direction of change. For trading purposes, information regarding the significance of incorrect
prediction can be used to derive a potentially profitable trading rule by going again the prediction
generated by the model. Following this argument, one might consider the cases in which the
proportion of "correct" forecasts is larger than or less than ½ contain the same information.
However, in evaluating the ability of the model to describe exchange rate behavior, we separate the
two cases.
        There is mixed evidence on the ability of the structural models to correctly predict the
direction of change. Among the 462 direction of change statistics, 134 (27) are significantly larger
(less) than ½ at the 10% level. The occurrence of the significant outperformance cases is higher
(29%) than the one implied by the 10% level of the test.
        Let us take a closer look at the incidences in which the forecasts are in the right direction.



                                                  14
The 134 cases are unevenly split between the error correction and first-difference specifications –
89 from the former specification and 45 from the latter; that is, error correction specifications
account for 66.4% of the success entries. It appears that the error correction specification – which
incorporates the empirical long-run relationship – is a better specification for the models under
consideration, according to the direction of change criterion.
        The forecasting period have an impact on prediction performance, as the success rate
declines as the horizon gets shorter and shorter: 46.2% (62 cases) occurred in the 20-quarter
horizon, 34.3.% (46 cases) in four-quarter horizon, and 19.4% (26 cases) in the one-quarter
horizon. In addition, the significant underperformances are highest in the latest period (III),
although most of these cases are all associated with the euro rate. Hence, this result might arise
from the small sample we use to estimate the euro models.
        It is hard to make generalizations about which model performs the best. For instance, the
BEER model accounts for 30 significant outperformances. Perhaps PPP does best among all the
models, with 30 cases, with 21 cases pertaining to error correction models. Recall that this means
time t to t+k information regarding differential inflation is less useful than reversion to the real rate
in predicting the direction of change.
        In terms of innovations, the yield curve models work quite well in the first two periods (I,
II): 8 out of 18 cases yield outperformance – but the outperformance is currency specific – there is
only one successful case for the British pound, one for Swiss franc. In addition, the performance
breaks down in the latest period (III).
        The sticky price monetary model does particularly poorly in Period III (4 significant
outperformances). When augmented with the VIX and the TED (the augmented sticky price
monetary model), the model fails to improve noticeably in this dimension.
        In terms of the economics, it is not clear that the newer exchange rate models decisively
edge out the “old fashioned” sticky-price model.
        The cases of correct direction prediction appear to cluster at the long forecast horizon. The
20-quarter horizon accounts for 62 of the 134 cases. This is about the same proportion than in
Cheung et al. (where the long horizon accounted for about 36.5% of the successes) Mirroring the
MSE results, it is interesting to note that the direction of change statistic tends to work for the
interest rate parity model only at the 20-quarter horizon. This pattern is entirely consistent with the



                                                   15
finding that uncovered interest parity holds better at long horizons.


4.3 The Consistency Criterion
         The consistency criterion only requires the forecast and actual realization comove
one-to-one in the long run. One may argue that the criterion is less demanding than the MSE and
direct of change metrics. Indeed, a forecast satisfies the consistency criterion can (1) have a MSE
larger than that of the random walk model, (2) have a direction of change statistic less than ½, or
(3) generate forecast errors that are serially correlated. However, given the problems related to
modeling, estimation, and data quality, the consistency criterion can be a more flexible way to
evaluate a forecast. In assessing the consistency, we first test if the forecast and the realization are
cointegrated.21 If they are cointegrated, then we test if the cointegrating vector satisfies the (1, -1)
requirement. The cointegration results are reported in Table 3. The test results for the (1, -1)
restriction are reported in Table 4.
         275 of 462 cases reject the null hypothesis of no cointegration at the 10% significance
level. Thus, 275 forecast series (59.5% of the total number) are cointegrated with the
corresponding spot exchange rates. The error correction specification and the first-difference
specification account for, respectively, 158 (57.5%) and 117 (42.5%) of the cointegrated cases. On
this count, the error correction specification imposing a cointegrating relationship performs better
than the first-difference specification.
         There is no real pattern in terms of findings of cointegration, across currencies and models,
at least in Periods I and II. The largest difference is the decrease in number of cointegrated cases in
Period III; the proportion drops from 71% to 53% moving from I and II, to period III. This is to be
expected given the decrease in number of observations as one goes to the latest period.22
         The results of testing for the long-run unitary elasticity of expectations at the 10%
significance level are reported in Table 4. In total there are only 9 cases in which the (1, -1)
restriction is not rejected. The condition of long-run unitary elasticity of expectations; that is the
(1,-1) restriction on the cointegrating vector, is rejected by the data in almost all cases, for the

21
   The Johansen method is used to test the null hypothesis of no cointegration. The maximum eigenvalue statistics are
reported in the manuscript. Results based on the trace statistics are essentially the same. Before implementing the
cointegration test, both the forecast and exchange rate series were checked for the I(1) property. For brevity, the I(1)
test results and the trace statistics are not reported.
22
   There will only be 8 observations in the five year ahead forecasts for Sample III, for instance.


                                                          16
longest period (I). Only when examining the shortest out-of-sample periods (III) is it the case that
there are countable failures to reject (5 out of 104 cases). This indicates that the “consistency”
criterion is a very difficult one to meet using the models and empirical methods we have adopted.


4.4 Discussion
           Several aspects of the foregoing analysis merit discussion. To begin with, even at long
horizons, the performance of the structural models is less than impressive along the MSE
dimension. This result is consistent with those Cheung et al. (2005), although the results are more
promising, with higher proportions of outperformance.
           Setting aside issues of statistical significance, it is interesting that the interest rate parity
model at the 4- and 20-quarter horizons does particularly well in period III. This is true, despite the
fact that interest rate parity does not appear to hold as well for interest rates bound at zero, of which
there are several during the 2007-14 period.23
           Expanding the set of criteria does yield some interesting surprises. In particular, the
direction of change statistics indicate more evidence that structural models can outperform a
random walk. However, the basic conclusion that no economic model is consistently more
successful than the others remain intact, with the possible exception of relative purchasing power
parity, couched in an error correction framework.
           Even if we cannot glean from this analysis a consistent “winner”, it may still be of interest
to note the best and worst performing combinations of model/specification/currency. The best
performance on the MSE criterion is turned in by the purchasing power parity model at the
20-quarter horizon for the British pound exchange rate (post-2007), with a MSE ratio of 0.04
(p-value of 0.003); other PPP forecasts for the other periods follow close behind. Figure 7 plots the
actual British pound exchange rate, and the 20 quarter ahead forecasts for the three periods. The
graph shows that forecast performance of the parity model varies across time, but the forecasts
track the actual exchange rate movements pretty well during 1985-1990 and 1993-1997.
           The worst performances are associated with first-difference specifications; in this case the
highest MSE ratio is for the first differences specification of the behavioral equilibrium exchange
rate model at the 20-quarter horizon for the Swiss franc exchange rate for Period II. This outcome

23
     Chinn and Quayyum (2012) document the fact that long horizon uncovered interest parity doesn’t hold as well for


                                                          17
is partly due to the short sample of data used to estimate the model, so it’s probably not the most
relevant case to examine.
        Perhaps more relevant is the sticky price monetary model augmented with the VIX and
TED spread, in first differences, with a MSE ratio of 3.5. To graphically illustrate the failure, we
graphed forecasts together with the actual exchange rate, in Figure 8. Interestingly, the 20 step
ahead forecast from the error correction model version of this economic model significantly
outperforms a random walk. One might think it’s a matter of the levels, but the ECM version of the
unaugmented sticky price model does poorly as well, with ratio of 2.0.
        Whether this divergence in results arising from inclusion of the VIX and Ted spread would
obtain in a sample extending forward in time is an interesting question; the most recent ten years
has been remarkable for its unique events involving risk, volatility and liquidity conditions, and it
is exactly during this period one expects the variables to be helpful. In fact, neither this model nor
the real interest rate differential (intended to capture some features of the data in post-crisis period)
perform particularly well over period III.
        This pattern of results is not atypical. The superior performance of a particular
model/specification/currency combination does not typically carry over from one out-of-sample
period to the other, nor from one specification to the other.
        It is known that the use of the Diebold-Mariano statistic may yield a conservation test
against the random walk specification. To enhance the test power, Clark and West (2006) proposes
an adjusted mean squared prediction error (MSPE) statistic. For brevity, we present in Appendix
3 a description of the Clark-West statistic, and the forecast comparison results based on this
statistic in Appendix 4 in a layout similar to that of Table 1. As expected, the use of the Clark-West
statistic increases the instances in which an exchange rate model outperforms the random walk
specification. Nevertheless, these results do not change the basic observation that the performance
of an exchange rate model varies across specifications, currencies, periods, forecasting horizon,
and evaluation criteria.


5. Concluding Remarks
        This paper has systematically assessed the predictive capabilities of models, including


Japan and Switzerland over the last decade.


                                                   18
several developed over the last decade. These models have been compared along a number of
dimensions, including econometric specification, currencies, out-of-sample prediction periods,
and differing metrics.
       In summarizing the evidence from this exhaustive analysis, we conclude that the models
that have become popular in last fifteen years or so might not be much better than the older ones.
Overall, the results do not point to any given model/specification combination as being very
successful, on either the MSE or consistency criteria. On the other hand, many models seem to do
well, particularly using the direction of change criterion.
       Of the economic models, purchasing power parity and interest rate parity do fairly well,
perhaps due to the parsimoniousness of the specifications (IRP requires no parameter estimation).
In the most recent period, accounting for risk and liquidity tends to improve the fit of the
workhorse sticky price monetary model, even if the predictive power is still unimpressive. But in
general the more recent models do not consistently outperform older ones, even when assessed on
the recent, post-crisis period. Overarching these results, specifications incorporating long run
(cointegrating) relationships tend to outperform first differences specifications, particularly along
the MSE dimension.




                                                 19
References
Andrews, Donald, 1991, “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
       Estimation,” Econometrica 59: 817-858.
Binici, Mahir and Yin-Wong Cheung, 2012, “Exchange Rate Dynamics under Alternative Optimal
       Interest Rate Rules,” Pacific Basin Finance Journal 20 (Jan): 122-150.
Ca’ Zorzi, Michele, Jakub Muck, and Michal Rubaszek, 2016, "Real Exchange Rate Forecasting
       and PPP: This Time the Random Walk Loses," Open Economies Review 27(3): 1-25.
Chen, Yu-Chin and Kwok Ping Tsang, 2013, “What Does the Yield Curve Tell Us about Exchange
       Rate Predictability,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1): 185-205.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Menzie Chinn, 1998, “Integration, Cointegration, and the Forecast
       Consistency of Structural Exchange Rate Models,” Journal of International Money and
       Finance 17(5): 813-830.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn, and Antonio Garcia Pascual, 2005, “Empirical Exchange Rate
       Models of the Nineties: Are Any Fit to Survive?” Journal of International Money and
       Finance 24 (November): 1150-1175. Also NBER Working Paper no. 9393 (December
       2002).
Chinn, Menzie and Richard Meese, 1995, “Banking on Currency Forecasts: How Predictable Is
       Change in Money?” Journal of International Economics 38(1-2): 161-178.
Chinn, Menzie and Guy Meredith, 2004, “Monetary Policy and Long Horizon Uncovered Interest
       Parity,” IMF Staff Papers 51(3) (November): 409-430.
Chinn, Menzie and Saad Quayyum, 2012, “Long Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity, Reassessed,”
       NBER Working Paper No. 18482.
Chinn, Menzie and Yi Zhang, 2015, “Uncovered Interest Parity and Monetary Policy Near and Far
       from the Zero Lower Bound,” NBER Working Paper No. 21159 (May).
Christoffersen, Peter F. and Francis X. Diebold, 1998, “Cointegration and Long-Horizon
       Forecasting,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 16: 450-58.
Clark, Peter and Ronald MacDonald, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Economic Fundametals: A
       Methodological Comparison of Beers and Feers,” in J. Stein and R. MacDonald (eds.)
       Equilibrium Exchange Rates (Kluwer: Boston), pp. 285-322.
Clark, Todd E. and Kenneth D. West, 2006, “Using Out-of-sample Mean Squared Prediction



                                              20
       Errors to Test the Martingale Difference Hypothesis,” Journal of Econometrics 135(1–2):
       155–186.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Political
       Economy 84: 1161-76.
Diebold, Francis, and Roberto Mariano, 1995, “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal of
       Business and Economic Statistics 13: 253-265.
Duy, Timothy, and Mark Thoma, 1998, “Modeling and Forecasting Cointegrated Variables: Some
       Practical Experience,” Journal of Economics and Business 50(3) (May-June): 291-307.
Engel, Charles, 2014, “Exchange Rates and Interest Parity,” Handbook of International
       Economics, Volume 4 (Elsevier), 453-522.
Engel, Charles and James Hamilton, 1990, "Long Swings in the Exchange Rate: Are They in the
       Data and Do Markets Know It?" American Economic Review. 80(4): 689-713.
Faruqee, Hamid, Peter Isard and Paul R. Masson, 1999, “A Macroeconomic Balance Framework
       for Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates,” in J. Stein and R. MacDonald (eds.)
       Equilibrium Exchange Rates (Kluwer: Boston), pp. 103-134.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1979, “On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real
       Interest Differentials,” American Economic Review 69: 610-622.
Groen, Jan J.J., 2000, “The Monetary Exchange Rate Model as a Long–Run Phenomenon,”
       Journal of International Economics 52(2): 299-320.
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Yoichi Ueno, 2006, “Monetary Policy and the Yield Curve at Zero Interest: The
       Macro-finance Model of Interest Rates as Options,” Bank of Japan Discussion Paper No.
       06-E-16.
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Yoichi Ueno, 2007, “Equilibrium Interest Rate and the Yield Curve in a Low
       Interest Rate Environment,” Bank of Japan Discussion Paper No. 06-E-18.
International Monetary Fund, 2015, Global Financial Stability Report: (IMF, October).
       http://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2015/02/index.htm
Kilian, Lutz and Mark Taylor, 2003, “Why Is It So Difficult to Beat the Random Walk Forecast of
       Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics 60(1): 85-107.
Lane P. and Milesi-Ferretti G.M., 2001, “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of Foreign
       Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing,” Journal of International Economics



                                               21
       55: 263-294. http://econserv2.bess.tcd.ie/plane/data.html
Leitch, Gordon and J. Ernest Tanner, 1991, “Economic Forecast Evaluation: Profits Versus the
       Conventional Error Measures,” American Economic Review 81(3): 580-90.
MacDonald, Ronald and Ian Marsh, 1997, “On Fundamentals and Exchange Rates: A Casselian
       Perspective,” Review of Economics and Statistics 79(4) (November): 655-664.
MacDonald, Ronald and Ian Marsh, 1999, Exchange Rate Modeling (Boston: Kluwer).
Mark, Nelson, 1995, “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long Horizon
       Predictability,” American Economic Review 85: 201-218.
Mark, Nelson and Donggyu Sul, 2001, “Nominal Exchange Rates and Monetary Fundamentals:
       Evdience from a Small post-Bretton Woods Panel,” Journal of International Economics
       53(1) (February): 29-52.
Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
       Do They Fit Out of Sample?” Journal of International Economics 14: 3-24. (a)
Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, “The Out-of-Sample Failure of Exchange Rate
       Models: Sampling Error or Misspecification? In J. Frankel (editor), Exchange Rates and
       International Macroeconomics (Chicago: Chicago University Press), 67-105.
Meese, Richard, and Andrew K. Rose, 1991, “An Empirical Assessment of Non-Linearities in
       Models of Exchange Rate Determination,” Review of Economic 58 (3): 603-619.
Rossi, Barbara, 2013, “Exchange Rate Predictability,” Journal of Economic Literature 51(4):
       1063-1119.
West, Kenneth D., 1996, “Asymptotic inference about predictive ability,” Econometrica 64(5):
       1067-1084.




                                               22
Appendix 1: Data
   Unless otherwise stated, we use seasonally-adjusted quarterly data from the IMF International
Financial Statistics ranging from the second quarter of 1973 to the last quarter of 2014.
      The exchange rate data are end of period exchange rates.
      The output data are industrial production.
      Money is M2.
      Consumer price indices are used to calculate annual inflation, and along with the producer
       price index used to calculate the relative price of nontradables.
      Interest rates used in the monetary models are three month Treasury rates. Interest rates
       used in real interest differential model are overnight rates; shadow rates for US, UK, Euro
       area are from Wu and Xia, for Japan from IMF Global Financial Stability Report (2015),
       and Ichiue and Ueno (2006, 2007).
      The three-month, annual and five-year interest rates are end-of-period constant maturity
       interest rates, and are obtained from the IMF country desks, updated from Bloomberg. See
       Chinn and Meredith (2004), Chinn and Quayyum (2012) for details. Five year interest rate
       data were unavailable for Japan and Switzerland; hence data from Global Financial Data
       http://www.globalfindata.com/ were used, specifically, 5-year government note yields for
       Switzerland and 5-year discounted bonds for Japan.
      The net foreign asset (NFA) series is computed as follows. Using stock data for year 1995
       on NFA (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2001), and flow quarterly data from the IFS statistics on
       the current account, we generated quarterly stocks for the NFA series.
      To generate quarterly government debt data we follow a similar strategy. We use annual
       debt data from the IFS statistics, combined with quarterly government deficit (surplus)
       data. The data source for Canadian government debt is the Bank of Canada. For the UK, the
       IFS data are updated with government debt data from the public sector accounts of the UK
       Statistical Office. Data for Switzerland and Japan are from the BIS.


Appendix 2: Diebold-Mariano-West statistics
       The Diebold-Mariano-West statistics (Diebold and Mariano, 1995; West, 1996) are used to
evaluate the forecast performance of the different model specifications relative to that of the naive



                                                 23
random walk.
        Given the exchange rate series xt and the forecast series y t , the loss function L for the

mean square error is defined as:
(A1)               L( y t )  ( y t  x t ) 2 .

        Testing whether the performance of the forecast series is different from that of the naive
random walk forecast z t , it is equivalent to testing whether the population mean of the loss

differential series d t is zero. The loss differential is defined as

(A2)             d t  L( yt )  L( zt ) .

        Under the assumptions of covariance stationarity and short-memory for d t , the

large-sample statistic for the null of equal forecast performance is distributed as a standard normal,
and can be expressed as
                                                  d
(A3)                                                                             ,
                      1 (T 1)                          T

                            
                     T 2   (T 1)
                                     l ( / S (T ))    (dt  d )(dt    d )
                                                    t   1


where, l ( / S (T )) is the lag window, S (T ) is the truncation lag, and T is the number of
observations. Different lag-window specifications can be applied, such as the Barlett or the
quadratic spectral kernels, in combination with a data-dependent lag-selection procedure
(Andrews, 1991).
        For the direction of change statistic, the loss differential series is defined as follows: d t

takes a value of one if the forecast series correctly predicts the direction of change, otherwise it will

take a value of zero. Hence, a value of d significantly larger than 0.5 indicates that the forecast has
the ability to predict the direction of change; on the other hand, if the statistic is significantly less
than 0.5, the forecast tends to give the wrong direction of change. In large samples, the studentized
version of the test statistic,
                    d  0.5
(A4)                         ,
                    0.25 / T
is distributed as a standard Normal.

Appendix 3: Clark-West Statistic



                                                            24
       To evaluate the forecasting accuracy of the different structural models, we use the adjusted
mean squared prediction error (MSPE) statistic proposed by Clark and West (2006). Under the null
hypothesis, the MSPE of a zero mean process is the same as the MSPE of the linear alternative.
Despite the equality, one expects the alternative model’s sample to be larger than the null’s. To
adjust for the downward bias, Clark and West propose a procedure that performs well in
simulations.
       We calculate the test statistic as the difference between the MSPE of the random walk
model and the MSPE from the linear alternative, which is then adjusted downward to account for
the spurious in-sample fit. Under the first model, the process is a zero mean martingale difference
process; under the second model, the process is linear,
       Model 1: yt 1  et 1

       Model 2: yt 1  X t 1 B  et 1 , E et 1 | I t   0

Our inferences are based on a formal test for the null hypothesis of no difference in the accuracy,
as measured by the MSPE, of the two competing forecasts, the linear (structural) model and the
driftless random walk. Thus, the hypothesis test is
        H 0 :  12   22  0

        H A :  12   22  0
A value larger (smaller) than zero indicates that the linear model (random walk) outperforms the
random walk (linear model). The difference between the two MSPEs is asymptotically normally
distributed. For forecast horizons beyond one period, one needs to account for the autocorrelation
induced by the rolling regression. We use Clark and West’s proposed estimator for the asymptotic
variance of the adjusted mean between the two MSPEs, which is robust to the serial correlation.




                                                          25
Appendix 4: Forecast Comparison based on Clark-West Statistics
Table A4a. Period I: 1983q1-2014q4
Specification   Horizon      PPP      SPMM     BEER     IRP   RID      TRF      SPMA   YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       3.231    1.470    1.517          1.848    2.178
                              0.001    0.071    0.065          0.032    0.015
                4 quarter     3.837    2.545    1.702          1.922    3.516
                              0.000    0.005    0.044          0.027    0.000
                20 quarter    4.519    3.440    2.394          3.847    2.802
                              0.000    0.000    0.008          0.000    0.003
FD              1 quarter     0.721    1.350    4.497         -0.790
                              0.236    0.089    0.000          0.785
                4 quarter    -1.031    0.940    2.045          0.073
                              0.849    0.174    0.020          0.471
                20 quarter   -2.019   -0.829    0.850         -1.371
                              0.978    0.796    0.198          0.915
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      2.947    3.074                   2.231    3.174           4.315
                              0.002    0.001                   0.013    0.001           0.000
                4 quarter     3.828    4.148                   5.185    4.451           7.943
                              0.000    0.000                   0.000    0.000           0.000
                20 quarter    6.355    6.337                   5.915    5.741           5.952
                              0.000    0.000                   0.000    0.000           0.000
FD              1 quarter    -0.209    0.818                   0.185
                              0.583    0.207                   0.426
                4 quarter     0.236    1.061                   0.565
                              0.407    0.144                   0.286
                20 quarter    0.408    1.204                   0.474
                              0.342    0.114                   0.318
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     3.211    1.752                   2.058    3.084
                              0.001    0.040                   0.020    0.001
                4 quarter     4.356    3.144                   3.248    3.397
                              0.000    0.001                   0.001    0.000
                20 quarter    7.033    8.830                   7.277    4.864
                              0.000    0.000                   0.000    0.000
FD              1 quarter    -0.525   -0.599                  -0.601
                              0.700    0.725                   0.726
                4 quarter    -0.629   -0.518                  -0.324
                              0.735    0.698                   0.627
                20 quarter   -1.304    1.262                  -0.104
                              0.904    0.103                   0.541


                                                26
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter           2.990      2.270      1.221                 2.158      2.761                 2.193
                                  0.001      0.012      0.111                 0.015      0.003                 0.014
                 4 quarter        5.607      2.346     -0.744                 0.413      2.923                 1.603
                                  0.000      0.009      0.771                 0.340      0.002                 0.054
                 20 quarter       7.719     -0.025     -2.775                -4.028     -1.171                 0.242
                                  0.000      0.510      0.997                 1.000      0.879                 0.404
FD               1 quarter        0.313     -1.491      3.890                -1.053
                                  0.377      0.932      0.000                 0.854
                 4 quarter       -1.137     -0.277      1.624                -1.118
                                  0.872      0.609      0.052                 0.868
                 20 quarter      -0.984     -1.279     -0.840                -0.923
                                  0.837      0.900      0.799                 0.822
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the Clark-West adjusted MSPE statistic, and the second
is the one-sided p-value; rejection implies the forecast performance of the random walk model is “worse” than the
competing specification. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         27
Table A4b. Period II: 2001q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP      SPMM     BEER     IRP   RID      TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       2.264    0.911    2.280          0.921    1.676    2.130    1.279
                              0.012    0.181    0.011          0.179    0.047    0.017    0.100
                4 quarter     2.671   -0.771    1.904         -1.856    2.666    1.631    0.231
                              0.004    0.780    0.028          0.968    0.004    0.051    0.409
                20 quarter    3.397   -1.766    1.619         -2.363   -1.894    4.054    6.050
                              0.000    0.961    0.053          0.991    0.971    0.000    0.000
FD              1 quarter     1.068   -0.211    3.969         -1.971             1.711
                              0.143    0.584    0.000          0.976             0.044
                4 quarter    -1.396   -0.665    1.609         -1.632             1.487
                              0.919    0.747    0.054          0.949             0.069
                20 quarter   -2.432   -3.799    1.399         -3.096            -0.496
                              0.993    1.000    0.081          0.999             0.690
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      0.270    2.151    1.246          0.119    0.386   2.072     1.147
                              0.394    0.016    0.106          0.452    0.350   0.019     0.126
                4 quarter     1.457    1.227    3.292          0.912    0.505   0.084     2.119
                              0.073    0.110    0.000          0.181    0.307   0.467     0.017
                20 quarter    4.567    4.386    4.410          4.370    4.469   2.795     6.002
                              0.000    0.000    0.000          0.000    0.000   0.003     0.000
FD              1 quarter    -0.535   -1.492    3.000         -0.038            0.954
                              0.704    0.932    0.001          0.515            0.170
                4 quarter    -0.190   -1.030    1.434          0.572            1.007
                              0.575    0.849    0.076          0.284            0.157
                20 quarter    0.395    0.700    0.387          0.395            0.284
                              0.346    0.242    0.349          0.346            0.388
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     1.660   1.477     1.865          0.290    1.455    1.675    0.587
                              0.048   0.070     0.031          0.386    0.073    0.047    0.279
                4 quarter     2.814   3.324     3.000          1.816    3.576    1.901    0.637
                              0.002   0.000     0.001          0.035    0.000    0.029    0.262
                20 quarter    3.918   6.900    11.825         11.902    6.518    5.250    4.967
                              0.000   0.000     0.000          0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
FD              1 quarter    -0.306   1.353    -0.391          1.667             0.455
                              0.620   0.088     0.652          0.048             0.325
                4 quarter     0.786   1.182    -0.823          1.758            -0.151
                              0.216   0.119     0.795          0.039             0.560
                20 quarter    0.898   0.726    -0.854          1.289            -0.958
                              0.185   0.234     0.803          0.099             0.831


                                                 28
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter            2.082    -0.108      1.082                0.929     0.575      0.821     -0.854
                                   0.019     0.543      0.140                0.176     0.283      0.206      0.803
                 4 quarter         2.925     0.624     -0.148               -1.377     1.284      1.281     -1.406
                                   0.002     0.266      0.559                0.916     0.099      0.100      0.920
                 20 quarter        7.684     2.137     -2.762               -2.101     2.345      0.861     -0.666
                                   0.000     0.016      0.997                0.982     0.010      0.194      0.747
FD               1 quarter         1.012     0.421      2.651               -0.645               -0.180
                                   0.156     0.337      0.004                0.740                0.571
                 4 quarter         0.536     0.054      1.091               -1.098               -2.164
                                   0.296     0.478      0.138                0.864                0.985
                 20 quarter       -0.396    -2.588     -0.920               -0.592               -0.414
                                   0.654     0.995      0.821                0.723                0.660
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the Clark-West adjusted MSPE statistic, and the second
is the one-sided p-value; rejection implies the forecast performance of the random walk model is “worse” than the
competing specification. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         29
Table A4c. Period III: 2007q4-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP       SPMM      BEER     IRP   RID      TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       1.409      1.179    1.099          1.017    1.673    0.626    0.679
                              0.079      0.119    0.136          0.154    0.047    0.266    0.248
                4 quarter     2.515      0.857    0.488          0.457    3.293    1.290   -0.078
                              0.006      0.196    0.313          0.324    0.000    0.099    0.531
                20 quarter    1.707      0.522    1.084          0.022    0.750    1.272    0.994
                              0.044      0.301    0.139          0.491    0.227    0.102    0.160
FD              1 quarter     1.221     -0.120    2.555         -1.431             1.994
                              0.111      0.548    0.005          0.924             0.023
                4 quarter    -0.715     -0.245   -0.128         -1.362             2.716
                              0.763      0.597    0.551          0.913             0.003
                20 quarter

Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      0.208      1.204   1.049           0.543   -0.643    3.184    0.441
                              0.418      0.114   0.147           0.294    0.740    0.001    0.330
                4 quarter     1.059      0.410   1.830           0.976   -0.517    4.494    0.772
                              0.145      0.341   0.034           0.164    0.697    0.000    0.220
                20 quarter    1.184      0.269   0.579           0.736    0.981    1.165    0.427
                              0.118      0.394   0.281           0.231    0.163    0.122    0.335
FD              1 quarter    -0.185     -1.211   3.053           0.133             1.104
                              0.573      0.887   0.001           0.447             0.135
                4 quarter     0.173     -0.185   3.427           0.770             0.580
                              0.432      0.573   0.000           0.221             0.281
                20 quarter

Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     1.091     0.212    1.076           0.319    1.017    0.618    0.646
                              0.138     0.416    0.141           0.375    0.155    0.268    0.259
                4 quarter     0.820     1.729    1.300           0.466    1.785    1.020    0.780
                              0.206     0.042    0.097           0.321    0.037    0.154    0.218
                20 quarter   -2.064     3.843    5.455           5.989    4.587    5.803    5.743
                              0.981     0.000    0.000           0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
FD              1 quarter     0.127     1.062    0.877           1.034            -0.442
                              0.449     0.144    0.190           0.151             0.671
                4 quarter    -0.079     0.534    0.423           0.759             0.232
                              0.531     0.297    0.336           0.224             0.408
                20 quarter




                                                  30
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter           2.255      1.240      1.268                 1.221      1.628      0.509      0.152
                                  0.012      0.107      0.102                 0.111      0.052      0.306      0.439
                 4 quarter        2.823      2.050      0.808                 0.162      1.091      0.666      0.922
                                  0.002      0.020      0.209                 0.436      0.138      0.253      0.178
                 20 quarter       3.716      1.648      1.367                 1.419      2.380      1.416      0.598
                                  0.000      0.050      0.086                 0.078      0.009      0.078      0.275
FD               1 quarter        1.446      0.435      2.284                -1.022                -0.057
                                  0.074      0.332      0.011                 0.847                 0.523
                 4 quarter        0.216      0.866      0.948                 0.873                 0.407
                                  0.414      0.193      0.171                 0.191                 0.342
                 20 quarter

Panel E: EU/$
ECM           1 quarter           1.877       0.090     1.357                -0.246      0.225      0.283      1.099
                                  0.030       0.464     0.087                 0.597      0.411      0.388      0.136
                 4 quarter        3.161      -1.170    -0.412                -1.336     -1.037      0.192     -1.289
                                  0.001       0.879     0.660                 0.909      0.850      0.424      0.901
                 20 quarter       2.746      -3.873    -3.908                -4.063     -3.816     -3.917     -3.549
                                  0.003       1.000     1.000                 1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000
FD               1 quarter        0.263      -0.859     1.032                -0.500                 0.262
                                  0.396       0.805     0.151                 0.691                 0.397
                 4 quarter       -0.954      -0.004    -0.261                -0.158                 1.364
                                  0.830       0.502     0.603                 0.563                 0.086
                 20 quarter

Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the Clark-West adjusted MSPE statistic, and the second
is the one-sided p-value; rejection implies the forecast performance of the random walk model is “worse” than the
competing specification. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         31
Table 1: The MSE ratios from the dollar-based exchange rates
1a. Period I: 1983q1-2014q4

Specification   Horizon      PPP      SPMM     BEER      IRP      RID      TRF      SPMA   YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       0.927    0.969     1.020    1.022    0.944    0.935
                              0.010    0.584     0.670    0.057    0.444    0.240
                4 quarter     0.852    0.995     1.065    1.027    1.005    0.767
                              0.003    0.960     0.447    0.086    0.958    0.029
                20 quarter    0.600    1.023     1.155    0.907    1.040    1.104
                              0.009    0.947     0.174    0.537    0.982    0.260
FD              1 quarter     1.028    1.077     0.611             1.136
                              0.557    0.476     0.014             0.170
                4 quarter     1.195    1.144     0.469             1.172
                              0.004    0.251     0.000             0.012
                20 quarter    2.226    2.100     0.747             1.863
                              0.000    0.000     0.118             0.000
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      0.917    0.932              1.016    0.957    0.899           0.878
                              0.044    0.116              0.719    0.292    0.069           0.036
                4 quarter     0.825    0.895              1.110    0.875    0.883           0.754
                              0.010    0.014              0.125    0.009    0.017           0.000
                20 quarter    0.524    0.950              1.050    0.935    0.946           0.729
                              0.000    0.006              0.006    0.004    0.007           0.001
FD              1 quarter     1.062    1.158                       1.050
                              0.224    0.073                       0.337
                4 quarter     1.084    1.195                       1.074
                              0.507    0.170                       0.608
                20 quarter    1.857    2.176                       1.884
                              0.058    0.003                       0.038
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     0.941    0.991                       0.967    0.926
                              0.088    0.755                       0.300    0.059
                4 quarter     0.813    0.969                       0.986    0.940
                              0.004    0.278                       0.362    0.068
                20 quarter    0.398    1.080                       1.024    1.171
                              0.000    0.002                       0.000    0.048
FD              1 quarter     1.062    1.306                       1.074
                              0.088    0.050                       0.046
                4 quarter     1.156    1.656                       1.160
                              0.032    0.000                       0.041
                20 quarter    2.309    1.615                       1.975
                              0.000    0.185                       0.022


                                                  32
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter           0.900     0.943      0.997      1.015      0.952      0.916                0.938
                                  0.031     0.221      0.941      0.467      0.380      0.048                0.418
                 4 quarter        0.733     0.952      1.106      1.022      1.070      0.923                1.062
                                  0.000     0.432      0.030      0.239      0.244      0.347                0.517
                 20 quarter       0.339     1.192      1.496      0.958      1.650      1.273                1.306
                                  0.000     0.067      0.000      0.182      0.000      0.007                0.042
FD               1 quarter        1.023     1.177      1.006                 1.112
                                  0.628     0.002      0.971                 0.068
                 4 quarter        1.095     1.145      1.056                 1.188
                                  0.040     0.093      0.758                 0.001
                 20 quarter       1.616     1.512      1.389                 2.335
                                  0.000     0.000      0.008                 0.000
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the MSE ratio (the MSEs of a structural model to the
random walk specification). The entry underneath the MSE ratio is the p-value of the hypothesis that the MSEs of
the structural and random walk models are the same (Diebold and Mariano, 1995). The notation used in the table
is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM:
sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model;
RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented
model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                        33
Table 1: The MSE ratios from the dollar-based exchange rates
1b. Period II: 2001q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP      SPMM      BEER     IRP      RID      TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       0.958     0.983    0.938    0.996    0.970    0.955    0.911    0.987
                              0.032     0.537    0.188    0.807    0.427    0.142    0.170    0.422
                4 quarter     0.849     1.039    1.057    0.981    1.055    0.828    1.061    1.070
                              0.018     0.233    0.847    0.646    0.024    0.024    0.917    0.497
                20 quarter    0.234     1.353    1.744    1.227    1.435    1.464    1.835    1.712
                              0.010     0.029    0.956    0.009    0.006    0.008    0.162    0.004
FD              1 quarter     0.959     1.026    0.435             1.039             1.005
                              0.415     0.453    0.004             0.032             0.990
                4 quarter     1.009     1.122    0.361             1.104             1.094
                              0.997     0.006    0.000             0.000             0.920
                20 quarter    1.345     1.574    0.475             1.590             3.699
                              0.005     0.000    0.000             0.000             0.000
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      0.990    0.903     0.939    1.003    1.002    1.011   0.916     0.918
                              0.616    0.114     0.380    0.691    0.610    0.642   0.120     0.744
                4 quarter     0.925    0.970     0.861    0.998    1.057    1.119   1.062     0.886
                              0.999    0.857     0.043    0.937    0.407    0.097   0.493     0.159
                20 quarter    0.570    1.014     1.097    0.840    1.057    0.962   1.008     1.025
                              0.016    0.059     0.007    0.005    0.087    0.061   0.071     0.014
FD              1 quarter     1.067    1.144     0.965             1.028            1.086
                              0.226    0.063     0.836             0.533            0.552
                4 quarter     1.000    1.117     0.948             1.005            1.236
                              0.645    0.131     0.758             0.624            0.059
                20 quarter    1.297    1.306     1.255             1.163            2.666
                              0.199    0.525     0.077             0.089            0.000
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     0.919    0.988     0.972    1.005    1.069    0.998   0.995     1.079
                              0.242    0.628     0.572    0.536    0.504    0.702   0.628     0.576
                4 quarter     0.703    1.022     1.143    0.983    1.209    1.008   1.157     1.428
                              0.042    0.022     0.417    0.031    0.979    0.014   0.783     0.220
                20 quarter    1.214    1.772     1.513    0.797    1.269    1.781   2.767     2.648
                              0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000   0.001     0.000
FD              1 quarter     1.100    1.032     1.764             0.989            1.408
                              0.259    0.949     0.025             0.346            0.079
                4 quarter     1.101    1.034     3.031             1.036            1.793
                              0.232    0.051     0.000             0.027            0.006
                20 quarter    1.598    1.328    16.795             1.038            5.045
                              0.000    0.000     0.000             0.000            0.000


                                                  34
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter           0.912     1.016      0.970     0.984      0.942     0.994      1.020      1.025
                                  0.099     0.514      0.362     0.734      0.490     0.900      0.663      0.166
                 4 quarter        0.704     1.015      1.007     0.932      1.045     0.919      0.977      1.053
                                  0.026     0.900      0.731     0.897      0.124     0.490      0.585      0.053
                 20 quarter       0.266     0.898      1.107     1.019      1.111     0.909      0.938      1.022
                                  0.000     0.097      0.003     0.804      0.009     0.090      0.843      0.254
FD               1 quarter        0.931     1.026      0.641                1.080                1.166
                                  0.518     0.684      0.304                0.360                0.149
                 4 quarter        0.864     1.077      0.658                1.047                1.292
                                  0.046     0.349      0.126                0.001                0.008
                 20 quarter       0.798     0.900      0.440                1.167                1.405
                                  0.018     0.223      0.000                0.025                0.001
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the MSE ratio (the MSEs of a structural model to the
random walk specification). The entry underneath the MSE ratio is the p-value of the hypothesis that the MSEs of
the structural and random walk models are the same (Diebold and Mariano, 1995). The notation used in the table
is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM:
sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model;
RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented
model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                        35
Table 1: The MSE ratios from the dollar-based exchange rates
1c. Period III: 2007q4-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP      SPMM      BEER     IRP       RID      TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       0.968     0.973    0.916     0.990    0.951    0.931    0.969    0.978
                              0.251     0.300    0.698     0.145    0.338    0.131    0.683    0.662
                4 quarter     0.882     0.976    0.925     0.968    0.993    0.627    0.894    0.975
                              0.066     0.430    0.798     0.037    0.683    0.002    0.313    0.575
                20 quarter    0.519     0.952    0.997     0.872    1.040    0.964    0.937    1.146
                              0.144     0.866    0.679     0.604    0.770    0.698    0.405    0.115
FD              1 quarter     0.897     1.011    0.447              1.037             0.776
                              0.257     0.721    0.085              0.155             0.230
                4 quarter     0.947     1.041    0.385              1.038             0.633
                              0.184     0.091    0.019              0.007             0.157
                20 quarter    1.159     1.207    1.211              1.338             0.919
                              0.086     0.167    0.497              0.083             0.932
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      0.989     0.946    0.912     0.979    0.971    1.058    0.832    0.943
                              0.917     0.421    0.398     0.181    0.864    0.297    0.004    0.518
                4 quarter     0.923     0.966    0.854     0.940    0.933    1.118    0.762    0.885
                              0.662     0.737    0.267     0.044    0.876    0.076    0.000    0.102
                20 quarter    0.509     1.019    0.852     0.810    0.869    0.884    0.924    0.918
                              0.973     0.381    0.553     0.907    0.603    0.558    0.769    0.379
FD              1 quarter     1.042     1.122    0.650              1.002             1.018
                              0.578     0.137    0.039              0.825             0.872
                4 quarter     0.889     1.041    0.634              0.954             1.130
                              0.218     0.412    0.000              0.914             0.177
                20 quarter    0.948     1.338    0.697              1.165             1.643
                              0.480     0.144    0.842              0.253             0.019
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     0.919     1.042    0.971     0.989    1.025    0.973    0.999    1.025
                              0.480     0.707    0.554     0.148    0.892    0.652    0.870    0.858
                4 quarter     0.771     0.950    1.019     0.971    1.229    0.943    1.024    1.135
                              0.985     0.373    0.909     0.840    0.478    0.308    0.707    0.754
                20 quarter    0.246     2.047    1.489     0.981    1.021    1.491    0.940    1.061
                              0.012     0.015    0.145     0.002    0.002    0.007    0.000    0.000
FD              1 quarter     1.048     0.981    1.065              0.989             1.730
                              0.729     0.668    0.725              0.648             0.119
                4 quarter     1.004     1.016    1.047              0.990             1.621
                              0.630     0.549    0.927              0.601             0.077
                20 quarter    1.050     1.130    2.327              1.208             3.545
                              0.002     0.002    0.238              0.014             0.002



                                                  36
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter           0.896      0.968     0.935      0.960      0.943      0.962      1.015     1.023
                                  0.042      0.275     0.254      0.182      0.332      0.194      0.997     0.874
                 4 quarter        0.568      0.938     1.011      0.885      1.045      0.961      0.978     1.028
                                  0.012      0.090     0.539      0.095      0.788      0.512      0.717     0.573
                 20 quarter       0.040      0.753     1.019      0.870      1.025      0.665      0.874     1.105
                                  0.003      0.213     0.310      0.125      0.305      0.027      0.234     0.777
FD               1 quarter        0.848      1.102     0.515                 1.114                 1.159
                                  0.201      0.363     0.329                 0.289                 0.401
                 4 quarter        0.911      1.392     0.554                 1.041                 1.078
                                  0.071      0.226     0.250                 0.697                 0.999
                 20 quarter       1.085      1.579     0.141                 1.035                 0.760
                                  0.440      0.306     0.284                 0.568                 0.891
Panel E: EU/$
ECM           1 quarter           0.876      0.979     0.905      0.986      0.996      0.960      0.985     0.949
                                  0.188      0.722     0.743      0.401      0.480      0.660      0.680     0.903
                 4 quarter        0.558      1.043     1.072      0.946      1.142      1.153      0.849     1.276
                                  0.008      0.023     0.042      0.157      0.030      0.031      0.288     0.052
                 20 quarter       0.310      1.253     1.205      0.945      1.169      1.897      1.308     1.431
                                  0.008      0.000     0.000      0.050      0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000
FD               1 quarter        0.994      1.197     1.341                 1.079                 1.589
                                  0.669      0.096     0.211                 0.283                 0.053
                 4 quarter        1.101      1.269     6.023                 1.201                 1.202
                                  0.009      0.017     0.027                 0.005                 0.200
                 20 quarter       1.476      2.020    11.974                 1.582                 3.391
                                  0.000      0.000     0.001                 0.000                 0.053
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one is the MSE ratio (the MSEs of a structural model to the
random walk specification). The entry underneath the MSE ratio is the p-value of the hypothesis that the MSEs of
the structural and random walk models are the same (Diebold and Mariano, 1995). The notation used in the table
is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM:
sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model;
RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented
model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                        37
Table 2: Direction of change statistics from the dollar-based exchange rates
2a. Period I: 1983q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP       SPMM      BEER      IRP       RID       TRF      SPMA   YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter        0.656     0.531     0.523     0.461     0.539    0.594
                               0.000     0.480     0.596     0.377     0.377    0.034
                4 quarter      0.664     0.680     0.592     0.480     0.568    0.632
                               0.000     0.000     0.040     0.655     0.128    0.003
                20 quarter     0.624     0.661     0.569     0.578     0.624    0.578
                               0.010     0.001     0.151     0.103     0.010    0.103
FD              1 quarter      0.547     0.531     0.664               0.453
                               0.289     0.480     0.000               0.289
                4 quarter      0.504     0.584     0.784               0.496
                               0.929     0.060     0.000               0.929
                20 quarter     0.294     0.514     0.560               0.431
                               0.000     0.774     0.213               0.151
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter       0.539     0.586               0.516     0.555    0.555           0.656
                               0.377     0.052               0.724     0.216    0.216           0.000
                4 quarter      0.576     0.600               0.504     0.672    0.600           0.752
                               0.089     0.025               0.929     0.000    0.025           0.000
                20 quarter     0.716     0.670               0.688     0.661    0.550           0.688
                               0.000     0.000               0.000     0.001    0.292           0.000
FD              1 quarter      0.492     0.516                         0.539
                               0.860     0.724                         0.377
                4 quarter      0.600     0.552                         0.608
                               0.025     0.245                         0.016
                20 quarter     0.550     0.596                         0.495
                               0.292     0.044                         0.924
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter      0.570     0.578                         0.539    0.617
                               0.112     0.077                         0.377    0.008
                4 quarter      0.608     0.600                         0.592    0.560
                               0.016     0.025                         0.040    0.180
                20 quarter     0.817     0.807                         0.752    0.661
                               0.000     0.000                         0.000    0.001
FD              1 quarter      0.414     0.492                         0.453
                               0.052     0.860                         0.289
                4 quarter      0.480     0.320                         0.480
                               0.655     0.000                         0.655
                20 quarter     0.541     0.578                         0.587
                               0.389     0.103                         0.069

                                                   38
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter             0.539       0.531      0.492       0.484      0.578       0.555                 0.547
                                    0.377       0.480      0.860       0.724      0.077       0.216                 0.289
                  4 quarter         0.680       0.600      0.488       0.480      0.536       0.608                 0.576
                                    0.000       0.025      0.788       0.655      0.421       0.016                 0.089
                  20 quarter        0.844       0.532      0.339       0.615      0.349       0.486                 0.578
                                    0.000       0.503      0.001       0.017      0.002       0.774                 0.103
FD                1 quarter         0.445       0.477      0.664                  0.492
                                    0.216       0.596      0.000                  0.860
                  4 quarter         0.480       0.488      0.584                  0.472
                                    0.655       0.788      0.060                  0.531
                  20 quarter        0.422       0.495      0.606                  0.303
                                    0.103       0.924      0.028                  0.000
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the proportion of forecasts that correctly predict
the direction of the dollar exchange rate movement. Underneath each direction of change statistic are the
p-values for the hypothesis that the reported proportion is significantly different from ½ is listed. When the
statistic is significantly larger than ½, the forecast is said to have the ability to predict the direct of change. If the
statistic is significantly less than ½, the forecast tends to give the wrong direction of change. The notation used in
the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity;
SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity
model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary
augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the
heading “Horizon.”




                                                            39
Table 2: Direction of change statistics from the dollar-based exchange rates
2b. Period II: 2001q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP       SPMM      BEER       IRP      RID       TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter        0.625     0.464     0.536     0.464     0.536    0.536    0.625   0.643
                               0.061     0.593     0.593     0.593     0.593    0.593    0.061   0.033
                4 quarter      0.642     0.434     0.509     0.585     0.377    0.528    0.566   0.566
                               0.039     0.336     0.891     0.216     0.074    0.680    0.336   0.336
                20 quarter     0.622     0.541     0.568     0.405     0.541    0.568    0.730   0.838
                               0.139     0.622     0.411     0.250     0.622    0.411    0.005   0.000
FD              1 quarter      0.571     0.464     0.750               0.482             0.571
                               0.285     0.593     0.000               0.789             0.285
                4 quarter      0.528     0.396     0.811               0.340             0.585
                               0.680     0.131     0.000               0.020             0.216
                20 quarter     0.568     0.216     0.892               0.243             0.622
                               0.411     0.001     0.000               0.002             0.139
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter       0.518     0.589     0.571     0.536     0.554    0.589    0.625   0.554
                               0.789     0.181     0.285     0.593     0.423    0.181    0.061   0.423
                4 quarter      0.547     0.585     0.679     0.547     0.566    0.566    0.528   0.566
                               0.492     0.216     0.009     0.492     0.336    0.336    0.680   0.336
                20 quarter     0.811     0.811     0.784     0.811     0.811    0.838    0.568   0.811
                               0.000     0.000     0.001     0.000     0.000    0.000    0.411   0.000
FD              1 quarter      0.554     0.464     0.643               0.482             0.500
                               0.423     0.593     0.033               0.789             1.000
                4 quarter      0.585     0.566     0.736               0.528             0.509
                               0.216     0.336     0.001               0.680             0.891
                20 quarter     0.811     0.730     0.730               0.811             0.486
                               0.000     0.005     0.005               0.000             0.869
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter      0.536     0.607     0.589     0.518     0.518    0.554    0.589   0.536
                               0.593     0.109     0.181     0.789     0.789    0.423    0.181   0.593
                4 quarter      0.566     0.698     0.623     0.642     0.585    0.679    0.566   0.453
                               0.336     0.004     0.074     0.039     0.216    0.009    0.336   0.492
                20 quarter     0.730     0.865     1.000     0.946     1.000    0.892    0.838   0.838
                               0.005     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000
FD              1 quarter      0.482     0.536     0.554               0.536             0.607
                               0.789     0.593     0.423               0.593             0.109
                4 quarter      0.717     0.755     0.509               0.736             0.509
                               0.002     0.000     0.891               0.001             0.891
                20 quarter     1.000     1.000     0.297               1.000             0.405
                               0.000     0.000     0.014               0.000             0.250

                                                   40
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter             0.500       0.500       0.518      0.536       0.500       0.536       0.536    0.518
                                    1.000       1.000       0.789      0.593       1.000       0.593       0.593    0.789
                  4 quarter         0.547       0.491       0.396      0.472       0.491       0.472       0.604    0.415
                                    0.492       0.891       0.131      0.680       0.891       0.680       0.131    0.216
                  20 quarter        0.919       0.703       0.405      0.486       0.324       0.703       0.459    0.514
                                    0.000       0.014       0.250      0.869       0.033       0.014       0.622    0.869
FD                1 quarter         0.571       0.589       0.732                  0.393                   0.500
                                    0.285       0.181       0.001                  0.109                   1.000
                  4 quarter         0.717       0.528       0.642                  0.264                   0.434
                                    0.002       0.680       0.039                  0.001                   0.336
                  20 quarter        0.703       0.541       0.811                  0.405                   0.378
                                    0.014       0.622       0.000                  0.250                   0.139
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the proportion of forecasts that correctly predict
the direction of the dollar exchange rate movement. Underneath each direction of change statistic are the
p-values for the hypothesis that the reported proportion is significantly different from ½ is listed. When the
statistic is significantly larger than ½, the forecast is said to have the ability to predict the direct of change. If the
statistic is significantly less than ½, the forecast tends to give the wrong direction of change. The notation used in
the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity;
SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity
model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary
augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the
heading “Horizon.”




                                                            41
Table 2: Direction of change statistics from the dollar-based exchange rates
2c. Period III: 2007q4-2014q4

              Horizon        PPP       SPMM       BEER       IRP      RID       TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter        0.517      0.448     0.517     0.483     0.414    0.586    0.483   0.586
                               0.853      0.577     0.853     0.853     0.353    0.353    0.853   0.353
                4 quarter      0.731      0.423     0.385     0.692     0.308    0.808    0.423   0.423
                               0.019      0.433     0.239     0.050     0.050    0.002    0.433   0.433
                20 quarter     0.600      0.500     0.600     0.500     0.500    0.600    0.600   0.600
                               0.527      1.000     0.527     1.000     1.000    0.527    0.527   0.527
FD              1 quarter      0.586      0.448     0.759               0.448             0.655
                               0.353      0.577     0.005               0.577             0.095
                4 quarter      0.462      0.462     0.769               0.231             0.538
                               0.695      0.695     0.006               0.006             0.695
                20 quarter     0.400      0.400     0.700               0.400             0.600
                               0.527      0.527     0.206               0.527             0.527
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter       0.655      0.621     0.552     0.586     0.517    0.483    0.655   0.552
                               0.095      0.194     0.577     0.353     0.853    0.853    0.095   0.577
                4 quarter      0.731      0.577     0.692     0.615     0.654    0.462    0.923   0.577
                               0.019      0.433     0.050     0.239     0.117    0.695    0.000   0.433
                20 quarter     0.500      0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500    0.600    0.600   0.500
                               1.000      1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000    0.527    0.527   1.000
FD              1 quarter      0.586      0.379     0.793               0.483             0.448
                               0.353      0.194     0.002               0.853             0.577
                4 quarter      0.769      0.500     0.846               0.577             0.615
                               0.006      1.000     0.000               0.433             0.239
                20 quarter     0.500      0.500     0.500               0.500             0.200
                               1.000      1.000     1.000               1.000             0.058
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter      0.483      0.379     0.621     0.586     0.483    0.586    0.586   0.552
                               0.853      0.194     0.194     0.353     0.853    0.353    0.353   0.577
                4 quarter      0.423      0.654     0.615     0.462     0.538    0.654    0.577   0.615
                               0.433      0.117     0.239     0.695     0.695    0.117    0.433   0.239
                20 quarter     0.200      1.000     1.000     0.800     1.000    1.000    1.000   1.000
                               0.058      0.002     0.002     0.058     0.002    0.002    0.002   0.002
FD              1 quarter      0.448      0.517     0.517               0.552             0.448
                               0.577      0.853     0.853               0.577             0.577
                4 quarter      0.654      0.654     0.615               0.654             0.615
                               0.117      0.117     0.239               0.117             0.239
                20 quarter     1.000      1.000     1.000               1.000             0.300
                               0.002      0.002     0.002               0.002             0.206

                                                   42
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter             0.483       0.621        0.655      0.586       0.586      0.517       0.586    0.586
                                    0.853       0.194        0.095      0.353       0.353      0.853       0.353    0.353
                  4 quarter         0.577       0.692        0.538      0.615       0.538      0.500       0.577    0.615
                                    0.433       0.050        0.695      0.239       0.695      1.000       0.433    0.239
                  20 quarter        0.900       0.400        0.500      0.600       0.500      0.600       0.600    0.600
                                    0.011       0.527        1.000      0.527       1.000      0.527       0.527    0.527
FD                1 quarter         0.655       0.655        0.793                  0.379                  0.414
                                    0.095       0.095        0.002                  0.194                  0.353
                  4 quarter         0.654       0.500        0.692                  0.500                  0.538
                                    0.117       1.000        0.050                  1.000                  0.695
                  20 quarter        0.600       0.600        0.800                  0.500                  0.700
                                    0.527       0.527        0.058                  1.000                  0.206
Panel E: EU/$
ECM           1 quarter             0.655       0.448        0.517      0.552       0.414      0.483       0.483    0.517
                                    0.095       0.577        0.853      0.577       0.353      0.853       0.853    0.853
                  4 quarter         0.769       0.462        0.577      0.538       0.423      0.538       0.577    0.500
                                    0.006       0.695        0.433      0.695       0.433      0.695       0.433    1.000
                  20 quarter        0.900       0.100        0.100      0.800       0.100      0.100       0.100    0.100
                                    0.011       0.011        0.011      0.058       0.011      0.011       0.011    0.011
FD                1 quarter         0.414       0.379        0.414                  0.379                  0.483
                                    0.353       0.194        0.353                  0.194                  0.853
                  4 quarter         0.423       0.462        0.500                  0.423                  0.500
                                    0.433       0.695        1.000                  0.433                  1.000
                  20 quarter        0.100       0.100        0.100                  0.100                  0.400
                                    0.011       0.011        0.011                  0.011                  0.527
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the proportion of forecasts that correctly predict
the direction of the dollar exchange rate movement. Underneath each direction of change statistic are the
p-values for the hypothesis that the reported proportion is significantly different from ½ is listed. When the
statistic is significantly larger than ½, the forecast is said to have the ability to predict the direct of change. If the
statistic is significantly less than ½, the forecast tends to give the wrong direction of change. The notation used in
the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity;
SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity
model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary
augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting horizons (in quarters) are listed under the
heading “Horizon.”




                                                            43
Table 3: Cointegration between dollar-based exchange rates and their forecasts
3a. Period I: 1983q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP      SPMM     BEER     IRP      RID        TRF           SPMA   YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       7.564   45.286   55.842    4.890     45.442        32.772
                              0.629    0.001    0.001    0.898      0.001         0.001
                4 quarter    48.271   49.208   46.940   43.647     46.900        26.173
                              0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001      0.001         0.001
                20 quarter    5.670    7.628   10.794    5.976     10.134        12.603
                              0.824    0.623    0.299    0.791      0.367         0.154
FD              1 quarter    62.396   92.624   72.232             109.964
                              0.001    0.001    0.001               0.001
                4 quarter    44.767   43.573   47.154              44.987
                              0.001    0.001    0.001               0.001
                20 quarter    6.651    9.037   11.493               6.370
                              0.722    0.479    0.228               0.751
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter     15.055   72.139            14.434     40.931        43.834          14.243
                              0.067    0.001             0.084      0.001         0.001           0.089
                4 quarter    42.509   41.745            39.352     39.529        39.281          31.511
                              0.001    0.001             0.001      0.001         0.001           0.001
                20 quarter   18.254    8.122             8.255      8.433         7.837          12.163
                              0.021    0.572             0.559      0.540         0.601           0.177
FD              1 quarter    46.820   74.253                       76.519
                              0.001    0.001                        0.001
                4 quarter    38.005   33.042                       37.943
                              0.001    0.001                        0.001
                20 quarter    6.388    7.594                        7.190
                              0.749    0.626                        0.667
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter     7.915   83.230                       61.838   103.310
                              0.593    0.001                        0.001     0.001
                4 quarter    44.791   39.555                       53.772    41.980
                              0.001    0.001                        0.001     0.001
                20 quarter    9.682   11.555                       13.427     8.766
                              0.413    0.222                        0.118     0.506
FD              1 quarter    87.446   99.953                      108.487
                              0.001    0.001                        0.001
                4 quarter    43.481   36.278                       40.980
                              0.001    0.001                        0.001
                20 quarter    8.402   10.862                        8.583
                              0.544    0.292                        0.525

                                                  44
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter          8.710     42.517    62.709      8.384     117.159      68.513               14.307
                                 0.512      0.001     0.001      0.545       0.001       0.001                0.087
                 4 quarter      34.164     38.779    39.665     38.147      41.653      34.689               45.750
                                 0.001      0.001     0.001      0.001       0.001       0.001                0.001
                 20 quarter     13.792     14.063    14.508     14.626      15.233      14.851               15.379
                                 0.104      0.095     0.081      0.078       0.063       0.072                0.060
FD               1 quarter      93.173     82.837    72.536                138.032
                                 0.001      0.001     0.001                  0.001
                 4 quarter      40.322     37.764    24.937                 38.056
                                 0.001      0.001     0.002                  0.001
                 20 quarter     16.402     17.582    21.326                 13.373
                                 0.042      0.027     0.007                  0.120
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the Johansen maximum eigenvalue statistic for
the null hypothesis that an exchange rate and its forecast are not cointegrated. The entry underneath reports the
p-value for the null hypothesis. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD:
first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral
equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor
rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         45
Table 3: Cointegration between dollar-based exchange rates and their forecasts
3b. Period II: 2001q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon        PPP      SPMM     BEER      IRP       RID       TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter       6.582   39.598    12.932     5.446    30.306   10.464   28.521    4.620
                              0.729    0.001     0.139     0.847     0.001    0.333    0.001    0.919
                4 quarter    21.253   19.694    22.786    20.919    20.641   16.612   24.633   21.517
                              0.007    0.012     0.004     0.008     0.009    0.039    0.002    0.006
                20 quarter    9.840    9.648    10.261    10.275     9.966    9.876   12.341   10.314
                              0.397    0.416     0.354     0.352     0.384    0.393    0.167    0.348
FD              1 quarter    46.488   37.776    26.238              49.788            38.463
                              0.001    0.001     0.001               0.001             0.001
                4 quarter    20.063   20.601    23.016              20.516            18.377
                              0.010    0.009     0.004               0.009             0.020
                20 quarter    9.711   10.068    10.458               9.875            10.987
                              0.410    0.373     0.334               0.393             0.280
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter     18.439   44.046    41.331     5.209    42.452   22.192   43.350    8.795
                              0.020    0.001     0.001     0.869     0.001    0.005    0.001    0.503
                4 quarter    17.580   18.473    17.083    15.584    18.020   16.338   17.122   16.418
                              0.027    0.019     0.033     0.056     0.023    0.043    0.032    0.041
                20 quarter   16.479    5.066     5.354     3.614     5.631    7.406    7.858    6.199
                              0.040    0.882     0.856     0.974     0.828    0.645    0.599    0.769
FD              1 quarter    40.862   56.223    25.468              65.609            35.570
                              0.001    0.001     0.001               0.001             0.001
                4 quarter    16.679   16.184    13.565              15.594            16.181
                              0.038    0.045     0.113               0.056             0.045
                20 quarter    3.898    3.624     6.840               3.897            11.642
                              0.962    0.974     0.703               0.962             0.213
Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter    10.594   80.981    34.108    11.086    60.800   96.831   77.672   12.126
                              0.320    0.001     0.001     0.269     0.001    0.001    0.001    0.179
                4 quarter    18.105   20.158    21.813    17.737    19.159   19.784   22.725   17.001
                              0.022    0.010     0.005     0.025     0.015    0.012    0.004    0.033
                20 quarter   11.416    9.549     9.582    10.089     8.761    7.088   12.029   10.150
                              0.236    0.426     0.423     0.371     0.507    0.678    0.185    0.365
FD              1 quarter    73.580   94.727    38.828              94.972            47.881
                              0.001    0.001     0.001               0.001             0.001
                4 quarter    18.643   19.171    14.516              17.212            22.414
                              0.018    0.015     0.081               0.031             0.004
                20 quarter    8.133    9.041    10.363               7.380            11.963
                              0.571    0.478     0.343               0.648             0.188

                                                  46
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter          10.910     35.819     43.127      5.294     42.720    25.942     40.478     13.283
                                  0.287      0.001      0.001      0.861      0.001     0.001      0.001      0.123
                 4 quarter       18.959     15.693     17.607     20.190     19.665    14.230     19.850     19.304
                                  0.016      0.054      0.027      0.010      0.012     0.090      0.012      0.014
                 20 quarter       6.739     10.630     10.890      8.523     10.225    13.997      8.040      9.493
                                  0.713      0.316      0.289      0.531      0.357     0.097      0.581      0.432
FD               1 quarter       59.496     30.726     31.812                91.589               41.131
                                  0.001      0.001      0.001                 0.001                0.001
                 4 quarter       21.582     27.196     12.047                18.835               20.866
                                  0.006      0.001      0.184                 0.017                0.008
                 20 quarter       7.198     14.150     10.579                10.763               12.372
                                  0.667      0.092      0.321                 0.302                0.166
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the Johansen maximum eigenvalue statistic for
the null hypothesis that an exchange rate and its forecast are not cointegrated. The entry underneath reports the
p-value for the null hypothesis. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD:
first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral
equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor
rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         47
Table 3: Cointegration between dollar-based exchange rates and their forecasts
3c. Period III: 2007q4-2014q4

Specification   Horizon       PPP       SPMM     BEER     IRP       RID      TRF         SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM             1 quarter       9.631   18.087   10.139    10.425   12.024   16.608       8.453   13.376
                                0.418    0.022    0.366     0.337    0.185    0.039       0.538    0.120
                 4 quarter     11.975   11.403   12.915    12.340   11.890   10.599      10.592   12.574
                                0.188    0.237    0.139     0.167    0.193    0.319       0.320    0.155
                 20 quarter    11.822    7.100    9.421    18.486   17.090   17.265      18.585   17.538
                                0.197    0.677    0.440     0.019    0.032    0.030       0.019    0.027
FD               1 quarter     29.545   21.602   17.886             29.725               26.240
                                0.001    0.006    0.024              0.001                0.001
                 4 quarter     11.582   12.495   16.740             11.889               11.681
                                0.219    0.159    0.037              0.193                0.209
                 20 quarter    14.935   16.248   14.591             17.213               16.778
                                0.070    0.044    0.079              0.031                0.036
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM              1 quarter     24.918   17.789   11.867    31.949   23.081       8.788   26.279   29.464
                                0.002    0.025    0.194     0.001    0.004       0.504    0.001    0.001
                 4 quarter      9.426    7.847    8.608     8.299    8.217       7.047    8.681   10.188
                                0.439    0.600    0.523     0.554    0.562       0.682    0.515    0.361
                 20 quarter    10.913   14.441   12.338    12.909   10.287       8.214    8.523   12.425
                                0.287    0.083    0.168     0.140    0.351       0.563    0.531    0.163
FD               1 quarter     28.720   32.919   20.547             32.001               23.136
                                0.001    0.001    0.009              0.001                0.004
                 4 quarter      8.931    8.305    7.977              8.199                7.829
                                0.490    0.553    0.587              0.564                0.602
                 20 quarter    10.087    9.199    8.535             11.695               12.481
                                0.371    0.462    0.530              0.207                0.160
Panel C: SF/$
ECM              1 quarter     10.250   36.460   16.953    25.641   35.972   38.802      21.648    4.443
                                0.355    0.001    0.034     0.001    0.001    0.001       0.006    0.931
                 4 quarter      7.694    8.864    8.915     8.232   10.423    7.984       9.353    7.880
                                0.616    0.496    0.491     0.561    0.337    0.586       0.446    0.597
                 20 quarter     6.747   16.057   12.356    10.846   14.462   21.015      17.605   13.272
                                0.713    0.047    0.167     0.294    0.083    0.008       0.027    0.124
FD               1 quarter     36.062   41.527   26.778             48.343               41.069
                                0.001    0.001    0.001              0.001                0.001
                 4 quarter      9.054    8.268   12.527              8.307               11.510
                                0.477    0.557    0.158              0.553                0.226
                 20 quarter    20.187   12.747   29.077             15.080               16.108
                                0.010    0.147    0.001              0.067                0.046

                                                  48
Panel D: BP/$
ECM                1 quarter       14.234    13.530     27.554     28.427    26.970     13.658     26.140    16.500
                                    0.089     0.114      0.001      0.001     0.001      0.109      0.001     0.040
                   4 quarter       17.780    17.377     17.357     17.216    17.180     18.608     20.105    17.109
                                    0.025     0.029      0.029      0.031     0.031      0.018      0.010     0.032
                   20 quarter      40.217    32.386     30.639     30.963    31.291     32.030     26.682    34.418
                                    0.001     0.001      0.001      0.001     0.001      0.001      0.001     0.001
FD                 1 quarter       35.498    20.861     17.396               43.574                42.512
                                    0.001     0.008      0.029                0.001                 0.001
                   4 quarter       16.863    23.915     26.191               17.659                23.508
                                    0.035     0.003      0.001                0.026                 0.003
                   20 quarter      33.814    26.296     14.840               33.347                25.529
                                    0.001     0.001      0.073                0.001                 0.001
Panel E: EU/$
ECM                1 quarter       10.477    14.699     15.838     22.366    13.999     22.202      9.550    10.540
                                    0.332     0.076      0.051      0.005     0.097      0.005      0.426     0.325
                   4 quarter       13.438    12.428     13.449     13.776    14.174     11.296     16.253    15.708
                                    0.117     0.163      0.117      0.105     0.091      0.248      0.044     0.053
                   20 quarter       4.641    13.729     10.087     12.623    20.576     32.626     14.331     4.881
                                    0.917     0.107      0.371      0.153     0.009      0.001      0.087     0.898
FD                 1 quarter       24.265    28.753     28.399               33.951                24.612
                                    0.003    0.00b1      0.001                0.001                 0.002
                   4 quarter       12.605    13.094     13.049               13.635                11.459
                                    0.154     0.131      0.133                0.110                 0.231
                   20 quarter      12.451    11.739     19.181               24.208                13.483
                                    0.162     0.203      0.015                0.003                 0.116
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first one reports the Johansen maximum eigenvalue statistic for
the null hypothesis that an exchange rate and its forecast are not cointegrated. The entry underneath reports the
p-value for the null hypothesis. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD:
first-difference specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral
equilibrium exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor
rule fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                         49
Table 4: Results of the (1,-1) restriction test: dollar-based exchange rates
4a. Period I: 1983q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon         PPP       SPMM      BEER      IRP        RID       TRF      SPMA   YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter                  24.849    25.471               16.648   23.444
                                          0.000     0.000                0.000    0.000
                4 quarter     47.280     45.221    38.112    42.459     41.450   21.411
                               0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000
                20 quarter

FD              1 quarter     28.609     62.635    70.450               58.588
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000
                4 quarter     38.600     33.900    45.362               39.986
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000
                20 quarter

Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter       7.444     70.187               1.938     38.347   41.802          11.466
                               0.006      0.000               0.164      0.000    0.000           0.001
                4 quarter     39.305     40.019              37.206     37.851   37.666          29.576
                               0.000      0.000               0.000      0.000    0.000           0.000
                20 quarter    14.702
                               0.000
FD              1 quarter     43.798     72.575                         74.340
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000
                4 quarter     36.556     31.104                         36.271
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000
                20 quarter

Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter                56.509                         46.934   74.098
                                          0.000                          0.000    0.000
                4 quarter     40.240     32.076                         45.131   35.007
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000    0.000
                20 quarter

FD              1 quarter     49.139     94.942                         76.324
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000
                4 quarter     35.653     30.811                         34.346
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000
                20 quarter



                                                     50
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter                       41.935     54.374                 103.092      60.086                13.083
                                               0.000      0.000                   0.000       0.000                 0.000
                  4 quarter       33.858      38.399     37.648      38.002      39.044      33.429                40.703
                                   0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000                 0.000
                  20 quarter                   7.405      6.903      10.319       7.581       6.483                12.625
                                               0.007      0.009       0.001       0.006       0.011                 0.000
FD                1 quarter       86.641      77.771     66.489                 111.515
                                   0.000       0.000      0.000                   0.000
                  4 quarter       39.833      37.331     22.880                  37.035
                                   0.000       0.000      0.000                   0.000
                  20 quarter      11.093      16.747     19.502
                                   0.001       0.000      0.000
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first entry is the likelihood ratio test statistic for the restriction of
(1, -1) on the cointegrating vector. The entry underneath is its p-value. The test is only applied to the cointegration
cases present in Table 3. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                            51
Table 4: Results of the (1,-1) restriction test: dollar-based exchange rates
4b. Period II: 2001q1-2014q4

Specification Horizon         PPP       SPMM      BEER       IRP       RID       TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter                  23.355                         18.437             9.501
                                          0.000                          0.000             0.002
                4 quarter     13.204     11.951    13.386    13.630     12.866    8.518   14.256   12.810
                               0.000      0.001     0.000     0.000      0.000    0.004    0.000    0.000
                20 quarter

FD              1 quarter     31.512     31.503    22.126               11.973            24.435
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.001             0.000
                4 quarter     12.487     12.735    15.697               12.733             5.565
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000             0.018
                20 quarter

Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter      16.159     39.557    40.788               38.379   21.898   36.281
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000    0.000    0.000
                4 quarter     17.083     18.100    16.941    15.266     17.832   15.931   16.489   15.421
                               0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                20 quarter     3.513
                               0.061
FD              1 quarter     39.875     45.822    25.435               64.889            35.433
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000             0.000
                4 quarter     16.442     15.492                         15.414            14.837
                               0.000      0.000                          0.000             0.000
                20 quarter

Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter                49.744    15.483               33.032   55.732   32.060
                                          0.000     0.000                0.000    0.000    0.000
                4 quarter       4.088     5.534     3.346      4.274     6.125    4.072    5.947    2.483
                                0.043     0.019     0.067      0.039     0.013    0.044    0.015    0.115
                20 quarter

FD              1 quarter     31.427     64.961    19.402               28.778            30.701
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000             0.000
                4 quarter      4.106      5.328     0.671                3.929             4.347
                               0.043      0.021     0.413                0.047             0.037
                20 quarter



                                                     52
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter                       35.037      43.091                 41.114     22.122      39.803
                                               0.000       0.000                  0.000      0.000       0.000
                  4 quarter       17.851      15.564      17.521     19.948      19.534     14.087      19.437     19.088
                                   0.000       0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000
                  20 quarter                                                                 5.390
                                                                                             0.020
FD                1 quarter       54.917      25.682      31.619                 90.767                 36.244
                                   0.000       0.000       0.000                  0.000                  0.000
                  4 quarter       21.269      26.581                             18.748                 19.644
                                   0.000       0.000                              0.000                  0.000
                  20 quarter                  13.325
                                               0.000
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first entry is the likelihood ratio test statistic for the restriction of
(1, -1) on the cointegrating vector. The entry underneath is its p-value. The test is only applied to the cointegration
cases present in Table 3. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                            53
Table 4: Results of the (1,-1) restriction test: dollar-based exchange rates
4c. Period III: 2007q4-2014q4

Specification Horizon         PPP       SPMM      BEER       IRP       RID       TRF      SPMA     YCS
Panel A: CAN$/$
ECM           1 quarter                  13.318                                  14.330
                                          0.000                                   0.000
                4 quarter

                20 quarter                                     3.621     4.723    1.454   13.163    9.883
                                                               0.057     0.030    0.228    0.000    0.002
FD              1 quarter     26.424     19.233    14.603               28.359            24.203
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000             0.000
                4 quarter                          12.821
                                                    0.000
                20 quarter      6.509     4.227     4.139                5.549            12.730
                                0.011     0.040     0.042                0.018             0.000
Panel B: Yen/$
ECM            1 quarter        0.061     9.839              29.138     15.213            25.960   23.109
                                0.805     0.002               0.000      0.000             0.000    0.000
                4 quarter

                20 quarter                9.690
                                          0.002
FD              1 quarter     21.843     32.387    16.226               30.679            22.319
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000             0.000
                4 quarter

                20 quarter

Panel C: SF/$
ECM             1 quarter                32.357     6.864    16.771     14.446   26.508   12.192
                                          0.000     0.009     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000
                4 quarter

                20 quarter               13.078                          8.453   19.904   11.925
                                          0.000                          0.004    0.000    0.001
FD              1 quarter     25.108     27.850    20.559                9.336            38.181
                               0.000      0.000     0.000                0.002             0.000
                4 quarter

                20 quarter    12.353               19.139                8.141             0.399
                               0.000                0.000                0.004             0.528

                                                     54
Panel D: BP/$
ECM           1 quarter            8.470                  23.523     10.964      21.031                 22.203     11.507
                                   0.004                   0.000      0.001       0.000                  0.000      0.001
                  4 quarter       12.953      12.987      12.101     14.455      12.285     11.428      12.896     12.877
                                   0.000       0.000       0.001      0.000       0.000      0.001       0.000      0.000
                  20 quarter      23.073       5.274       7.892      9.479       7.597     13.101       9.782      8.159
                                   0.000       0.022       0.005      0.002       0.006      0.000       0.002      0.004
FD                1 quarter       26.945      15.746      11.226                 35.028                 38.586
                                   0.000       0.000       0.001                  0.000                  0.000
                  4 quarter       13.049      22.891       4.110                 12.422                 22.786
                                   0.000       0.000       0.043                  0.000                  0.000
                  20 quarter       8.142      14.002       8.312                  9.773                 22.137
                                   0.004       0.000       0.004                  0.002                  0.000
Panel E: EU/$
ECM           1 quarter                        6.076       8.654       1.205      8.971     10.031
                                               0.014       0.003       0.272      0.003      0.002
                  4 quarter                                                       9.241                 11.945       9.982
                                                                                  0.002                  0.001       0.002
                  20 quarter                                                     13.164     10.728       8.591
                                                                                  0.000      0.001       0.003
FD                1 quarter       19.218      18.193      11.159                 28.555                 20.088
                                   0.000       0.000       0.001                  0.000                  0.000
                  4 quarter

                  20 quarter                               0.258                 21.621
                                                           0.611                  0.000
Note: Each cell in the Table has two entries. The first entry is the likelihood ratio test statistic for the restriction of
(1, -1) on the cointegrating vector. The entry underneath is its p-value. The test is only applied to the cointegration
cases present in Table 3. The notation used in the table is ECM: error correction specification; FD: first-difference
specification; PPP: purchasing power parity; SPMM: sticky-price monetary model; BEER: behavioral equilibrium
exchange rate model; IRP: interest rate parity model; RID: real interest differential model; TRF: Taylor rule
fundamentals; SPMA: sticky-price monetary augmented model; YCS: yield curve slope model. The forecasting
horizons (in quarters) are listed under the heading “Horizon.”




                                                            55
     1.0
            Log exchange
            rate, 1973Q2=0
     0.8


     0.6
                     GBP

     0.4


     0.2


     0.0
                  CAD
                              Period I ==>                             Period II ==>    Period III ==>
    -0.2
           1975      1980      1985          1990   1995        2000         2005        2010



Figure 1: Exchange rates for Canadian dollar and British pound, end of month.



     .3

     .2

     .1            DEM
                  '73Q2=0
     .0
                                                             EUR
                                                           '99Q1=0
    -.1

    -.2

    -.3

    -.4

    -.5    Log exchange
           rate              Period I ==>                             Period II ==>    Period III ==>
    -.6
           1975     1980     1985           1990    1995       2000        2005         2010


Figure 2: Exchange rates for Deutsche mark and euro, end of month.




                                                       56
     0.2
                      JPY
     0.0

     -0.2

     -0.4

     -0.6
                    CHF
     -0.8

     -1.0

             Log exchange
     -1.2
             rate, 1973Q2=0
                               Period I ==>                          Period II ==>   Period III ==>
     -1.4
             1975     1980     1985           1990    1995    2000        2005        2010


Figure 3: Exchange rates for Japanese yen and Swiss franc, end of month.


     20
                    USD      CAD
                                                                                     Policy
     16                                                                              rates, %
                                                GBP

     12


      8
                                                                                       EUR
                               CHF
      4


      0
                                                                                      JPY

     -4
            1975     1980     1985        1990       1995    2000        2005        2010


Figure 4: Overnight interest rates.




                                                        57
     20
                  USD     CAD

     15
                                            GBP

     10


      5
                                                                                 EUR
                            CHF
      0


      -5     Policy
             rates, %                                                            JPY

     -10
           1975    1980    1985       1990       1995      2000          2005   2010


Figure 5: Overnight interest rates and shadow rates.


     45                                                                                7


     40                                                                                6


     35                                                                                5
                                  VIX
     30                           [left scale]                                         4


     25                                                                                3


     20                                                                                2
                                                         TED
     15                                                  [right scale]                 1


     10                                                                                0
           1975    1980    1985       1990       1995      2000      2005       2010


Figure 6: VIX (left scale) and TED spread (right scale).




                                                    58
    -0.1
                          Actual
    -0.2                                             PPP ECM (II)
                                     PPP ECM (I)
    -0.3                                                                          PPP ECM (III)

    -0.4

    -0.5

    -0.6

    -0.7

    -0.8

    -0.9                                                                   Log GBP/USD
    -1.0
           1975      1980          1985     1990     1995      2000        2005        2010


Figure 7: GBP/USD exchange rate and 20 quarter ahead PPP ECM forecasts



     .3


     .2
                         Actual
                                                      Augmented sticky
     .1
                                                      price, ECM

                                                   Sticky price,
     .0
                                                   first differences


    -.1


    -.2      Log CHF/USD,
                                                                       Sticky price,
             20 qtrs ahead
                                                                       ECM
    -.3
      2007        2008       2009         2010     2011        2012       2013         2014


Figure 8: CHF/USD exchange rate and 20 quarter ahead forecasts for Period III




                                                          59
