NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVISING INFANT MORTALITY RATES FOR THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY
UNITED STATES
Katherine Eriksson
Gregory T. Niemesh
Melissa Thomasson
Working Paper 23263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23263

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

We are particularly grateful to William Even and Analisa Packham for helpful suggestions. We
would also like to thank Jeremy Atack, William J. Collins, Dora Costa, Gordon Hanson, Adriana
Lleras-Muney, Seth Sanders, Marianne Wanamaker, and Sven Wilson for comments when
portions of this work were included in the paper "Death In the Promised Land: The Great
Migration and Black Infant Mortality". Brian Lee and Man-Ting Chang provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Katherine Eriksson, Gregory T. Niemesh, and Melissa Thomasson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Revising Infant Mortality Rates for the Early 20th Century United States
Katherine Eriksson, Gregory T. Niemesh, and Melissa Thomasson
NBER Working Paper No. 23263
March 2017
JEL No. I19,J11,N32
ABSTRACT
Accurate vital statistics are required to understand the evolution of racial disparities in infant
health and the causes of rapid secular decline in infant mortality during the early twentieth
century. Unfortunately, infant mortality rates prior to 1950 suffer from an upward bias stemming
from a severe underregistration of births. At one extreme, African-American births in Southern
states went unregistered at the rate of 15 to 25 percent. In this paper, we construct improved
estimates of births and infant mortality in the United States for the 1915-1940 period using
recently released complete count decennial census microdata combined with the counts of infant
deaths from published sources. We check the veracity of our estimates with a major birth
registration study completed in conjunction with the 1940 Decennial Census, and that the largest
adjustments occur in states with less complete birth registration systems. An additional advantage
of our census-based estimation method is the extension back of the birth and infant mortality
series for years prior to published estimates of registered births, enabling previously impossible
comparisons and estimations. Finally, we show that underregistration can bias effect estimates
even in a panel setting with specifications that include location fixed effects and place-specific
linear time trends.
Katherine Eriksson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
kaeriksson@ucdavis.edu
Gregory T. Niemesh
Miami University of Ohio
Economics Department
Farmer School of Business
800 E. High Street
Oxford, OH 45056
niemesgt@miamioh.edu

Melissa Thomasson
Miami University/FSB
Department of Economics MSC 1035
800 E. High Street, Rm. #2054
Oxford, OH 45056
and NBER
mthomasson@miamioh.edu

I.

Introduction

Vital statistics form the foundation of our understanding of health trends for the nation, and
have come to be regarded as indispensable when targeting effective public health programs and
evaluating interventions. As early as the late-19th century, public health officials recognized the
importance of statistics coming from the vital registration system as an important resource in the
fight against infectious disease (Cassedy, 1965). For modern researchers in economics, demography, and public health, vital statistics from the early 20th-century provide a rich data source to
understand trends in mortality and longevity, socioeconomic correlates with health, and estimate
causal impacts of health interventions.1 Unfortunately, estimates of live births, infant mortality
rates, and maternal mortality rates for years prior to 1950 suffer from an upward bias stemming
from a severe underregistration of births. Not only are rates incorrect, but the measurement error
varies over races and locations in ways that are potentially correlated with variables of interest.
In this paper, we construct improved estimates of live births, infant mortality, and maternal
mortality for the United States using newly released decennial census microdata. We focus on infant
mortality to demonstrate the importance of using the new estimates. To obtain these estimates, we
revise the number of births, while leaving the published counts of infant deaths unchanged. Thus,
any differences between published and revised rates arises from a different estimate of live births.
In addition to improving upon published estimates, our method enables us to extend the existing
series backwards in time. While current state-level infant mortality rates begin only after a state
enters the Birth Registration Area (BRA), we are able to construct a series based on when a state
entered the Death Registration Area (DRA), which generally occurred prior to a state’s entrance
into the BRA.2 As a result, our series allows for previously impossible comparisons of fertility and
infant mortality across groups and analyses of earlier interventions.
Infant mortality rates (IMR) are computed by dividing registered deaths of infants by the number
of registered live births occurring during a calendar year. Bias can enter the calculation through
an incorrect estimate of infant deaths (the numerator) or an incorrect estimate of births (the
denominator). Contemporary evidence suggests that severe underregistration of births biased IMR
estimates at least until 1940, with the bias varying by region and race (Grove, 1943). Bias in the
numerator from unregistered deaths was believed to be a minor issue. Thus, IMR estimates using
1 Examples of recent papers that use births estimates that suffer a bias from underregistration include: Collins and Thomasson
(2004); Cutler and Miller (2005); Thomasson and Treber (2008); Jayachandran, Lleras-Muney and Smith (2010); Clay, Troesken
and Haines (2013); Hansen (2014); Moehling and Thomasson (2014); Bhalotra and Venkataramani (2015); Eriksson and Niemesh
(2016)
2 States entered the Death Registration Area as early as 1880, while the Birth Registration Area did not begin until 1915.
Table A3 lists the entry dates for each state into the BRA and the DRA

2

registered events will vary inversely with the completeness of birth registration.3
The main source of national evidence of birth registration completeness during the period comes
from an infant card test conducted concurrently with the 1940 decennial census, as summarized
by Grove (1943). Enumerators were instructed to fill out a special infant card for any child born
during the four months prior to the census date. The Census Bureau then attempted to match
each card – and registered infant death – to a birth certificate filed in the state registrar’s office.
The completeness of registrations was estimated as the proportion of infant cards and deaths for
which a birth certificate could be found. For the nation as a whole, 92.5 percent of births were
found to be registered, but the total hid large differences between races (94.0 percent for whites and
82.0 percent for blacks), cities and rural areas (96.9 percent in cities above 10,000 in population
and 88.0 percent in small cities and rural areas combined), and whether the birth occurred in an
institution (98.5 percent in hospitals and 86.1 percent outside of hospitals). The test suggested
that underregistration in some states was quite severe in total, and particularly poor for blacks.
For example, only 77.6 percent of births were registered in South Carolina versus 99.4 percent in
Connecticut. In general, the South had the highest level of underregistration.4
We produce annual, 2-year, and 5-year adjusted estimates of births, infant mortality rates, and
maternal mortality rates by state and race, as well as at the national level, to account for the
well-documented severe underregistration of births.5 The adjustment procedure estimates births
by adding together the enumeration of live children in the census, the number of infant deaths,
and the number of non-infant deaths. We start with the enumeration of children in the decennial
census for each state of birth by year of birth by race cell, using newly released complete census
microdata for the 1920, 1930, and 1940 decennial census from IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2015).
Infant deaths are allocated to the state and year of occurrence. Finally, deaths of children after
infancy, but prior to the subsequent decennial census enumeration, are allocated to year and state
of birth. The two major sources of bias in our estimates come from migration of children who
3 Researchers at the time understood the biases present in infant mortality rates. For example, a former presidient of the
Population Association America, P.K. Whelpton, wrote in the Journal of the American Statistical Association in 1934, “If
birth registration is equally deficient in various states, only absolute values for birth rates and infant mortality are affected.
However, if there are large differences in completeness between states, the comparative standing of states in these respects will
vary correspondingly when they are ranked on an adjusted instead of an unadjusted basis.” (Whelpton, 1934).
4 A subsequent test conducted in 1950 showed major improvements over the decade with 97.8 percent registered for the nation
as a whole, although some states lagged behind (Shapiro and Schachter, 1952). The likely explanation for this rapid improvement
is that registration completeness is highly correlated with the percent of births delivered in a hospital. Completeness eventually
reached close to 100 percent by the mid to late 1960s as hospital deliveries approached 100 percent of all births after the
integration of hospitals in the South (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973)
5 City-level infant mortality estimates are also biased from birth underregistration. However, we are loathe to use our
procedure to adjust rates at the city-level. The census records only state of birth, not city. Any allocation of census enumerations
back to a city of birth would be plagued by bias from cross-city migration. Because state of birth is known, this migration bias
does not affect our state based revised rates.

3

subsequently die and underenumeration of children in the decennial census. Bias from migration
stems from children dying outside their state of birth; however, we show that a rough allocation
of these non-infant deaths back to their state of birth does not meaningfully alter the estimates.
Underenumeration, when the census undercounts the number of children alive at the census date,
poses a more challenging problem. To partially resolve this issue, we use the number of children
counted in a later census rather than the first census in which a child should be enumerated (e.g. 11
year olds in the 1940 census rather than 1 year olds in the 1930 census for the 1929 birth year). In
the end, we are not able to fully account for underenumeration, but the revision of births becomes
a race between underregistration of births and underenumeration of children in the census. The
revision procedure provides more accurate birth estimates for states where underregistration was
more severe than underenumeration (i.e. the South). In the few instances where underenumeration
was a larger problem, we restrict the adjusted rates to be no higher than published rates.
In general, estimates are biased to the extent that underregistration is correlated with the intervention or group attribute on which a comparison is made. Any cross-sectional or time-series
comparison is biased when registration completeness varies across groups or over time. Importantly,
we show that underregistration potentially biases results even in a panel setting with specifications
that include location fixed effects and place-specific linear time trends. These added controls do
not fully explain the difference between the revised rates and the published rates, suggesting that
a meaningful amount of measurement error remains.
We end by briefly discussing a number of important implications of the census-based adjustment
method. First, at the national level the revised estimates suggest a lower black IMR relative to
those in published sources, with larger differences prior to 1925: 11.1 percentage points in 1915
versus 18.9 in the published data. The lower initial level in 1915 also implies slower progress in black
infant health. IMR declined by 11.2 percentage points between 1915 and 1940 in the published
data, but only by 4.9 percentage points in the revised estimates. Because underregistration of
births was not as severe for whites, revised estimates of white IMR do not deviate from published
estimates as much. The largest difference occurs in 1915 and is only 1.3 percentage points.
The large variation across states in the quality of birth registration data leads to significant
revisions of cross-sectional comparisons, as evidenced by the change in rankings of states based
on infant mortality. The effect of rank changes extends to regional differences and subsequent
convergence. The South initially had a mortality advantage over the North for black infants, but
rates converged as the urban penalty gradually declined over the course of the early 20th century.
4

Three main implications for regional convergence emerge from using the revised estimates. First,
the southern mortality advantage widens as the adjustment method primarily lowers black IMR in
the South. Second, starting from a lower initial IMR in the South implies a faster convergence rate
between the regions. Finally, the level shift downward in southern IMR delays the North overtaking
South until the late 1930s, if at all before 1940.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the development of the birth registration
area and evidence of a severe underregistration of births that varies with race and geography.
Next, we describe the procedure used to revise birth and infant mortality estimates to account
for underregistration of births. We provide a detailed discussion of the potential biases that enter
the revised estimates. Finally, the paper discusses some important implications of the revised
series for national trends and regional convergence in the black-white IMR gap, and the power of
socio-economic status in explaining the gap by revisiting Collins and Thomasson (2004).
II.

Development of the Birth Registration Area and Evidence of Completeness

The first registration law for vital events was adopted by the Massachusetts legislature in 1842,
with six other states enacting similar legislation by 1851. These early systems, however, operated
in only a few localities and suffered from lax enforcement (Lunde, 1980). Despite the known flaws
in the system, public health professionals realized the importance of vital statistics reporting in
their efforts to combat and eradicate infectious disease in the latter half of the 19th century. The
federalism of the time slowed the growth of the registration system, as it imposed a piece-meal
state-by-state approach that eventually created nationally representative statistics.6 The Death
Registration Area (DRA) began in 1880 with two states, the District of Columbia, and several
large cities. In 1900, the Census Bureau established a national DRA that initially included 10
states, mainly from the Northeast and Midwest. The DRA and was completed in 1933 with the
entrance of Texas.
It took longer to establish the Birth Registration Area (BRA). Public health officials viewed
mortality data as being more helpful for preventive medicine than birth data, and registrars believed
enforcement of birth registration to be more difficult than for deaths (Cassedy, 1965). However,
once started in 1915 with 10 states and the District of Columbia, the BRA was completed relatively
quickly over a period of 18 years. Again, states in the Northeast, Middle Atlantic, and Midwest
6 Vital registration systems were and remain the responsibility of the several states. The Federal Government’s role is
limited to the promotion of state registration systems and to work with the states to produce national level statistics. An act of
Congress in 1902, put the national system on a firm footing by making the Census Bureau a permanent agency and providing
the authority to collect information on births and deaths.

5

joined first, with most of the remainder of the country entering in the 1920s. Southern states
lagged the others, and the BRA was not completed until 1933 with the entrance of Texas. A list
of entrance dates for each state can be found in Appendix Table A3.
States seeking entrance to the BRA had to overcome two hurdles. First, the state legislature
needed to enact and enforce registration laws in a manner deemed sufficient by the Census Bureau.
The more difficult second hurdle was to show evidence that registrations were at least 90 percent
complete (Lunde, 1980; Moriyama, 1990). All tests of registration completeness proceeded by first
obtaining a list of children born during a fixed period of time, and then determining whether birth
certificates had been filed for those children. Various methods of obtaining the list of names were
used by the Census Bureau over the course of the early 20th century. At the advent of the BRA,
the test was conducted under the direction of the Census Bureau, and consisted of comparing birth
registrations to collected lists of births from postmasters, newspapers, death registers, and church
records. Contemporaries acknowledged early on that the tests used to enter the BRA were woefully
inadequate (Whelpton, 1934). Cressy Wilbur, Chief Statistician for Vital Statistics of the United
States for 1906-1914, believed that the use of lists of births collected by postmasters to be a highly
biased sample for a test (Wilbur, 1916). Deacon (1937) relates the story of how after finding a 100
percent registration rate from names provided by a postmaster, he came to find that the postmaster
received the list directly from the local registrar. Later evidence showed the sources used to create
the list of children - death registrations, hospital births, and newspaper announcements - were likely
a highly selected sample of births; children born to urban, educated, and wealthier parents were
more likely to appear in these sources, and also more likely than the population to register a birth
(Moriyama, 1990). The selected sample caused the tests to overestimate the completeness of the
registration system. Nevertheless, entrance to the BRA was granted after a positive test result.
In the mid-1920s, the Census Bureau switched to a testing procedure based on postal infant test
cards, which were sent out in mass mailings to every known household. Residents were asked to
list the occurrence of any deaths or births that occurred during the prior 12 months, with returned
cards checked against birth registers. While believed to be an improvement over collected lists, the
postal test card method suffered from its own biases. Errors entered the lists from memory lapses
inherent in any recall method. More importantly, households with unregistered events were less
likely to return the cards, as were households with low education and incomes (Moriyama, 1990).
A 1934 test in Georgia and Maryland used the postal card test method and compared the results
from a canvas of enumerators. The relevant findings include: 1.) Registrations were more complete
6

for households with higher incomes, with more education, lived in cities, delivered their birth in
a hospital, and were white, 2.) The postal card method led to overstatements of completeness as
mail carriers were more likely to deliver the cards to households receiving other mail - meaning
households with higher income and education levels, 3.) Finally, higher income and higher educated
households were more likely to return the cards (Hedrich, Collinson and Rhoads, 1939). Postal test
cards, generally thought of as an improved method of testing for entrance into the BRA, grossly
overstated the completeness of birth registrations. Officials at the Census Bureau recognized by
the 1930s the need for a nationwide test built on proper sampling procedures.
In addition to biased samples, public health officials worried about the subsequent quality of
registrations after the entrance test (Wilbur, 1916). The early policy called for periodic retests
using the collected lists methodology to ensure the 90 percent cutoff continued to be met (Davis,
1925). However, retests were infrequent - once in sixteen years in the case of Michigan - and poor
results rarely led to a state exiting the BRA (Deacon, 1937). Only two states were ever expelled
despite evidence that a number of states were well under the 90 percent cutoff: Rhode Island in
1919 (re-entering in 1921), and South Carolina in 1925 (re-entering in 1928) (Wilcox, 1933). By
the mid-1930s, the Census Bureau’s policy was that retests were for the sole purpose of helping to
improve the registration systems of underperforming states, not to threaten removal from the BRA
(Lenhart, 1943).
A.

1940 test of birth registration completeness

The opportunity arose with the 1940 Decennial Census to develop a nationwide test that would
greatly improve knowledge about the accuracy of the birth registration system (Grove, 1943).
Officials believed that census enumerators could provide a more representative list of children born
during a sample period than previous methods. Enumerators were instructed to fill out a special
infant card for any child born during the four months prior to the census date.7 The Census Bureau
then matched each infant card and recorded death of an infant to birth certificates filed in state
registrar offices. The completeness of registrations was then estimated as the proportion of infant
cards and registered deaths for which a birth certificate had been filed.
For the nation as a whole, 92.5 percent of births were found to be registered, but the total hid
large differences between races (94.0 percent for whites and 82.0 percent for blacks), cities and rural
areas (96.9 percent in cities above 10,000 in population and 88.0 percent in small cities and rural
7 The

recall period for the infant test cards was limited to 4 months to reduce bias from memory lapses.

7

areas combined), and whether the birth occurred in an institution (98.5 percent in hospitals and
86.1 percent outside of hospitals) (Grove, 1943; Moriyama, 1946). The geographic variation in birth
registration completeness for all races combined can be seen in Figure 1.8 Registrations were more
complete in northern states compared to the southern states. Much of the regional difference was
suspected to arise from regional differences in urbanization and rates of hospital births (Moriyama,
1946). The racial disparity can also be explained by a largely rural black population in South
with very low rates of hospital delivery. Although diminished, the racial difference remains when
comparing within cities and within category of place of delivery.
The test suggests that births - especially black births - were systematically under-registered at
higher rates in southern states relative to northern states, inducing an upward bias in reported
infant mortality for the South. Regional comparisons and empirical strategies relying on crosssectional variation may provide results contaminated by this systematic bias. We take this as our
prime motivation for revising mortality estimates from 1910-1940.
B.

Improvement in birth registration completeness

Continued urbanization and increases in the proportion of births delivered in hospitals eventually
reduced the number of births that went unregistered. Additionally, the value to the individual of
holding a birth certificate rose as proof of age was increasingly required for receipt of government
benefits, school attendance, and other privileges such as drivers licenses. Subsequent tests for
registration completeness were conducted at a national scale in conjunction with the 1950 census
and in the late 1960s using household surveys such as the Current Population Survey and the Health
Information Survey (Shapiro and Schachter, 1952; U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973). The results
of the tests between 1940 and 1950 suggest large improvements in birth registration at the national
level: from 92.5 percent in 1940 to 97.8 percent in 1950. The national average, however, belied
large regional differences for minorities.9 Completeness for southern non-whites only increased to 92
percent by 1950. For states in the Mountain census region with large Native American populations,
the non-white completeness rate lagged at 78 percent.10 By at least 1968, after the integration of
hospitals in the South, the proportion of births delivered in a hospital converged to almost 99
percent nationwide for all races combined, and the birth registration system covered close to the
8 Appendix

Table A1 reports results from the test by region and whether delivery occurred in a hospital.
Figure A1 plots the proportion of all births registered from the 1950 test against that from the 1940 test. We
can clearly see that all states increased the quality of their published birth data. However, some improved more than others.
One plausible reason is that low rates of out-of-hospital births persisted for non-whites in the South and West.
10 The Mountain census region includes the following states: Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming,
Idaho, and Montana.
9 Appendix

8

entire universe of all births: 99.4 percent for whites and 98.0 percent for nonwhites.
III.

Adjusting Infant Mortality Rates

In this section we outline the method and data sources used to revise infant mortality rates and
birth estimates to account for the underregistration of births. We then graphically present the
adjusted rates for different subcategories and discuss differences with the published vital statistics.
The results of the exercise consist of a set of tables of infant mortality rates by subcategory for
1-,2-, and 5-year averages for use by researchers.11 In the end, we provide two additional estimates
of infant mortality in addition to those in the published vital statistics: one using the census-based
adjustment method, and a second series where births are scaled by the extent of underregistration
in the 1940 test in Grove (1943).
Published infant mortality rates are constructed from registered deaths before the age of 1 and
registered births using the following formula:
(Published)

UB
IMRPs,r,t
=

Pub Deathss,r,t
Pub Birthss,r,t

where s denotes state of occurrence, r denotes race, and t denotes calendar year. IMR is often
reported as deaths per thousand live births, but we choose to report in percentage points for
simplicity. We know from contemporary evidence that (Pub Birthss,r,t ) is biased downward in a
way that leads to an upward bias in infant mortality rates for blacks and southern states.
To revise these rates, we rely on newly available complete count census microdata for 1920,
1930, and 1940 as the main source of information on the number of children who remained alive,
published age-specific deaths for each state and race to account for non-infant deaths, and, finally,
deaths of infants from published sources. In all estimates, the numerator of the IMR calculation,
infant deaths, is held constant and comes from the published counts of registered deaths. Thus,
any differences from the published mortality rates arises from an alternate estimate of live births.
Our method provides a distinct improvement for understanding infant mortality during the early
20th century United States.
Our revisions can be expressed as:
(Adjusted)
11 A

IMRADJ
s,r,t =

Pub Deathss,r,t
Adj Birthss,r,t

full set of machine readable tables can be found on line at http://www.gregoryniemesh.net/data.

9

so that any difference with the published rates are entirely driven by differences in birth estimates.
Our adjustment uses the complete count census datasets from IPUMS to estimate the number of
live children by race, birth state, and birth year (Ruggles et al., 2015). To this, we then add the
number of infant and non-infant deaths during intervening years between the birth year and the
census year, both of which come from published tables. The data appendix contains a lengthy
discussion of the data sources used and additional detail on the construction of estimates.
With this method, underenumeration of young children, especially infants, provides a potential
bias in the census counts of live children, with the extent of underenumeration more severe for
black infants (Brunsman, 1953). We use census counts for a given birth year from a later census to
partially account for this underenumeration. For example, the number of live children born in 1929
(children less than one) is under counted in the 1930 census, but can be replaced with the count of
ten year olds from the 1940 census. We implement the strategy by race, state of birth, and birth
year using the counts of older children (10, 11, 12,... year olds) from a later census whenever their
numbers exceed that in the earlier census. However, in Northern states where underenumeration
presented a greater problem than underregistration, our revisions may yield birth estimates that
are lower than the published estimates. Thus, we use the published registered births for any cell
in which our census based method results in a smaller number of births. As such, revised infant
mortality rates will never be higher than the published rates. Figure 4 plots the bias in the published
rates (Published - Adjusted) against the extent of underregistration in the 1940 test form Grove
(1943). States with higher levels of underregistration do in fact see larger reductions in IMR using
our census-based method, just as we would expect. Over time, the size of the adjustment falls and
the relationship between extent underregistration and the bias in published rates weakends. We
interpret this set of facts as evidence of gradual improvement in the birth registration system over
time.
Additionally, the complete census indexes provide a method to address a number of potential
biases from the migration of young children out of their state of birth. Importantly, our estimate
of live children includes those born in state s regardless of the state of residence at the time of
the census. The potential migration of children outside of their state of birth does not bias our
estimates of births downward as long as they remain alive to the next census, or to the subsequent
census when using counts of live children aged 10 or 11 years old. In the absence of a complete death
index for the entire country, we do not have complete information on children that died outside
of their state of birth. Bias enters in the case where states experience differential net migration
10

rates, or differential mortality rates. We split the discussion of bias from migrant deaths into two
parts: infant deaths and non-infant deaths. Infant deaths are allocated to the state of occurrence
regardless of the child’s birth state as we have no information on state of birth for deaths in this
age group. As the out-of-state migration rate for infants is small (less than 1 percent in 1940), and
most infant deaths occur in the first 30 days of life, and the likelihood of migration with a sick
infant is relatively small, we believe the potential bias from this source is limited.
Both the cumulative likelihood of migration and the hazard rate increase with age, implying an
increased potential for non-infant children to die outside of their state of birth. Thus, deaths of
children aged 1 and above outside of their state of birth present a larger pathway for bias to enter
the estimates. Working in the opposite direction, however, is the fact that mortality rates decrease
rapidly after the first year of life, as do cross-state differentials in age-specific mortality. In practice,
bias from migrant deaths is small. Figure 2 plots adjusted infant mortality when allocating noninfant deaths to state of birth versus adjusted infant mortality when allocating non-infant deaths
to state of occurrence.12 The methods have a tight almost, one-for-one, relationship. Differences
do arise, however, from the high amounts of out-migration from southern states with large black
populations during the “Great Migration”. Nevertheless, these differences are small. As such, we
choose to allocate non-infant deaths to states of birth in the revised estimates, but emphasize the
limited importance of migration in this context.
Two potential biases remain as concerns: additional underenumeration in the census that using
later censuses does not account for, and the underregistration of deaths. It is well known that
the decennial censuses of the early 20th century under counted young children (Greville, 1947;
Brunsman, 1953). Our estimates of the number of births are biased downward to the extent
underenumeration occurred. Whether our adjustments are an improvement over the published
aggregate mortality rates depends on the amount of underregistration of births relative to the
amount of underenumeration in the census.13 Underregistration was severe in the Southern states,
and this is exactly where we see a large change in mortality rates from our adjustment, on the
12 Rates with non-infant deaths allocated to state of birth is our preferred revised rate and corresponds to (ADJ 4 ) in the
appendix. The procedure allocates the number of age-specific reported non-infant deaths in each state of occurrence to states
of birth using the age-birth-state breakdown in the complete count censuses. For example, if 10 percent of black eight year
olds living in Illinois in the 1940 census were born in Mississippi, then 10 percent of black non-infant deaths in Illinois are
apportioned to black births in Mississippi for the 1932 birth year. Rates with non-infant deaths recorded in the state of
occurrence corresponds to (ADJ 2 ) in the appendix. Appendix figure A2 plots the relationship for non-infant deaths.
13 Walter F. Wilcox, former president of both the American Statistical Association and American Economic Association,
wrote in 1933,“A Federal census is more likely to understate that to overstate the population because omissions are more
common that false returns or double entries, but a census is probably nearer the truth than American registration of births...I
should not consider that the registration of births was fairly complete unless the births exceeded the population under1 year
of age by at least 10 per cent,” (Wilcox, 1933). Our method makes a similar comparison of enumerated children to reported
births.

11

order of a 20 percent increase in the number of births in the case for South Carolina. On the other
hand, adjusted births slightly undershoot registered births in Northern states, because registration
was nearly complete in those areas. These results confirm our expectations. The adjustment
provides improved estimates of infant mortality where underregistration was more severe than
underenumeration. Note that we impose a restriction that revised IMR can never be higher than
published IMR, to account for the few instances in Northern states where registration was more
complete than enumeration.
Bias from non-registered deaths presents a more difficult issue. When a parent decides against
registering a death, no record of the event exists, and thus no direct means to assess the size
of death underregistration is available to the researcher (Greville, 1947). To our knowledge, no
contemporary evidence exists for the special case of the extent of underregistration for infant deaths.
Contemporaries clearly believed the issue was less severe than for birth registration (Wilbur, 1916;
Whelpton, 1934). Supporting this view, incentives were in place for death registration that were
absent for birth registration. A cemetery burial, with the family or in churchyard, required a burial
permit, which was only issued after a death had been registered and a certificate created. In the
absence of a direct assessment of the potential bias from death underregistration, our revised rates
provide a lower bound on infant mortality in the presence of death underregistration, whereas
published rates provide an upper bound.
As an additional robustness check, and to help illuminate the sources of potential bias across
estimation methods, we present a second adjusted series in which registered births in every year
are scaled by the extent of underregistration from the 1940 test reported in Grove (1943). The
adjusted IMR by scaling births can be expressed as:14
(Scaled)

IMRSCALED
=
s,r,t

Pub Deathss,r,t
AdjSCALED Birthss,r,t

Biases in scaled rates stem from changes over time in the extent of completeness of birth registration.15 The 1940 estimate of underregistration provides an increasingly uncertain or inaccurate
method of adjustment the more distant the year of birth cell is from 1940. The processes that lead
to registration evolve gradually over time (e.g. states placing importance on birth registration, and
14 This

scaled rate corresponds to adjustment 5 in the appendix.
births during the six months prior to the April census date in 1940, the estimates of registration completeness contained
in Grove (1943) provide an accurate measure of the bias in infant mortality calculations. As such, we are confident in their
use to make adjustments at the state level for 1939 and 1940. See the discussion of Adjustment 3 in the appendix for more
information.
15 For

12

the proportion of births in hospitals or attended by a physician).16 Underregistration, then, likely
followed a downward trend, introducing some bias into the scaled IMR estimates.
How should a researcher choose between the revised and published estimates? Comparing the
potential sources of bias and how they vary across time and place is helpful to distinguish the proper
estimate. Biases in (IM RADJ ) enter from underenumeration of young children, whereas bias from
time-varying registration completeness affects (IM RSCALED ). In the end, we suggest using both
IMR estimates, as well as the original published rates, to check any results for robustness. The bias
present in any one of the three suggested estimates behave differently in the cross-section and over
time, and thus showing that an estimate of a casual effect is robust to the choice of series provides
convincing evidence of a true effect. Alternatively, the various rates can be used to provide a range
of values for trends or group differentials.
Finally, we want to emphasize that a major contribution of our work is to produce infant mortality
rates for states prior to entering the Birth Registration Area. Most states entered the Death
Registration Area before meeting the requirements to enter the Birth Registration Area. We use
the reported infant death counts in the mortality statistics volumes and our own estimates of
births to construct infant mortality estimates for states prior to their entrance to the BRA.17 The
additional data allows researchers to extend analysis further into the past.
IV.

When does underregistration bias matter?

In general, IMR differentials and treatment effect estimates are biased to the extent that underregistration is correlated with the intervention or group attribute. Answering this question is
simplified if we consider three scenarios. First, sometimes the researcher would like to know the
true IMR for a given place and time without making any comparisons. In this simple scenario, any
underregistration of births will bias the estimate of IMR. Secondly, researchers frequently make
comparisons across locations, groups, or time. IMR differences arising from a cross-sectional comparison partially reduce the bias as long the extent of underregistration remains constant across
the groups being compared. However, underregistration appears to vary in important ways across
groups and locations (e.g. higher bias in the IMR for blacks and in southern states). Later, we
provide two applications of cross-sectional comparisons where this bias can dramatically change
16 The proportion of births registered clearly varies over time within a state. A simple way to argue the point is to notice
the large differences in registration rates by whether the birth occurred in a hospital, and that the proportion of hospital births
increased rapidly over time. The 1940 test showed that 98.5 percent of all hospital births were registered versus 86.1 percent
of births outside of hospitals. Moriyama (1946) estimates that only 36.9 percent of births were hospital deliveries in 1935, but
increased to 55.8 percent in 1940 and to 75.6 percent in 1944.
17 Appendix Table A2 lists the years and states for which new estimates are available.

13

results. The first shows the impact on the pace and timing of regional convergence in the NorthSouth difference in black IMR from Eriksson and Niemesh (2016). We close by revisiting Collins
and Thomasson (2004) to conduct Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of the national black-white IMR
gap using socio-economic status measures as explanatory variables.

In the third scenario, researchers use panel data with observations for each location taken over
multiple points in time. In this final scenario of a panel setting, location fixed effects and locationspecific trends potentially account for any mis-measurement of IMR from differential completeness
of the birth registration system. To explore this possibility, we estimate a series of regressions to
determine the ability of state fixed effects and state-specific linear time trends to explain the gap
between the published and adjusted infant mortality estimates.18 We use three measures for the
gap that correspond to three specifications for IMR commonly used in the literature: the difference



IM RP U B
RP U B
,
and
the
natural
log
of
the
ratio
ln
. AddiIM RP U B − IM RADJ , the ratio IM
ADJ
ADJ
IM R
IM R
tionally, we split the sample into black, white, and total. No matter how the gap is specified, or on
which sample the regression is run, between 16 and 26 percent of the variation in the gap remains
after including state fixed effects. After state-specific linear time trends are included, the remaining
variation in the gap ranges from 12 to 16 percent for whites and the combined sample, and 7 to 8
percent for the black sample. The scope for bias from this source is large. The standard deviation
of the residuals from specifications that include linear trends range between 3 and 6 percent of
the level of IMR depending on the sample and how the gap is measured. Using a panel setting
to difference out unobservables or allowing for differential trends in unobservables does not fully
remove the potential bias from causal estimates in the presence of birth underregistration.

The remainder of the section briefly discusses a number of implications that arise from using
revised infant mortality rates in place of the published estimates. We begin by graphically showing national trends in IMR by race and the black-white gap. The most important changes from
using revised estimates are on cross-sectional comparisons, such as the pace and timing of regional
convergence in the North-South differential. We close by revisiting Collins and Thomasson (2004)
to conduct a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of the national black-white IMR gap using state-level
socio-economic status measures as explanatory variables.

18 Table

A4 reports results from this exercise.

14

A.

Implications for national-level IMR

Figure 5 plots three IMR series: published, restricted sample adjusted, and full sample adjusted.
The restricted sample adjusted series limits the sample to state-year observations that are also in the
published series (i.e in the BRA). The full sample adjusted series lifts that restriction and includes
state-year observations for which our method fills a hole in the the published series (i.e. the state
is part of the DRA, but not the BRA). Differences between the published and restricted sample
adjusted series arise solely from differences in birth estimates, not changes in the composition of
states. Differences between the published and full sample adjusted series arise from both changes
in the composition of states and birth estimates.
Holding the sample of states constant between series, Panel A of Figure 5 suggests that adjustments to black rates lead to a level shift in IMR, but not to any meaningful change in the trend.
Prior to 1925, this meant primarily the Northeastern and Midwestern states, where blacks experienced elevated rates of mortality compared to the southern states that were not yet included.
However, adding the low IMR southern states, as in the full sample adjusted series, reduces IMR
substantially in early years: by 42 percent in 1915. As more southern states enter the BRA, the
“Full Adj” and “Restricted Adj” series converge and become identical when the entrance of Texas
completes the BRA in 1933. The evidence suggests that black health was not as poor as contemporaries thought, but also implies that black health progress proceeded at a slower rate: a fall of
11.2 percentage points from 1915 to 1940 as compared to 4.9 percentage points in the published
data.
Because black births were much more likely than white births to go unregistered, adjustments
clearly reduce black infant mortality rates relative to those of whites at the national level, as seen
in Figure 6. The figures make clear that adjustments lead to a shift in the level of both the absolute
and relative black-white gap in IMR, but not to a revision in the trend. Thus, we find that the
gap started from a smaller initial level, but fell at roughly the similar rate in terms of percentage
points. Our understanding of national trends in the IMR gap does not seem to be much changed.
B.

Implications for cross-state comparisons of IMR

The large variation across states in the quality of birth registration data, however, leads to
significant revisions of cross-sectional comparisons. Figure 7 illustrates the number and magnitude
of rank changes between the published and revised rates, capturing the impact on cross-sectional
comparisons. The left y-axis ranks states by published IMR and the right y-axis ranks states by
15

revised IMR with the values for a state connected by a line. A downward slope in the line implies
an improvement in rank. From Panel A of Figure 7, we can clearly see a large number of rank
changes, many of a large magnitude. In general, the southern states for which the revision lowered
IMR experience improvements in rank at the expense of states in the northeast and Midwest.
The effects of rank changes extend to regional differences and any subsequent convergence. In
1915, the South initially had a mortality advantage over the North for black infants, as shown in
Figure 8.19 Much of the gap is explained by the existence of a black urban-rural penalty combined
with the fact that Northern blacks lived in cities, but were primarily rural in the South.20 Northern
infant mortality rates converged with the South as the urban penalty gradually declined over the
course of the early 20th century. In the published data, the North overtook the South by the
early 1930s in terms of black infant health. Three main implications emerge from using the revised
estimates. First, the southern mortality advantage widens as the adjustment method primarily
lowers black IMR in the South. Second, starting from a lower initial IMR in the South implies
a faster convergence rate between the regions. Finally, the level shift downward in southern IMR
delays the North overtaking South until the late 1930s, if at all before 1940.
To illustrate the importance of our adjustments to cross-place comparisons, we reprint IMR
comparisons from Eriksson and Niemesh (2016). In that paper, we estimate the effect on the
subsequent birth outcomes of infants to southern-born black parents after moving North during
the first half of the “Great Migration”. Here, we are concerned solely with the observed differences
in black IMR across regions as an indicator of the health environments from which blacks left and
in which they settled. Table 1 reports regional comparisons with published estimates and revised
estimates. The change in inference induced by the bias from underregistration of births is clear. In
the published data, black infant mortality was initially 33 percent higher (4.4 percentage points)
in the North, with the southern mortality advantage declining to only 9 percent (1.1 percentage
points) by the late 1920s and disappearing completely in the 1930s. The revised data widens the
initial gap so that IMR in the North is 55 percent higher than in the South, and increases the
southern mortality advantage in all decades (rows labeled “Diff” in Table 1). Additionally, we find
that infant mortality rates were identical in 1940 rather than the North overtaking the South as in
the published data. Finally, the last row shows the bias in the regional comparison, calculated as
19 We do not observe a similar regional convergence for whites as the urban penalty for infant whites had disappeared by
1920.
20 According to the 1940 decennial census, 89 percent of blacks lived in urban areas in the North census region, whereas
34 percent were urban dwellers in the South census region. Data underlying these calculations come from the full count 1940
census microdata from IPUMS.

16

the regional difference in the published data minus the regional difference in the revised data. The
magnitude of the negative bias in each period is large: 38 percent, 154 percent, and 108 percent
of the published regional IMR difference. Clearly, accounting for underregistration bias with our
revised rates dramatically changes the interpretation of the differential health risks faced by black
infants across the two regions.
C.

Replication of Collins and Thomasson (2004)

Finally, we use the revised state-level infant mortality rates to revisit Collins and Thomasson
(2004), which decomposes explanatory factors of the racial gap in infant mortality for the period
from 1920 to 1970. Their main findings include the fact that measures of income, urbanization,
women’s education, and physicians per capita (broadly interpreted as SES) explain a large portion
of the black-white IMR gap prior to 1945, but a vanishingly small portion afterwards. We show that
once the underregistration of births is accounted for in the revised IMR estimates, the interpretation
of the decomposition dramatically changes.21
Collins and Thomasson (2004) run an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of the black-white IMR
gap from 1920-1970. Using observations taken every five years at the state and race level, the
natural log of IMR is first regressed on physicians per capita and race-specific measures for income,
women’s education, and urban status, and a set of year fixed effects. The β’s are averaged over
race for the decomposition. Table 2 juxtaposes the results of the decomposition of published and
revised infant mortality rates. Using published IMR estimates, the explained gap makes up between
75 to 96 percent of raw difference prior to 1945, with SES (income and education) providing the
majority of explanatory power. Three major differences in the findings emerge when an identical
decomposition procedure is conducted on revised rates.
1) A smaller raw black-white IMR gap emerges, not surprisingly, because the adjustment procedure lowers IMR relatively more for blacks than for whites.
2) The percent “explained” by controls is significantly reduced, up to 40 percent in some years,
because of a change in estimated β’s. By reducing infant mortality for southern blacks - the
low-income region for blacks - the strong correlation between income and IMR found in the
original data is weakened.
3) The contribution of racial income differences to the IMR gap is reduced by close to a factor
21 The authors were well aware of the underregistration of births and provide a discussion of how potential bias might enter
their estimates. However, at the time no direct way of accounting for the bias was available.

17

of 10. Education, on the other hand, is only slightly reduced and remains the most important
explanatory factor. Physicians per capita increases in importance.
In summary, the use of corrected IMR rates can change conclusions in meaningful ways in empirical exercises originally conducted with published vital statistics rates that include bias from the
underregistration of births.
V.

Conclusion

Accurate vital statistics play an important role to target, execute, and evaluate public health
interventions. Biases from underregistration of births hamper our understanding of public health
crises, trends, and the evolution of racial health disparities. In this paper, we document large
regional and racial disparities in the completeness of birth registration in the first half of the 20th
century, which eventually disappeared in the 1960s after the racial integration of hospitals and
almost all births were delivered in institutions.
To account for the severe underregistration of births, we construct adjusted infant mortality rates
using a method based on the census enumeration of live children to obtain improved estimates of the
number of births. The method is essentially a horse race between the extent of underregistration
of births in the vital statistics and the extent of underenumeration of children in the census. In
states and for races for which underregistration of births is more severe than underenumeration,
our method provides a more accurate estimate of infant mortality than the published values.
REFERENCES

Bhalotra, Sonia, and Atheendar Venkataramani. 2015. “Shadows of the Captain of the Men
of Death: Health Innovation, Human Capital Investment, and Institutions.” Working Paper.
Brunsman, Howard G. 1953. Infant Enumeration Study 1950. Procedureal Studies of the 1950
Censuses, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Cassedy, James H. 1965. “The Registration Area and American Vital Statistics.” Bulletin of the
History of Medicine, 39: 221–223.
Clay, Karen, Werner Troesken, and Michael R Haines. 2013. “Lead and Mortality.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 96(3): 458–470.
18

Collins, William J, and Melissa A Thomasson. 2004. “The Declining Contribution of Socioeconomic Disparities to the Racial Gap in Infant Mortality Rates, 1920-1970.” Southern Economic
Journal, 70(4): 746–776.
Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. “The role of public health improvements in health
advances: The twentieth-century United States.” Demography, 42(1): 1–22.
Davis, William H. 1925. “Necessity for Completing the Registration Area by 1930.” American
Journal of Public Health, 399–404.
Deacon, W J V. 1937. “Tests and Promotion of Registration of Births and Deaths.” American
Journal of Public Health, 27(5): 492–498.
Eriksson, Katherine, and Gregory T Niemesh. 2016. “Death in the Promised Land: the
Great Migration and Black Infant Mortality.”
Greville, Thomas. 1947. United States Life Tables and Actuarial Tables, 1939-1941. U.S. National
Office of Vital Statistics.
Grove, Robert. 1943. “Studies in the Completeness of Birth Registration, Part 1. Completeness of
Birth Registration in the United States, December 1, 1939 to March 31, 1940.” Vital Statistics Special Reports Series, National Office of Vital Statistics, U.S. Public Health Service, 17(18): 223–
296.
Hansen, Casper Worm. 2014. “Cause of death and development in the US.” Journal of Development Economics, 109: 143–153.
Hedrich, A.W., John Collinson, and F.D. Rhoads. 1939. “Comparison of Birth Tests by
Several Methods in Georgia and Maryland.” Vital Statistics - Special Reports Series, National
Office of Vital Statistics, U.S. Public Health Service, 7(60): 681–699.
Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V Smith. 2010. “Modern
Medicine and the Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality: Evidence on the Impact of Sulfa
Drugs.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 118–146.
Lenhart, Robert F. 1943. “Completeness of Birth Registration in the United States in 1940.”
American Journal of Public Health, 33(6): 685–690.
19

Lunde, Anders S. 1980. “The Organization of the Civil Registration System of the United States.”
International Institute for Vital Registration and Statistics, Technical Report No. 8, Bethesda,
MD.
Moehling, Carolyn, and Melissa Thomasson. 2014. “Saving Babies: The Impact of Public
Health Education Programs on Infant Mortality.” Demography, 51(2): 367–386.
Moriyama, Iwao. 1946. “Estimated Completeness of Birth Registration: United States, 1935 to
1944.” Vital Statistics - Special Reports Series, National Office of Vital Statistics, U.S. Public
Health Service, 23(10): 223–227.
Moriyama, Iwao. 1990. “Measurement of Birth and Death Registration Completeness.” International Institute for Vital Registration and Statistics, Technical Report No. 43, Bethesda, MD.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
2015. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series.” Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database].
Shapiro, Sam, and Joseph Schachter. 1952. “Birth Registration Completeness United States,
1950.” Public Health Reports (1896-1970), 67(6): 513–524.
Thomasson, Melissa, and Jaret Treber. 2008. “From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of
Childbirth in the United States, 1928-1940.” Explorations in Economic History, 45(1): 76–99.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1973. Test of Birth Registration Completeness 1964 to 1968. Evaluation and Research Program PHC(E)-2, U.S. Government Printing Office.
Whelpton, P.K. 1934. “The Completeness of Birth Registration in the United States.” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, XXIX(186): 125–136.
Wilbur, Cressy. 1916. The Federal Registration Service of the United States: Its Development,
Problems, and Defects. U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Wilcox, Walter F. 1933. Introduction to the Vital Statistics of the United States, 1900 to 1930.
Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce.

20

JDDvi

BIRTH
REGISTRATION

CO

AND STATISTICS
IN UNITED
STATES

co~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c

COD~~~~~~

0,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

0~~~~~~~~~~~~

21

C'

7

Figure 1. : Percent completeness of birth registration by state, December 1, 1939 to March 31, 1940

97

Source: Data from underlying test of birth registration completeness described in Robert Grove (1943)

.2
Allocated to state of birth
.05
.1
.15
0
0

.05

.1
.15
Allocated to state of occurrence

.2

.05

.1

Allocated to state of birth
.15
.2
.25

.3

(a) White

.05

.1

.15
.2
Allocated to state of occurrence

.25

.3

(b) Black

Figure 2. : Relation between infant mortality allocating non-infant deaths to state of birth versus
state of occurrence
Note: Deaths of non-infants reported by age, race, and state of occurrence in the published tables are allocated to states of
birth using the proportion of residents in each state from each state of birth in the complete count census microdata for 1920,
1930, and 1940 by race and age. Observations are limited to states with at least 1,000 births for the figure of black rates.
Sources: See data appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations and sources used.

22

1920

1930

1940

.2

.15

.1

.05

(a) Black

1920

1930

1940

.12

.1

.08

.06

.04

(b) White

Figure 3. : Change in five-year average IMR by race and time period from published to adjusted
rates for states in the BRA
Note: Dots denote published IMR and the placement of the arrow denotes adjusted IMR. IMR is the average over the five years
ending in the census year. States enter the sample when they 23
enter the Birth Registration Area.

.08
Published rate − Adj4 rate (p.p.)
.02
.04
.06

KY

B = .138 se = .036

SC
TN
MS

MA

PA
MD
OH
IN

0

NJ

LA

GA

NC

AR

MO
AL
WV

ILVA
FL

DC
NY

0

.1
.2
.3
Pct underregistration of births in 1940
Southern state

.4

Northern state

(a) Black

Published rate − Adjusted rate (p.p.)
.005
.01
.015
.02

SC

B = se =
TN
OK
MT

LA

MS

GA

TX

PA
OHND

AZ
NM
FL
VA

AR

AL
WV

MO

0

NV
WI
DE
VT
IL MEWY
KS
UT
OR
CT
RI
MD
IA
WA
MI
ID
IN
MN
SD
NE
NH
CA
MA
NY
NJ
DC

KY
CO NC

0

.05
.1
.15
Pct underregistration of births in 1940
Southern state

.2

Northern state

(b) White

Figure 4. : Bias in published IMR relative to percent underregistration - single year IMR
Note: Each single-year difference between adjusted rates and the published infant mortality rate is plotted against the percent
of underregistration from the 1940 test for each race-state cell. Underregistration is measured only once for each state, and
thus all observations for a state are on the same vertical line. The slope coefficient and standard error from the regression line
are estimated with controls for year of birth.
Sources: See data appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations and sources used.

24

.2
.15

Pub

Full Adj

.05

.1

IMR

Res Adj

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1930

1935

1940

.1

(a) Black

Pub

Full Adj

.04

.06

IMR

.08

Res Adj

1915

1920

Published

1925

Restricted Sample

Full Sample Adjusted

(b) White

Figure 5. : Published vs. adjusted national level rates
Note: Published rates include states in the Birth Registration Area. The Restricted Sample Adjusted series consists of the
same set of states used in the calculation of the Published series. The Full Sample Adjusted series includes all states for which
new rates exist.
Source: See data appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations and sources used.

25

.1
.08
B−W Gap (p.p.)
.06
.04
.02
1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1935

1940

1.4

B−W Gap (relative)
1.6
1.8

2

(a) Absolute difference (p.p.)

1915

1920

1925

Published

1930

Restricted Sample Adjusted

(b) Relative difference

Figure 6. : Black-White gap in IMR - published vs. adjusted rates
Note: The same set of states are used in the adjusted rates as in the published rates. States enter the sample as they enter the
Birth Registration Area.
Sources: See data appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations and sources used.

26

1916−1920
Pub
MD

1926−1930
Adj

Pub

1936−1940
Adj

Pub

Adj

.19

.181

MD .128

.128

KY .097

.09

PA .183

.177

KY .123

.119

DC .091

.088

NY .172

.172

IN

.12

.117

MD .091

.085

OH .162

.159

NY .119

.117

MO .091

.084

IN

.159

.156

PA .117

.115

VA

.09

.077

KY .151

.144

MO .117

.114

SC .089

.074

MA

.15

.122

MI

.117

.114

LA .086

.073

SC .149

.119

OH .115

.113

NC .085

.073

VA .127

.116

TN .115

.113

TX .084

.073

NC .126

.105

DC .114

.108

FL .082

.073

NJ .113

.104

TN .082

.07

SC .111

.103

WV .081

.069

WV .111

.102

GA .078

.069

.11

.101

AL .076

.068

VA .107

.096

IN

.076

.067

.105

.094

NY .074

.066

LA .104

.092

OH .071

.065

MA .104

.091

PA

.07

.065

GA .098

.085

NJ

.07

.063

FL .097

.08

MI

.067

.061

.09

.078

IL

.064

.06

MS .083

.071

MS .063

.058

AR .072

.056

AR .056

.039

NC
IL

AL

(a) Black

1926−1930

1916−1920
Pub
RI
PA
NH
MD
ME
MA
CT
VT
MI
NY
OH
IN
SC
NC
VA
KY
WI
KS
CA
MN
UT
WA
NE
OR

.115
.108
.104
.102
.099
.098
.095
.091
.09
.089
.088
.082
.08
.079
.079
.078
.078
.073
.072
.068
.068
.065
.063
.061

Pub

Adj
.107
.103
.1
.1
.098
.095
.095
.089
.088
.086
.083
.079
.075
.074
.073
.072
.071
.071
.067
.066
.065
.062
.061
.058

NM
AZ
CO
ME
WV
SC
DE
PA
RI
TN
NC
NH
MD
VT
KY
MI
WY
GA
MA
VA
OH
OK
ND
IN
CA
LA
NJ
NY
AL
CT
IL
WI
MT
UT
MO
MS
AR
KS
FL
ID
IA
MN
NE
DC
WA
OR

.143
.119
.086
.077
.075
.074
.071
.07
.069
.069
.069
.069
.068
.068
.068
.067
.066
.066
.066
.066
.064
.063
.062
.061
.061
.061
.061
.061
.061
.061
.061
.06
.059
.059
.058
.057
.056
.056
.055
.055
.054
.053
.052
.052
.048
.047

1936−1940
Adj
.138
.117
.078
.075
.069
.069
.068
.068
.068
.067
.067
.066
.066
.063
.062
.062
.062
.061
.061
.061
.061
.061
.06
.06
.06
.058
.057
.057
.057
.055
.055
.055
.055
.052
.052
.051
.051
.05
.05
.05
.05
.049
.048
.047
.047
.046

Pub
NM
AZ
TX
CO
WV
SC
ME
TN
KY
NC
VA
GA
LA
AL
MS
VT
MO
OK
DE
WY
AR
FL
ND
NH
DC
PA
MD
CA
MT
ID
UT
NV
OH
MI
RI
IN
IA
KS
WI
MA
NY
SD
MN
IL
NE
NJ
WA
OR
CT

.107
.086
.067
.065
.059
.058
.058
.057
.056
.055
.055
.053
.052
.052
.049
.049
.049
.049
.048
.048
.048
.047
.047
.046
.046
.046
.046
.045
.044
.044
.044
.044
.044
.044
.043
.043
.042
.042
.041
.041
.04
.039
.039
.039
.038
.037
.037
.037
.037

Adj
.101
.082
.061
.059
.057
.054
.052
.051
.05
.049
.047
.047
.047
.047
.046
.046
.046
.046
.046
.045
.045
.045
.045
.045
.044
.044
.044
.043
.043
.043
.043
.043
.043
.042
.042
.04
.04
.04
.04
.039
.039
.039
.038
.037
.037
.037
.037
.037
.036

(b) White

Figure 7. : Change in five-year average IMR ranking from published to adjusted rates
Note: For each state in the Birth Registration Area for a given time period and with at least 5,000 births for each race over
the five years, the chart ranks each state by published IMR on the left and adjusted IMR on the right.
Sources: See appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations27
and sources used.

Pub South

.2
IMR

.15

Adj North

.05

.1

Adj South

1915

1920

1925

1930

Adj South

Pub South

1935

1940

Adj North

Figure 8. : Regional convergence of black IMR between southern and northern states
Note: States are included in calculations as they enter the Birth Registration Area. Published rates for the North are not
shown as they are almost identical to adjusted rates.

28

Table 1—: Regional comparison of black IMR (p.p.)
1916-1920

1926-1930

1936-1940

Published
North
South
Diff

17.7
13.3
4.4

12.3
11.2
1.1

7.9
9.1
-1.2

Adjusted
North
South
Diff

17.2
11.1
6.1

12.1
9.2
2.8

7.6
7.6
0.0

Bias

-1.7

-1.7

-1.3

Note: The difference is northern minus southern IMR. Bias is calculated as the published rate minus adjusted rate. States
included in the sample are Illinois, Ohio, and Pennsylvania for the North, and North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee
for the South. The sample is limited to these states because of data limitations discussed in Eriksson and Niemesh (2016).

29

Table 2—: Black-White decomposition results from Collins and Thomasson (2004) and using revised rates
1920

Total Log Gap
Gap “Explained” by:
Income
Education
Urban
Physicians
Total “Explained” Gap
Total “Unexplained” Gap
Percent “Explained”

1925

1960

1965

1970

Panel A: Collins and Thomasson (2004)[Published rates]
0.455 0.462 0.493 0.447 0.521 0.454 0.496 0.583

0.626

0.630

0.559

0.110
0.337
-0.106
0.034
0.375
0.079
0.83

0.106
0.293
-0.079
0.027
0.347
0.115
0.75

0.134
0.343
-0.082
0.034
0.429
0.064
0.87

0.116
0.265
-0.037
0.037
0.381
0.073
0.84

0.111
0.223
-0.014
0.029
0.349
0.147
0.70

0.102
0.166
0.000
0.022
0.290
0.293
0.50

0.097
0.121
0.011
0.016
0.245
0.381
0.39

0.091
0.093
0.019
0.012
0.215
0.414
0.34

0.082
0.069
0.029
0.007
0.187
0.372
0.33

0.388

0.426

Panel B: Revised rates
0.434 0.408 0.378 0.454

0.496

0.583

0.626

0.630

0.559

0.014
0.293
-0.125
0.071
0.253
0.136
0.65

0.013
0.250
-0.087
0.051
0.226
0.199
0.53

0.015
0.287
-0.082
0.055
0.275
0.159
0.63

0.012
0.18
-0.014
0.045
0.224
0.272
0.45

0.011
0.134
0.000
0.034
0.179
0.404
0.31

0.011
0.098
0.010
0.024
0.143
0.483
0.23

0.010
0.075
0.018
0.018
0.121
0.508
0.19

0.009
0.055
0.027
0.010
0.102
0.457
0.18

30
Total Log Gap
Gap “Explained” by:
Income
Education
Urban
Physicians
Total “Explained” Gap
Total “Unexplained” Gap
Percent “Explained”

1930

1935

0.131
0.329
-0.069
0.038
0.429
0.017
0.96

0.014
0.269
-0.066
0.059
0.277
0.131
0.68

1940

0.132
0.307
-0.056
0.042
0.425
0.097
0.81

0.015
0.259
-0.056
0.067
0.284
0.094
0.75

1945

0.013
0.214
-0.035
0.057
0.249
0.205
0.55

1950

1955

Note: The “Total IMR Gap” is the difference between the average (weighted by population) log white and nonwhite infant mortality rates in each year. Each component
of the ”Gap Explained By” section is the product of the difference in the variables average value for whites and nonwhites (in that year) and the relevant coefficients from
a race specific regression of infant mortality for the full 1920-1970 sample period. See Table 2 in Collins and Thomasson (2004).
Source: See text for construction of revised IMR for1920-1940, and Collins and Thomasson (2004) for a description of the variables used in the decomposition and source
of IMR for 1945-1970.

Appendix A: Data sources and construction of estimates

A1.

Infant Deaths

In all estimates, we use the counts of registered deaths under 1 year of age by race and state
reported in the published volumes of the Vital Statistics of the United States. In the calculations
shown below, let infant deaths for each state, race, and birth year be denoted as Ds,r,t .
Sources:
Mortality Statistics, 19XX, Table 4. Bureau of the Census: U.S. Department of
Commerce. 1910-1936.
Vital Statistics of the United States, 19XX: Part I, Table 16. Bureau of the
Census: U.S. Department of Commerce. 1937-1940.
Three states vary how deaths of Hispanics are categorized over the period. Initially including
Hispanics in the white category, Arizona (1930-1934), California (1931-1934), and Colorado (19311934) moved Hispanics to the other races category. Then in 1935, all states placed Hispanics back
in the white category for the purpose of vital statistics reporting. To keep the series consistent
over time, we place Hispanics in the white category in all years. The deaths listed as “Other” are
assumed to be Hispanics in these three states for the years listed above.

A2.

Registered Births

Birth counts contained in the published volumes originate from the births registered with each
state vital statistics office. Births of Hispanics in Arizona, California, and Colorado suffer from the
same issues as the registered deaths in published reports. We choose to categorize Hispanic births
as “white” to keep the birth series consistent. In the calculations shown below, let published births
for each state, race, and birth year be denoted as Bs,r,t .
Sources:
Birth, Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
of the United States, 19XX, Table 2. Bureau of the Census: U.S. Department of
Commerce. 1910-1936.
Vital Statistics of the United States, 19XX: Part I, Table 2. Bureau of the Census:
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1937-1940.
31

A3.

Enumeration of Children at Census Date

We use the complete count census microdata for 1920, 1930 and 1940 provided by IPUMS to
count the number of children of each age (< 20), race, and state of birth. Age is measured in years.
Cells are allocated to years of birth by (CensusDate)−age−1. Because infants and young children
are more likely to go unenumerated, in some instances we choose to use the second census after the
birth of the child as providing better information on the true size of the state of birth, race, year
of birth cell. For example, black children born in 1929 in South Carolina face underenumeration
on the order of 28 percent (Grove, 1943). Instead of using black 0 year olds from the 1930 census,
we choose to use black 10 year olds from the 1940 census. In practice, we compare the number
of children enumerated in each cell in the first and second census after the child’s birth, and use
whichever count is larger. In the calculations shown below, let census enumerations of live children
for each state, race, and birth year be denoted as CEs,r,t .
Sources:
Steven Ruggles, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew
Sobek.Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2015.
A4.

Non-infant Deaths

The number of deaths of children aged 1 and older that occur for a given birth cohort are added
back into the adjusted birth counts. For a given state and race, we count the number of deaths
occurring in state s of 1 year olds in 1937, 2 year olds in 1938, and 3 year olds in 1939, which are
then added to the adjusted birth estimate for the 1936 birth cohort. Using the state of occurrence
may bias the estimate for states experiencing net in- or out-migration of children, which then face
a lower (or higher) risk of death. Ideally, we could fully adjust the counts of non-infant deaths
for migration with a complete death index covering the the entire United States. However, this
death index does not exist. Instead, we leverage the 1920-1940 complete count census microdata
from IPUMS to construct the proportion of all children of age “x” in each state of residence in the
census year from each potential state of birth. The non-infant deaths accruing to each birth cohort
in a state of residence are then apportioned to states of birth using the calculated proportions.
The published vital statistic tables report deaths for single years of age below 5, but group ages
5 to 9. We would like to have death counts for each age individually. Digitized state death indexes
contain the complete listing of the underlying death certificates, which can be used to disaggregate
32

vital statistics in the published tables. FamlySearch.org kindly provided death indexes for Illinois,
North Carolina, Ohio, South Carolina, and Tennessee. Estimates of the proportion of deaths in the
full 5-9 age group fall in each single age are calculated. We estimate the proportions for each decade
(1915-1920, 1921-1930, 1931-1940), race (white, black), and region (North, South) cell. Ohio and
Illinois provide death counts for the North, while the remaining states provide death counts for the
South.
Additionally, the Census Bureau combined the 1-4 age groups in the 1930-1934 reporting years.
We choose to use a state-based estimation strategy for these young ages rather than the process
used for older children, as deaths in young children are more likely and this process does not impose
the same trend on states within a region. The age breakdown of deaths in the 1-4 age group in
state s in the two years on either side of the missing data are averaged. The average proportions
are then scaled to sum to 1 and then applied to the published death counts in the combined 1-4
age group.
In the calculations below, the state of occurrence based non-infant death counts are denoted as
occurrence and non-infant deaths apportioned to state of birth are denoted as N ID sob .
N IDs,r,t
s,r,t

Sources:
Mortality Statistics, 19XX, Table 4. Bureau of the Census: U.S. Department of
Commerce. 1910-1936.
Vital Statistics of the United States, 19XX: Part I, Table 16. Bureau of the
Census: U.S. Department of Commerce. 1937-1940.
A5.

Completeness of Birth Registration

The Census Bureau conducted a test of the birth registration system in every state of the union
covering the the six months prior to the 1940 census date. While conducting the regular duties
of the decennial census, enumerators were asked to fill out special cards for infants born during
the prior four months. The infant cards were then checked against the state birth registration
files. The extent of underregistration of births was determined as the percent of infant cards that
were successfully matched to a birth certificate. We use the estimates reported by state and race.
The registration test is discussed in more detail in the main text. The percent of completeness is
denoted as pct complete.
Source:
Grove, Robert. Studies in the Completeness of Birth Registration: Part 1 Completeness of Birth Registration in the United States, December 1, 1939 to
33

March 31, 1940. Vital Statistics - Special Reports Series, 17(18), April 1943.
Table 1.
A6.

Construction of infant mortality rates

We construct various estimates of the infant mortality rate (in percentage points) based on
different methods to estimate births. Rates and births are calculated for each state, race, and year
of birth cell.
1) The published rate: IMRpub
s,r,t =

Ds,r,t
Bs,r,t

2) Adjusted rate 1 uses census counts, infant deaths, and non-infant deaths in state of occurrence
adj1
=
as the estimate of births: IMRs,r,t

Ds,r,t
occurrence +D
CEs,r,t +N IDs,r,t
s,r,t

3) Adjusted rate 2 replaces non-infant deaths in state of occurrence by allocating non-infant
deaths to state of birth: IMRadj2
s,r,t =

Ds,r,t
sob +D
CEs,r,t +N IDs,r,t
s,r,t

Adjustment 2 directly accounts for the potential of migration to bias results from the deaths of
non-infant children. Whereas Adjustment 1 allocates the deaths of children aged 1 and above
to the state of occurrence, Adjustment 2 allocates these deaths to the state of birth using
the proportion that each state of birth accounts for in each age-race-state-of-residence cell in
the census. The movement from Adjusted rate 1 to Adjusted rate 2 does not seem to make
a meaningful difference. Appendix Figure A2 plots non-infant deaths allocated to the state
of occurrence against non-infant deaths allocated to state of birth. The two series are almost
indistinguishable from one another for whites. However, differences emerge in southern states
with large black populations that left the south in large numbers during the Great Migration.
Figure 2 in the main text plots the relationship for estimated infant mortality rates and the
differences are even smaller between the two series.
4) Adjusted rate 3 replaces births in 1939 and 1940 by scaling up published births by the percent

Ds,r,t


t < 1939
sob +D
CEs,r,t +N IDs,r,t
s,r,t
adj3
complete from the 1940 test: IMRs,r,t =

Ds,r,t

t ∈ 1939, 1940
1
B
s,r,t pct complete

This adjustment revises the 1939 data for the severe underenumeration of infants, and allows
us to construct a revised estimate for 1940. Adjustment methods 1 and 2 accounted for
underenumeration in the census of 0-1 year olds by using a subsequent census count for
the same birth years (10-11 year olds). In the absence of complete microdata for the 1950
34

decennial census, we are unable to make a similar adjustment for 1939. Instead, we scale up
registered births in each cell by the extent of registration incompleteness reported in Grove
(1943) for the 1939 and 1940 birth years.
Moving from Adjustment 2 to Adjustment 3 reduces infant mortality rates in 1939 and 1940
in amounts inversely proportional to amount of registration completeness.Appendix Figure
A3 makes clear the large impact on infant mortality rates in 1939 and 1940 for two illustrative
cases. In southern states where registration of births was generally more of a problem than
underenumeration, we see that our adjustment method predicts lower infant mortality than
the published volumes for both blacks and whites, except for in 1939 and 1940. Scaling
published births for these two years seems to keep the relative difference between Adjusted
rate 2 and the published mortality rate consistent for for pre-1949 and 1939-1940. For northern
states, registration wins the race against enumeration: birth registrations are more accurate
than census enumerations. As such, we do not observe large differences between Adjusted
rate 2 and published rates in northern states. Again, we see in the North that scaling births
by the extent of underregistration keeps a consistent difference between the revised series and
published series.
5) Adjusted rate 4 replaces any cell where the adjusted births from method 3 is less than the
number of published
births, and uses the published births instead:


D
s,r,t

t < 1939

sob +D

CEs,r,t +N IDs,r,t
s,r,t


Ds,r,t
sob + D
IMRadj4
CEs,r,t + N IDs,r,t
s,r,t =
s,r,t < Bs,r,t
Bs,r,t




Ds,r,t


t ∈ 1939, 1940
1
B
s,r,t pct complete

The original purpose for undertaking this study was to construct accurate infant mortality
rates in a cross-section of states to make regional comparisons. The fact that method 3
allows for an increase in estimated IMR relative to the published rates is concerning. In
those instances, registered births provide a better estimate of the truth than does our census
based method, and adjusting does not lead to improvements in accuracy. As such, Adjustment
4 takes the results from Adjustment 3 and replaces the census based births with registered
births in any state-year-race cell where registered births are greater.
We believe that Adjustment 4 provides the best improvement in accuracy to make crosssectional comparisons. Figure 4 plots the bias in the published rates (Published - Adj 4)
against the extent of underregistration of births from the 1940 test. States with higher levels
35

of underregistration do in fact see larger reductions in IMR using our census-based method,
just as we would expect.
6) Adjusted rate 5 replaces births in all years with the published births scaled by the percent
complete from the 1940 test: IMRadj5
s,r,t =

Ds,r,t
1
Bs,r,t pct complete

36

100

ALOKLA

GA

NC TX
CO

CT
RI
MN
DC
MA
NJ
WI
NE
NY
DE
MT
ND
KS NH
PA
IA OH
MD
SD
ILVT
WA
CA
OR
INUT
MI
WYME
NV
ID MS
VA

AZ

NM

KY

WV
SC
AR

80

Percent complete in 1950
85
90
95

TN

FL
MO

80

85

90
Percent complete in 1940

95

100

100

(a) White

ME

WY
CT RI
OR
MTWI
MA
CA
MD NY
IA
OH
IN
DE
CO PA
DCNJ
NE
MO MS WAIL KS
MINDMN
VA
KY
TN
FL
AL
NC
GA WV
ID

LA
TX
OK

Percent complete in 1950
60
80

NV

SC
SD

UT
AR

AZ

40

NM

40

60
80
Percent complete in 1940

100

(b) Nonwhite

Figure A1. : Relation between birth registration in the 1950 and 1940 tests
Note: The solid line plots the one-to-one relationship for 1940. A point above this line represents an improvement in the
proportion of births registered.
Source: Data from Shapiro and Schachter (1952).

37

Allocated to state of residence
5000
10000
0
0

5000
Allocated to state of birth

10000

0

Allocated to state of residence
500
1000
1500

2000

(a) White

0

500

1000
Allocated to state of birth

1500

2000

(b) Black

Figure A2. : Relation between non-infant deaths allocated to state of occurrence and allocated to
state of birth
Note: Deaths of non-infants reported by age, race, and state of occurrence in the published tables are allocated to states of
birth using the proportion of residents in each state from each state of birth in the complete count census microdata for 1920,
1930, and 1940 by race and age. Observations are limited to states with at least 1,000 births for the figure of black deaths.
Sources: Table 4 of Morality Statistics of the United States for years 1910-1936 and the complete count decennial census
microdata for 1920-1940 provided by IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2015).

38

.1

.065

Infant mortality rate
.07
.08
.09

.06
Infant mortality rate
.05
.055

.06

.045
.04
1935

1936

1937
Pub

1938
Adj2

1939

1940

1935

1936

Adj3

1937
Pub

1939

1940

1939

1940

Adj3

(b) South Carolina - Black

.04

.03

.05

Infant mortality rate
.035
.04

Infant mortality rate
.06
.07

.08

.045

(a) South Carolina - White

1938
Adj2

1935

1936

1937
Pub

1938
Adj2

1939

1940

Adj3

1935

1936

1937
Pub

(c) Illinois - White

1938
Adj2

Adj3

(d) Illinois - Black

Figure A3. : Comparing published rates to Adjusted Rate 2 and Adjusted Rate 3 for two example
states
Note: Adjusted rate 3 takes values from adjusted rate 2 and replaces births for 1939 and 1940 by scaling up the published
births by the extent of of underregistration recorded in the 1940 test.
Sources: See data appendix for a discussion of author’s calculations and sources used.

39

Table A1—: Regional and racial differences in the extent of registration in the 1940 test
Area

United States

All races

Total
White

Nonwhite

92.5

94.0

82.0

Geographic Divisions:
New England
Middle Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific
40

Note: Reprinted from (Grove, 1943; Moriyama, 1946).

In institutions
All races White Nonwhite

Not in institutions
All races White Nonwhite

98.5

98.6

96.3

86.1

88.2

77.2

99.5
99.2
98.7
98.2
96.7
98.2
96.4
97.9
99.1

99.5
99.3
98.8
98.4
96.8
98.3
96.6
98.0
99.2

99.1
97.8
96.6
93.7
95.8
97.4
94.3
95.0
97.1

95.7
94.5
93.6
91.1
82.4
83.0
78.5
83.2
91.4

95.8
94.9
93.8
91.5
84.4
83.8
81.7
87.9
91.4

90.8
88.4
89.1
77.0
78.0
81.0
68.1
37.1
91.7

Table A2—: List of states and years for which adjusted rates fill gaps in published vital statistics
State
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DE
FL
GA
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS
MT

Years
1925 - 1926
1910 - 1918
1910 - 1927
1910 - 1914
1919 - 1920
1919 - 1923
1919 - 1923
1923
1922 - 1925
1918 - 1921
1910 - 1916
1914 - 1916
1911 - 1916
1918 - 1926
1910 - 1915
1910 - 1915
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1914
1912 - 1926
1919 - 1920
1910 - 1921

State
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

Years
1910 - 1916
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1920
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1916
1918
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1914
1916 - 1918, 1925 - 1927
1930 - 1931
1917 - 1926
1912 - 1916
1913 - 1916
1910 - 1914
1910 - 1916
1910 - 1916
-

Note: The table lists the years and states for which our process of estimating births allows us to construct infant mortality rates
that are not reported in the published volumes in the VSUS for the Birth Registration Area. States tended to enter the Death
Registration Area prior to entering the Birth Registration Area, allowing us to use the published counts of infant deaths and
our own estimates of births. Beginning in 1925, South Carolina was removed from the Birth Registration Area for low levels
of registration completeness during the previous years. Rhode Island first entered the BRA in 1915, was removed in 1919, and
re-entered in 1921. The Census Bureau allowed Rhode Island to re-enter in 1928 after showing a 90 percent registration rate
using test cards.

41

Table A3—: Entry Date to the Birth Registration Area
1915 (original)

1916
1917
42

Minnesota (1910)
Michigan (1900)
District of Columbia (1880)
Pennsylvania (1906)
New York (1890)
Rhode Island (1890)
Connecticut (1890)
Massachusetts (1880)
New Hampshire (1890)
Vermont (1890)
Maine (1900)
Maryland (1906)
Washington (1908)
Utah (1910)
Kansas (1914)
Wisconsin (1908)
Indiana (1900)
Kentucky (1911)

1917

1919
1920
1921

1922

1924

1925
1926

N. Carolina (1916)
Virginia (1913)
Ohio (1909)
Oregon (1918)
California (1906)
Nebraska (1920)
Mississippi (1919)
Delaware (1919)
New Jersey (1880)
Montana (1910)
Wyoming (1922)
Illinois (1918)
N. Dakota (1924)
Iowa (1923)
Florida (1919)
W. Virginia (1925)
Idaho (1922)
Arizona (1926)

Source: Birth, Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics of the United States, 1933. Page 2.

1927

1928

1929
1932
1933

Missouri (1911)
Arkansas (1927)
Louisiana (1918)
Tennessee (1917)
Alabama (1925)
Colorado (1906)
Oklahoma (1928)
Georgia (1928)
S. Carolina (1916)
Nevada (1929)
New Mexico (1929)
S. Dakota (1930)
Texas (1933)

Table A4—: Explanatory power of state fixed effects and linear trends for the gap between published
and revised IMR


IM RP U B − IM RADJ

IM RP U B
IM RADJ

Black
Year fixed effects
State fixed effects
State-specific linear trends
Standard deviation of residuals

0.038
0.736
0.926
6%

0.059
0.816
0.927
5%

0.073
0.834
0.917
4%

White
Year fixed effects
State fixed effects
State-specific linear trends
Standard deviation of residuals

0.119
0.777
0.839
5%

0.111
0.809
0.867
6%

0.114
0.814
0.869
2%

Total
Year fixed effects
State fixed effects
State-specific linear trends
Standard deviation of residuals

0.087
0.795
0.851
3%

0.096
0.808
0.863
3%

0.099
0.816
0.867
3%


ln

IM RP U B
IM RADJ



Note: Each entry reports the R-squared from a separate specification of the gap between published and adjusted infant mortality
rates from an unbalanced panel of states in years in which both published and adjusted rates exist. We run regressions on the
Black sample, White sample, and the combined Total sample. The first row of for each sample is from a specification that
includes only year fixed effects. The second row adds state fixed effects, and the third row adds state-specific linear trends.
The final row reports the standard deviation of residuals from the specification that includes state-specific linear trends as a
percent. In the first column, the standard deviation is relative to the mean adjusted IMR in the first column.

43

