NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT IS A PATENT WORTH? EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. PATENT “LOTTERY”
Joan Farre-Mensa
Deepak Hegde
Alexander Ljungqvist
Working Paper 23268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23268

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised December 2018
A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title “The Bright Side of Patents.” We
are grateful to Emily Blanchard, Lauren Cohen, Wesley Cohen, Michael Ewens, Matt Fiedler,
Lee Fleming, Teresa Fort, Ken French, Alberto Galasso, Bronwyn Hall, Zorina Khan, Josh
Lerner, Ross Levine, Alan Marco, Ramana Nanda, Bhaven Sampat, Robert Seamans, Amit Seru
(the Editor), Ted Sichelman, Scott Stern, Rick Townsend, Heidi Williams, Rosemarie Ziedonis,
an anonymous associate editor, two anonymous reviewers, and audiences at the NBER
Productivity Lunch Seminar, the NBER Summer Institute, the SFS Cavalcade, the WFA
meetings, and various universities for helpful comments. We also thank the Institute for
Exceptional Growth Companies for granting access to the NETS database. Hegde gratefully
acknowledges the support of the United States Patent and Trademark Office’s Thomas Alva
Edison Visiting Scholars program and the Kauffman Junior Faculty Fellowship. The views and
comments expressed herein are solely the opinion of the authors, do not reflect the performance
of duties in the authors’ official capacities, and are not endorsed by, nor should be construed as,
any viewpoint official or unofficial of the United States Patent and Trademark Office. The
authors confirm to the best of their knowledge that no information contained herein is privileged,
confidential, or classified. The authors confirm to the best of their knowledge that no information
contained herein is privileged, confidential, or classified.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23268.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What is a Patent Worth? Evidence from the U.S. Patent “Lottery”
Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 23268
March 2017, Revised December 2018
JEL No. D23,G24,L26,O34
ABSTRACT
We provide evidence on the value of patents to startups by leveraging the quasi-random
assignment of applications to examiners with different propensities to grant patents. Using unique
data on all first-time applications filed at the U.S. Patent Office since 2001, we find that startups
that win the patent “lottery” by drawing lenient examiners have, on average, 55% higher
employment growth and 80% higher sales growth five years later. Patent winners also pursue
more, and higher quality, follow-on innovation. Winning a first patent boosts a startup’s
subsequent growth and innovation by facilitating access to funding from VCs, banks, and public
investors.
Joan Farre-Mensa
Cornerstone Research
699 Boylston Street, 5th Floor
Boston, MA 02116
j.farre-mensa@northeastern.edu
Deepak Hegde
Stern School of Business
New York University
40 West Street
Suite 722
New York, NY 10012
dhegde@stern.nyu.edu

Alexander Ljungqvist
Stockholm School of Economics
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm, Sweeden
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu

Patents award temporary monopoly rights over inventions to their inventors. In theory, patents
can benefit their holders by deterring copycats, as defensive shields in litigation suits, as
bargaining chips in licensing negotiations, and as signaling devices to attract investors and
customers (Williams 2017). Policymakers and scholars argue that these benefits offset the social
cost of patent rights (Nordhaus 1969, Scherer 1972). Startups may derive particularly large
private benefits from patents, given that they typically have few assets early on in their lives,
other than their ideas, and lack alternative mechanisms to protect their inventions (Lamoreaux
and Sokoloff 1999, Federal Trade Commission 2011). At the same, there is mounting evidence
that patents are abused, costly to enforce, and tax follow-on inventors (Heller and Eisenberg
1998, Becker and Posner 2013, Jaffe and Lerner 2004, Lemley and Shapiro 2005, Galasso and
Schankerman 2015). How valuable, then, are patents to startups?
The value of a patent is the incremental economic benefit accruing to its holder from the
legal right to exclude others from exploiting the invention, beyond what would be earned if the
invention were not granted a patent. Separating this incremental benefit from the economic value
of the underlying invention itself is challenging. Previous studies document that firm value
increases in the number of patents a firm holds or when a firm is awarded a patent, but these
correlations conflate the value of the underlying inventions and the incremental benefits of the
exclusion rights conferred by the patents.1 Our study aims to provide an estimate of these
incremental economic benefits, focusing on how patents affect the growth and success of
startups. To do so, we employ novel data and an identification strategy that disentangles the
causal effects of patent rights from the economic value of the underlying inventions.
To isolate the incremental benefit of patents over and above the value of the underlying

1

For example, Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005), Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2011), and Kogan et al. (2017)
report a positive correlation between patents and measures of firm value.

inventions, we assemble novel data on patent rejections. Until recently, researchers have lacked
access to data on patent applications that were denied and so have instead compared firms with
and without patents. Of course, firms could be without patents for many reasons: they may not
have inventions to patent in the first place, may have had their patent applications denied, or may
have chosen other ways to protect their inventions (such as trade secrets). Comparing firms with
and without patents thus cannot identify the value of a patent right, as distinct from the value of
the underlying invention. We overcome this challenge thanks to special access to the internal
databases of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), which cover the population of not
only granted but also rejected applications.2
We combine the applications data with data on the performance of startups assembled from a
variety of sources. We focus on five types of outcome variables: (i) growth in sales and
employment (from Dun & Bradstreet’s National Establishment Time Series or NETS database);
(ii) follow-on patenting and patent citations (from the USPTO’s patent database); (iii) the
pledging of patent applications as collateral to raise debt (from the USPTO’s patent assignment
database); (iv) venture funding (from VentureXpert); and (v) fundraising by startups through
initial public offerings (IPOs) (from VentureXpert and Thomson-Reuters’ SDC database).
To disentangle the value of a patent from that of the underlying invention, we exploit
plausibly exogenous variation in the patent approval process through an instrumental-variables
approach pioneered by Sampat and Williams (2018).3 The validity of the approach rests on two
features of the USPTO’s patent examination process. First, the USPTO assigns applications in
each technology field (or “art unit”) to examiners randomly with respect to the characteristics of

2

Access to the USPTO’s internal databases was granted to one of the authors through the agency’s Thomas Alva
Edison Scholars program.
3
Sampat and Williams (2018) use the approach to measure the effect of gene patents on follow-on innovation in the
human genome field.

2

the underlying invention (Lemley and Sampat 2012, Sampat and Williams 2018). Second,
examiners vary in their propensity to approve applications: some are more lenient while others
are stricter, leading Cockburn, Kortum, and Stern (2003) to observe that “there may be as many
patent offices as patent examiners.” The assignment of applications to examiners who quasirandomly differ in their leniency imparts a lottery-like element to the patent review process:
among applicants with patentable inventions, some win patent rights while others do not, simply
because the former were lucky enough to draw more lenient examiners.4 Thus, we are able to
isolate the economic benefits of patent rights from those of the underlying invention.
Our sample covers all 34,215 first-time patent applications filed by U.S. startups at the
USPTO since 2001 that received a final decision by December 31, 2013. Our estimates suggest
that winning the patent lottery, by randomly drawing an examiner more likely to approve
applications, increases the average startup’s employment growth over the next five years by 54.5
percentage points, compared to startups with only randomly different underlying inventions that
fail to obtain a patent. The effect on sales growth—a 79.5 percentage-point increase over five
years—is even larger. For the average startup in our sample, these estimates imply that receiving
a patent leads to 16 additional employees after five years, and $10.6 million in additional sales
cumulated over five years after winning the patent lottery. A first patent grant also increases both
the number of subsequent patents the firm is granted (by 56.5%) and their quality (with the
average number of citations per subsequent patent increasing by 33%).
In contrast to the large benefits of receiving a first patent, subsequent patents are much less

4

Gaule (2018) uses a similar instrument to study the effect of patents on the likelihood of going public or being
acquired using a sample of 2,191 VC-backed startups. Galasso and Schankerman (2015) exploit variation in the
leniency of judges at the U.S. Court of Appeals of the Federal Circuit to study the effect of patent invalidation on
follow-on innovation in related technologies. Of course, not all patent applications are equally affected by the
leniency of their examiner: applications of marginal quality are likely to be the most affected. In the language of the
treatment effects literature, these marginal applications comprise our instrument’s compliant subpopulation.

3

obviously beneficial to the startups in our sample. We find little evidence that approval of a
second patent application boosts growth in employment or sales significantly (even for startups
whose first application was rejected), though it does increase the number of subsequent patents
(by 49.8%). Approval of a third patent shows similar patterns. These results suggest that the
value of patents to startups changes over time. Securing a first patent, when they typically have
few other assets, allows startups to innovate and embark on a high-growth trajectory. Subsequent
patents encourage further innovation but play less of a direct role in boosting growth, which
instead presumably depends on other resources the startups have acquired along the way.
What explains the large economic benefits startups derive from obtaining a patent, especially
for their first application, over and above the economic benefits arising from the underlying
invention? To make headway on this question, we investigate a funding channel. Empirically, we
find that the first patent increases a startup’s chances of securing funding from VCs over the next
three years by 47%, and of securing a loan by pledging the patent as collateral by 76%. A patent
also more than doubles the odds of the startup raising funding from public investors through an
IPO. The VC funding effect is strongest for startups founded by inexperienced entrepreneurs and
located in areas where attracting investors’ attention is harder, and weakest for biochemistry
startups. Mirroring the ambiguous effects of subsequent patents on the performance of startups,
we find that the approval of a startup’s second or third patent application appears to have no
statistically significant impact on the startup’s ability to raise VC funding.
Collectively, our findings suggest that patents facilitate startups’ access to external finance in
contexts where information frictions, and thus contractual hazards, are especially high. A patent
grant sets a startup on a growth path through funding that helps transform its ideas into products
and services that generate jobs, revenues, and follow-on inventions.

4

Our study makes the following contributions to the literatures on intellectual property,
innovation, and entrepreneurial finance. First, cash-constrained startups account for thousands of
patent applications every year, even though patents are expensive to obtain and maintain5 and
there is significant uncertainty surrounding their enforceability and thus their expected value.6
Our study helps explain the apparent attraction of patents to startups by providing the first causal
estimates of the incremental economic benefits U.S. startups derive from patent grants.7
Measuring patent value as the incremental growth in employment and sales, over and above that
stemming from the underlying invention, as well as the incremental increase in follow-on
innovation activity, we show that patents confer economically large benefits on startups.
Interestingly, not all patents are created equal: second and subsequent patents, after purging out
the benefits of the underlying inventions, are less effective at stimulating growth and success.
Second, we provide causal evidence that patents facilitate startup growth by enabling access
to external funding,8 particularly in settings associated with high information frictions. These
findings are consistent with the view that patents, through their property rights function, can help
startups raise funding by providing some level of legal recourse against expropriation (Johnson
et al. 2002) or by mitigating information asymmetry problems that hamper contracting,
particularly between first-time inventors and investors (Arrow 1962, Long 2002).
Third, our identification strategy, based on quasi-random assignment of applications to patent

5

The average U.S. patent costs an estimated $20,000 to obtain and thousands more to keep from expiring before its
20-year term (Lemley 2001).
6
Unlike traditional property rights, such as title to a piece of land, patents are awarded for technological inventions,
the boundaries of which tend to be uncertain and so costly to enforce (Lemley and Shapiro 2005). The USPTO is
blamed for aggravating this uncertainty by granting patents to worthless inventions (Heller and Eisenberg 1998,
Jaffe and Lerner 2004, Becker and Posner 2013). For example, U.S. Patent #4,344,424 for an anti-eating mouth
cage, U.S. Patent #5,934,226 for a bird diaper, and U.S. Patent #6,293,874 for a buttock-kicking apparatus.
7
Schankerman (1998) provides the first, and only other, systematic evidence we are aware of on the private value of
patents. His estimates are derived from patent renewal data for French patents granted between 1969 and 1982.
8
Our evidence on this point echoes prior arguments made in correlation studies (Conti, Thursby, and Thursby 2013,
Hsu and Ziedonis 2013), survey studies (Graham and Sichelman 2008), and law reviews (Long 2002).

5

examiners of varying leniency, highlights the profound impact the luck of the draw can have in
determining startups’ fortunes. The median examiner in our sample grants 61.5% of applications.
An applicant “lucky” enough to have drawn an examiner in the 75th percentile of leniency enjoys
an 11.8 percentage-point higher probability of winning the patent lottery, and thus achieving the
sales and employment growth associated with a patent grant, than an applicant who has drawn an
examiner in the 25th percentile of leniency. We are agnostic about whether a system that results
in such large variation in fortunes is “good” or “bad” for efficiency, except to note that variation
among evaluators is to be expected in systems that depend on subjective human judgment.9
Fourth, patents being privately valuable is clearly not a sufficient condition for the patent
system to improve welfare (we cannot ignore negative externalities imposed on other inventors
or deadweight monopoly costs), but it is a necessary condition: patents are supposed to promote
innovation through the promise of private value to inventors, and we establish that they do,
particularly for entrants into patenting.10 The large economic magnitude of the private returns we
document suggests that the patent system is at least partially performing its intended function by
promoting the growth of entrepreneurs who are least likely to have access to alternative
commercialization channels, at a time when they face the greatest information-related hurdles.
Thus, we contribute to the growing debate about the welfare consequences of the patent system.
Finally, previous empirical tests of the Schumpeterian hypothesis linking innovation to
economic growth report large positive effects of patented inventions on firm growth and
productivity (Kogan et al. 2017). Our findings raise the possibility that at least some of these
positive effects are due to the legal right to exclude conveyed by patent grants.

9

For example, teachers may be more or less lenient when grading examinations, evaluators at funding bodies vary
in their stringency, and court judges may be more or less sympathetic towards the accused.
10
Of course, the fact that the market values of startups are not readily observable means that we cannot estimate the
private value of patents in dollar terms.

6

1. Institutional setting and data
1.1 The patent examination process
The USPTO sends incoming applications to the appropriate “art unit” for review. Each art
unit consists of a group of patent examiners who specialize in a narrowly defined technology
field.11 During our sample period, the USPTO employed some 13,000 examiners in over 900 art
units. The median art unit has 13 examiners; the largest, more than 100.
Applications in each art unit’s holding queue are assigned to one of the unit’s examiners,
who is responsible for assessing if the claims in the application meet the legal thresholds of
novelty, usefulness, and non-obviousness. As we argue more fully in Section 2.3, the matching
of application to examiner is orthogonal to the quality of the application or of the applicant. This
quasi-random assignment is central to our identification strategy.
After receiving an assignment, the examiner evaluates the application and makes a
preliminary ruling on its validity. This ruling, called the “first-action decision,” is communicated
to the applicant via an official letter, and it is from this letter that the applicant first learns the
examiner’s identity. On average, sample applications take 0.7 years to be assigned to an
examiner, who then takes an additional year to make a first-action decision. The final accept/
reject decision is on average made 1.5 years later (i.e., 3.2 years after the application date).12
1.2 Timing considerations
Firm outcomes could, in principle, be measured from three alternative starting points: the
filing date, the first-action date, and the final-decision date. Our choice of starting point is guided

11

To illustrate, the examiners in art unit 1641 are in charge of examining patent applications related to “peptide or
protein sequence,” examiners in art unit 2831 are in charge of applications related to “electrical connectors,”
examiners in art unit 3676 are in charge of applications related to “wells and earth boring,” and so on.
12
Strictly speaking, patent applications are never irrevocably rejected by the USPTO; they are abandoned by
applicants following what technically are appealable rejections issued by examiners (Lemley and Sampat 2008). For
expositional clarity, we follow Sampat and Williams (2018) and refer to abandoned applications (i.e., the
complement of those applications that are approved) as “rejected.”

7

by two considerations: how uncertainty about the patentability of a startup’s invention evolves
over time, and from what point onwards the startup’s behavior could affect the timing of the
USPTO’s decision. Resolution of uncertainty is necessary (but not sufficient) for a patent
application to affect firm outcomes. Endogenous timing of the final approval decision may
contaminate our causal estimates.
Because the first-action letter is the first communication about the merits of its application
that an applicant receives from the USPTO, there is no resolution of uncertainty before the firstaction date. This rules out using the filing date as the starting point. The timing of the final
decision is likely endogenous: the delay between first action and final decision is determined, in
large part, by applicants’ actions (in particular, how long they take to respond to any concerns
the examiner may have raised in the first-action letter). This rules out using the final-decision
date as the starting point. The appropriate choice of starting point in our setting is hence the firstaction date. As Carley, Hegde, and Marco (2015) note, first-action letters contain a detailed
summary of the merits the examiner sees in the application, so the first-action decision resolves a
substantial amount of uncertainty about the application’s ultimate fate, as required.
1.3 Patent data and sample selection
Establishing the private value of a patent requires data on both approved and rejected patent
applications. Until recently, publicly available datasets, such as those maintained by the NBER
or Harvard Business School, only covered approved patents (Lerner and Seru 2015), and even
now, public disclosure of rejected applications is incomplete.13 Instead, we obtain patent data
directly from the USPTO’s internal databases, which contain a complete record of both approved

13

The USPTO’s Patent Application Information Retrieval (PAIR) system, which is publicly accessible, provides no
data on applications that are abandoned prior to public disclosure (around 15% of all unsuccessful applications) and
no data on rejected applications filed before 2001.

8

and rejected patent applications going back to 1976.14 For applications filed since 2001, when the
American Inventors Protection Act came into force, we know the applicant’s identity, regardless
of the USPTO’s final decision. For earlier applications, the applicant’s name is not recorded for
rejected applications, though all other relevant aspects of the application are available. Our
sample hence starts in 2001 (though we use the earlier data in the coding of our instrument).
Our goal is to identify the benefits of early patent grants to startups. The USPTO does not tag
whether an applicant is a startup, so to code startups we proceed as follows. First, we restrict the
sample to incorporated applicants based in the U.S. Second, we screen out not-for-profit entities
such as charities, universities, or government research labs. Third, using data from a variety of
sources, we manually screen out applicants that are or have been listed on a stock market or are
or have been a subsidiary of another firm (whether listed or privately held, and whether domestic
or foreign), at the time of the application.15 These three steps leave a set of patent applications
filed by stand-alone for-profit U.S. firms. Not all are startups. To zero in on applicants likely to
be startups, we apply two further filters. First, we focus on filers that qualify for reduced fees at
the USPTO by virtue of satisfying the criteria defining a “small business entity” under Section 3
of the Small Business Act. Second, we focus on applicants without a history of patenting, by
screening for firms that have filed at least one application on or after January 1, 2001 and no
applications in the previous 25 years. This step requires standardizing applicant names and
checking for name changes. Since many patents are subsequently reassigned, this step also
requires identifying each patent’s original applicant.
Our analysis focuses on how the outcome of a firm’s early patent application affects its

14

Carley, Hegde, and Marco (2015) provide a comprehensive description of these data.
We also screen out a small number of applicants that are acquired between filing and first-action, on the ground
that we cannot disentangle the effects of the patent decision from the effects of the acquisition.
15

9

ability to grow, continue innovating, and raise funding. To ensure we have sufficient time to
study the long-term effects of early patent grants, we require firms to receive a first-action
decision on their first application by the end of 2009 and a final decision by the end of 2013.16
Our final sample consists of 34,215 first-time patent applicants (called startups from here
on). Of these, 31.6% operate in the electronics, computers, and communications industries
(henceforth, IT); 17.8% are active in the pharmaceutical and biochemical sectors (henceforth,
biochemistry); and the remaining 50.6% operate in “other” industries including transportation,
construction, mechanical engineering, and manufacturing. Just under two-thirds (64.5%) of firsttime patent applications in our sample are granted over our sample period.
1.4 Data on firm outcomes
Being privately held, the startups in our sample are not covered in standard financial
databases such as Compustat, so we assemble data on firm outcomes from five other sources.


Dun and Bradstreet’s National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database. NETS is similar
to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) in that it aims to cover
the universe of business establishments in the U.S., but offers the advantage of not requiring
special permission for access. Matching patent assignees to NETS (and to other databases)
requires matching on firm names and locations. We use a “fuzzy” matching algorithm (with
each potential match manually verified), supplemented with information on name changes
and location moves obtained from Capital IQ and the USPTO’s firm name and address
register. We are able to match 80.01% of sample startups to firms in NETS – a higher match

16

The firm’s “first application” is the first application the USPTO rules on. (In 8% of cases, the first ruling a firm
receives is not for its first-ever application but for a later application.)

10

rate than that achieved by studies using the Census Bureau’s data.17


The USPTO’s patent database. This database allows us to track each sample company’s
subsequent patent applications as well as citations to each sample company’s patents.



The USPTO’s patent assignment database. This dataset records transactions between patent
owners and entities to whom owners transfer patent rights. We use it to track instances of
startups pledging their patents or patent applications as collateral for loans.



VentureXpert. This database tracks VC funding events. We use it to identify which of the
34,215 sample firms go on to raise VC funding at some point after the first-action date.



The Thomson Reuter’s Securities Data Company (SDC) database. We use data from SDC
(and VentureXpert) to identify firms that raise capital from public investors via an IPO.
Table 1 provides summary statistics and compares startups whose first patent application is

approved or rejected. Panel A shows that at the time of application, the median startup is 2 years
old, has 8 employees, and $800,000 in sales. Unsuccessful applicants have lower pre-filing
growth in employment and sales than successful ones, suggesting that endogeneity concerns are
rife in patent application data. After the USPTO’s first-action decision, successful applicants
grow employment and sales at substantially higher rates than unsuccessful applicants (Panel B),
produce more and higher-quality follow-on inventions (Panel C), are more likely to raise funding
from VCs or the IPO market (Panel D), and are more likely to raise debt by pledging their patent
applications as collateral, even when not funded by VCs (Panel E). These simple correlations
suggest that startups whose first patent application is approved experience superior outcomes.

17

Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2011) are able to match 63.7% of patent assignees to firm names in the Census
Bureau’s Business Register, often considered the “gold standard” for its coverage of the entire population of U.S.
business establishments with paid employees filing taxes with the Internal Revenue Service. Kerr and Fu (2008)
report a match rate of about 70%.

11

2. The real effects of patent grants
Our focus in this section is on how obtaining a legal property right over an invention (as
distinct from the invention itself) affects a startup’s subsequent growth in employment and sales
and its follow-on innovation. We first outline our empirical setup, review the main challenge our
identification strategy needs to overcome, and discuss our identifying assumptions and
associated threats to identification. We then report our findings on the real effects of a startup
obtaining an early patent. In the next section, we investigate financing channels that link these
outcomes to legal property rights.
2.1 Empirical setup and identification challenge
We estimate panel regressions of the following general form:
Φ

+

(1)

where i indexes startups, j examiners, a art units, t first-action years, and application years.
includes HQ-state fixed effects to control for geographical differences in outcomes (Lerner
and Seru 2015). Art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects,

, are included to control for

unobserved demand or technology shocks that could affect both applications and outcomes; for
example, a breakthrough in a technology field may lead to an increase in both the number of
patentable inventions and the growth rate of firms operating in that field.18 Standard errors are
clustered at the art unit level to allow for arbitrary correlation of the errors within each art unit.
Assuming it can be identified, the coefficient of interest, , captures the average treatment
effect of being granted a patent on an invention on firm outcomes, that is, the conditional average
difference in outcomes between a startup that has both an invention and is granted a patent over

18

Since art units are quite narrowly defined (they span 495 different technology fields in our sample), including
these fixed effects allows us to control for time-varying demand and technological conditions at a very fine level and
so ensures that our findings are not confounded by unobserved industry-level shocks. Applications belonging to artunit-by-year singletons do not contribute to identification and are excluded.

12

it and a startup subject to the same demand and technology conditions that has not been granted a
patent over its invention. The main identification challenge is to ensure that differences in
outcomes reflect the effects of being granted a patent and not differences in the quality of the
underlying invention (or other factors that correlate with its quality, such as unobserved
characteristics of the startup).
2.2 Identification strategy and identifying assumptions
The ideal experiment to identify the causal contribution of a patent over an invention to a
firm’s success would randomize patent approvals, thus ensuring that successful applicants and
their inventions do not differ systematically from unsuccessful ones ex ante.
We exploit a lottery-like feature of the USPTO’s review process to get as close as possible to
this ideal experiment. As prior work has already argued,19 the lottery-like feature in question has
two components: patent applications are assigned to examiners in a quasi-random fashion; and
patent examiners differ systematically in their propensity to approve patents, such that more
lenient examiners are more likely to grant a patent than are stricter examiners, holding the quality
of the invention constant. Under these assumptions, threats to which we discuss in the next
subsection, examiner leniency is a valid instrument for whether or not a startup’s patent
application is approved so that

in equation (1) can be consistently estimated using 2SLS.

We measure examiner leniency as the approval rate of examiner j belonging to art unit a
assigned to review startup i’s patent application submitted at time :
,
where

and

(2)

are the numbers of patents examiner j has reviewed and

19

Notably Lichtman (2004), Sampat and Lemley (2010), Lemley and Sampat (2012), Sampat and Williams (2018),
and Gaule (2018).

13

granted, respectively, prior to the application date .20,21,22 Figure 1 shows that examiner
approval rates vary substantially, even within a given art unit and application year. To illustrate
the variation, consider a startup that is assigned to an examiner with an approval rate at the 75th
percentile rather than at the 25th percentile in that art unit and year. Figure 1 suggests that this
assignment would put the startup’s application on the docket of an examiner whose approval rate
is 17.6 percentage points higher—a lucky draw indeed.23
Table 2, column 1 reports the first stage of our 2SLS specification, that is:

Π

.

(3)

The results confirm that examiner leniency is a strong predictor of whether an application is
approved, supporting the relevance condition required for identification.24 The coefficient
estimate for

in column 1 implies that each percentage-point increase in an examiner’s prior

approval rate leads to a 0.67 percentage-point increase in the probability that a startup patent she
reviews is approved (p<0.001). Thus, moving from an examiner at the 25th percentile to one at
the 75th percentile would increase a startup’s probability of being granted a patent by 11.8
percentage points (=0.67 × 17.6), all else equal.

20

Neither the numerator nor the denominator in (2) includes patent application i, as it has not been reviewed prior to
date . To ensure that we measure approval rates accurately, we exclude startups whose application is assigned to an
examiner with fewer than 10 prior reviews. All results are robust to using alternative cutoffs.
21
Due to data limitations, prior work often uses a somewhat noisier instrument, sometimes called the “leave-oneout” estimator, defined using an examiner’s future decisions as well as her past ones. Our results are little different
using this alternative way of coding the instrument.
22
Our results are robust to computing the instrument as the approval rate of all first-time patent applications
assigned to a given examiner, or to including only the last three years of applications. We thank an anonymous
referee for suggesting these robustness tests.
23
Our approval rates are based on a large number of reviewed applications: the average (median) examiner has
reviewed 770 (409) applications by the time we measure her approval rate (the 10th percentile is 51). This suggests
that the variation shown in Figure 1 reflects persistent inherent differences in examiners’ propensity to approve
applications and not small-sample random differences in the quality distribution of the applications they review.
24
We estimate a linear probability model in the first stage instead of a probit model to avoid using the nonlinearity
of the probit model as an additional source of identifying information (Angrist and Pischke 2009, p. 190). All our
conclusions are robust to estimating our first-stage equation (3) using a probit model instead.

14

The effect of an examiner’s past approval rate on the probability of receiving a patent is not
only large economically, it is also strong statistically, with F statistics well above the rule-ofthumb value of 10. This ensures that our results are not subject to weak-instrument bias.
2.3 Threats to identification
Conditional on patent applications being quasi-randomly assigned to patent examiners, the
familiar exclusion restriction required for instrument validity is likely plausibly satisfied in our
setting: it is difficult to see how an examiner’s past leniency would affect a startup’s future
success directly, other than through its effect on the likelihood that the startup is granted a patent.
Thus, threats to identification in our setting likely involve the possibility that examiner leniency
correlates with omitted variables that in turn drive a startup’s future success. This amounts to the
possibility that our instrument is not, after all, “as good as randomly assigned conditional on
covariates” (Angrist and Pischke 2009, p. 117). This would be the case if the characteristics of
the application, the applicant, or the examiner influenced assignment.
We investigate this possibility in three ways. First, we argue—on institutional grounds and
based on prior literature—that patent applications are indeed assigned quasi-randomly at the
USPTO. Second, we implement a validation test of quasi-random assignment proposed by Righi
and Simcoe (2017). Third, we test whether examiner leniency correlates with (observed) drivers
of a startup’s future success.
We are far from the first to argue that the USPTO assigns applications to examiners quasirandomly (see Lichtman 2004, Sampat and Lemley 2010, Lemley and Sampat 2012, Sampat and
Williams 2018, and Gaule 2018, among others). The precise details of the assignment process
vary from art unit to art unit. For example, Lemley and Sampat (2012) report that some art units
assign patents based on the last digit of the (randomly assigned) application serial number. Other

15

art units use a “first-in-first-out” rule: the application with the earliest filing date is assigned to
the first available examiner. Importantly, though, the various assignment mechanisms in use at
the USPTO are consistent with our identifying assumption that applications are assigned to
examiners quasi-randomly (that is, randomly with respect to application or applicant quality).
Reassuringly, Righi and Simcoe (2017) report finding “no evidence that particularly important
applications (with large families) or broad applications (with short first independent claims) are
assigned to specific examiners” (p. 2) and “no evidence that certain examiners specialize in
applications that have greater importance or broader claims” (abstract).
Next, we implement a validation test of quasi-random assignment proposed by Righi and
Simcoe (2017). As Righi and Simcoe note, under the null of quasi-random assignment, the firststage coefficient estimate of

in equation (3) should be invariant to the inclusion of controls for

application, applicant, or examiner characteristics. We test this in the remainder of Table 2.
Columns 2 through 4 investigate the possibility that examiner assignment depends on applicant
or application quality. We use size (the log number of employees and log sales at first-action)
and growth in employment and sales to proxy for applicant quality, and the log number of
independent claims in the application to proxy for application quality. Columns 5 and 6
investigate the possibility of assignment based on examiner characteristics, specifically
specialization (in columns 5 and 6) and experience and seniority (in column 6). We follow Righi
and Simcoe, who suggest including technology-subclass-by-year fixed effects to control for
specialization.25 Data on examiner experience and seniority were made available to us by the
USPTO pursuant to a Freedom of Information Act request.

25

Technology subclass is the finest observable unit of technology classification at the USPTO. We include subclassby-year fixed effects alongside the art-unit-by-year fixed effects of our baseline specification, which we can do
because subclasses can span multiple art units. (In our sample, we have a total of 495 unique art units, 3,871 unique
subclasses, and 9 years in the data.)

16

The reassuring upshot of Table 2 is that , the coefficient on the instrument, does not change
across the six specifications: the coefficient estimates vary between 0.67 and 0.69. In light of
this, our instrument passes Righi and Simcoe’s (2017) validation test. Table 2 further shows that
our proxies for the quality of the applicant do not predict whether the application is approved
(columns 2 and 3), and neither do our proxies for examiner experience and seniority (column
6).26 Not surprisingly, we do find that applications with a larger number of claims, which we
expect to be of higher quality, are more likely to be granted (column 4); however, this does not
undermine identification insofar as the number of claims is orthogonal to examiner leniency, as
suggested by the fact that the first-stage coefficient on the instrument does not change when the
number of claims is included in equation (3)—and as we directly test next.
Table 3 tests whether examiner leniency correlates with observed characteristics of the
applicant, the application, or the examiner. Neither the characteristics of the applicant (in
columns 1 and 2) nor the characteristics of the application (in column 3) predict the leniency of
the examiner to whom the application was assigned, consistent with quasi-random assignment.
We do find that more experienced and more senior examiners are more lenient, all else equal
(column 4), consistent with previous evidence reported by Lemley and Sampat (2012) and
Frakes and Wasserman (2017). But this correlation does not invalidate our instrument if more
experienced and more senior examiners are assigned applications quasi-randomly, as our Table 2
findings suggest.27
The final two columns of Table 3 report the results of a placebo test. Some startups file for

26

Similarly, we find no evidence that including examiner workload at the time an application is assigned to her
affects the coefficient on the instrument. We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this robustness test.
27
In particular, it is worth noting that Table 2 shows that neither experience nor seniority have any explanatory
power over and above leniency to predict whether an application is approved, and their inclusion in the first stage
has no effect on the coefficient estimated for leniency in the first stage. Nonetheless, it is instructive to consider
whether the second-stage results reported in the remainder of the paper are robust to controlling for examiner
characteristics. As Tables IA.1-IA.4 in the Internet Appendix show, this is indeed the case.

17

patent protection not just in the U.S., but also in the European Union and/or Japan. Using foreign
patent grants as a measure of the quality of the applicant or the underlying invention, we validate
the quasi-random-assignment assumption by testing whether applications that are granted by a
foreign patent office are more likely to have been assigned to more lenient U.S. examiners.
Consistent with our identification assumption that leniency is uncorrelated with the quality of the
application or the applicant, we find no such evidence.
2.4 Empirical results
2.4.1 Employment growth, sales growth, and firm survival
Table 4 reports our baseline results for the effects of approval of a startup’s first patent
application on its subsequent growth in employment and sales and its survival. Panel A focuses
on employment.28 The employment effects of quasi-randomly being granted a patent take some
time to get going. After one year, a patent grant raises a startup’s employment growth rate by a
marginally significant 6.1 percentage points (p=0.066), all else equal.29 After two years, the
employment growth rates of successful and unsuccessful patent applicants differ by 22.8
percentage points, increasing to differences of 33.3, 48.9, and 54.5 percentage points after three,
four, and five years, respectively (all significant at p<0.01 or better). Figure 2, Panel A visualizes
this steady increase over time in the differential employment growth of successful and
unsuccessful first-time patent applicants.
To gauge the economic significance, consider the median startup, which has eight employees
at first-action. All else equal, patent approval results in the startup having 4.4 (= 8 × 0.545) more

28
To streamline the discussion, we report only 2SLS estimates. The corresponding OLS estimates can be found in
the Internet Appendix, starting with Table IA.5. We discuss differences between the 2SLS and OLS estimates in
Section 2.5.
29
In addition to including art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects, we also control for the log number of
employees that the firm has at first-action (not shown). As expected, larger firms tend to grow more slowly.

18

employees five years later than if the application had been rejected as a result of being assigned
to a stricter examiner. Summed over five years, a patent grant supports an additional 13.2 manyears of employment at the median startup. The equivalent numbers for the average successful
applicant are 16.1 more employees by year 5 and 49 additional man-years of employment.
Table 4, Panel B and Figure 2, Panel B show a similar pattern for sales growth. On average,
successful applicants grow their sales by a cumulative 10.0, 27.6, 51.2, 79.6, and 79.5 percentage
points more than do their unsuccessful counterparts over the one through five years following
patent approval (p<0.01 or better from year 2 onwards). For the median startup, which in our
sample has sales of $800,000 at first-action, patent approval leads to sales being $636,000
(=$800,000 × 0.795) higher in year 5 than if the application had been rejected. Summed over the
five years, a patent grant allows the median startup to make an additional $2 million in sales, all
else equal. The equivalent numbers for the average successful applicant are $3.4 million higher
sales by year 5 and a cumulative $10.6 million more in sales over the five years.
Table 4, Panel C shows the extensive-margin effect of a patent grant on a startup’s
probability of survival over the next few years. We code a firm as being alive in year

if it

continues to be included in the NETS database that year.30 Compared to the intensive-margin
effects on growth, the effect of a first patent grant on survival is quite modest. The estimates are
economically small (measuring less than five percentage points) and statistically significant only
at the three-year horizon (p=0.045).

30
Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), the source of the NETS database, is careful about identifying firm deaths and
distinguishing them from relocations. See Neumark, Zhang, and Wall (2005) for a comprehensive account of D&B’s
methodology. We spot-check firm deaths according to NETS with information obtained from Capital IQ, which
appears in text form (e.g., “On April 22, 2009, Technologies to Be, Inc. filed a voluntary petition for liquidation
under Chapter 7 in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Middle District of Florida.”).

19

2.4.2 Potential confound: review speed
A causal interpretation of the intensive-margin estimates in Table 4 requires that our leniency
instrument is uncorrelated with omitted variables that affect firm outcomes. A possible violation
of this condition could arise if lenient examiners were also faster and review speed had an
independent effect on outcomes. If so, our patent approval estimates would confound the benefits
of approval with the benefits of speedy resolution of uncertainty about the application’s fate. We
investigate this concern by adding review speed (measured as the time from patent filing to firstaction decision) as a control variable to equation (1).
Given that review speed is plausibly endogenous, we follow Hegde and Ljungqvist (2017)
and instrument it using a measure of administrative delays. The instrument builds on the notion
that the time it takes to receive a first-action decision on a patent application can be decomposed
into two parts: the time from filing to the application being assigned to the examiner’s docket
(which reflects quasi-random administrative delays at the USPTO that are unrelated to invention
quality or application complexity), and the time the examiner takes from the docket to the firstaction date (which is potentially endogenous). Thus, we instrument review speed using the sum
of the time an application takes from filing to being assigned to an examiner’s docket, and the
average time that examiner has taken in the past from docket to first-action.31
As Table IA.6 in the Internet Appendix shows, controlling for instrumented review speed
yields point estimates of the patent approval effect on employment and sales growth that are well
within the 95% confidence intervals around the Table 4 coefficients.

31

The rationale for using the examiner’s average past review speed to construct this review-speed instrument is
similar to that for using examiner leniency to instrument approval: both instruments exploit inherent characteristics
of the examiners which, given the quasi-random assignment of applications to examiners, should be orthogonal to
application and applicant quality.

20

2.4.3 Follow-on innovation
How does the outcome of a startup’s first patent application affect its ability to continue
innovating? We capture a startup’s follow-on innovation using the log number of patent
applications it files after the first-action decision on the first application; the log number of such
subsequent applications that are approved; the approval rate of subsequent applications; the log
number of citations received by all subsequent applications combined; and the log average
number of citations per subsequent approved patent. (See Table 1 for descriptive statistics.)
Since these models do not require NETS data, we use the full sample of startups. As in our
baseline specification (1), we include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects.
Table 5 reports the results. Columns 1 and 2 show that approval of its first patent application
leads to a 56.5% (=e0.448−1) increase in the number of patents the startup subsequently applies
for and a 42.3% increase in the number of patents it subsequently obtains (p<0.001 in each case).
This may not be surprising; after all, Table 4 shows that successful applicants enjoy faster
growth, and that faster growth may, directly or indirectly, support investment in R&D. Column 3
shows that it is not just the volume of subsequent patent applications and grants that increases:
success in the first application leads to a 24.4 percentage-point increase in the approval rate of a
startup’s subsequent applications (p<0.001), suggesting that later applications may be of higher
quality. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that a first patent grant boosts the number of
citations received by the patents the firm is subsequently granted, both overall (up by 60.3% in
column 4) and per patent (up by 33% in column 5).
2.4.4 Subsequent patent applications
Next, we investigate whether the approval of subsequent patent applications delivers
similarly large benefits to startups or whether a startup’s first patent is in some way special.

21

Table 6, Panel A shows that obtaining a second patent has a much smaller effect on
employment growth than did the first patent. After one year, a successful second application
increases a startup’s employment growth by a marginally significant 10.8 percentage points
(p=0.06), all else equal. Over longer time horizons, the effect is neither economically nor
statistically significant. Table 6, Panel B reports economically large effects on sales growth over
four and five years (measuring 20.2 and 49.6 percentage points, respectively), but these effects
are noisily estimated and not statistically significant at conventional levels.32
It is only with regards to follow-on innovation that a startup’s second patent has reliably
beneficial effects. Table 6, Panel C shows positive and statistically significant effects on the
number of future patent applications (up by 64.2%) and approved patents (up by 49.8%), on the
success rate of future patent applications (up by 14.1 percentage points), and on citations to
future patents (up by 75.6%) (p<0.01 in each case), though not on average citations per patent.
The effects of approval of a third patent application follow a similar pattern: no effect on
growth in sales or employment and a strong positive effect on follow-on innovation (not shown).
Overall, these results suggest that the benefits startups derive from obtaining patent grants
(over and above the benefits they derive from the underlying inventions) change over time.
While a successful first application provides a substantial boost to both growth and follow-on
innovation, later patent grants only boost follow-on innovation. One plausible interpretation is
that startups, once they have embarked on a high-growth trajectory thanks to winning their first
patent lottery, are able to find alternative ways to keep their growth rates up. In other words,

32
Not even when we restrict the sample to startups whose first patent application was rejected do we find evidence
that a successful second patent application boosts growth (see Table IA.10 in the Internet Appendix). In that sense,
at least, startups that “lose the patent lottery” in their first application do not recover even when they later manage to
obtain a patent in their second application. Having the first patent application rejected can thus have long-lasting
negative consequences for a startup.

22

success in a startup’s first patent application is indeed special, at least as far as helping to launch
accelerated growth is concerned.
2.4.5 IT startups
Two influential surveys report that established U.S. companies in the IT sector consider
patents the least effective mechanism to protect their R&D investments (Levin et al. 1987,
Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000). Instead, respondents rely on trade secrets, lead time, and
design and manufacturing capabilities to profit from their inventions. IT products also tend to be
complex and involve multiple patentable elements, making it difficult for any single patent to
effectively protect a product (Cohen, Nelson and Walsh 2000). Table IA.9 in the Internet
Appendix revisits these survey findings using our data on startups, showing that IT startups
derive sizable benefits in terms of sales growth and follow-on innovation, contrary to the survey
evidence from established IT firms. A plausible explanation for the difference in importance is
that IT startups use patents as bargaining chips in licensing negotiations or as defensive shields
that preserve their independence to operate in product markets (Hall and Ziedonis 2001).
2.5 External validity
We report the OLS counterparts to our 2SLS estimates of the effects of patents on growth
and follow-on innovation in the Internet Appendix. A comparison of Tables 4 and 5 to Tables
IA.5 and IA.7 reveals that the OLS estimates are smaller than the 2SLS estimates. To understand
why this is the case, we need to be clear about whose outcomes our instrument identifies.
When treatment effects are heterogeneous (i.e., they affect firms differently), an instrument
identifies a local average treatment effect (LATE). This means that our 2SLS estimates identify
the effects of patents only for the subpopulation of startups whose patent application is affected
by their examiner’s leniency. Applications that are obviously bad will be rejected even by lenient

23

examiners; in the language of the treatment effects literature, such applicants are “never-takers.”
Applications that are obviously great will be approved even by harsh examiners; such applicants
are hence “always-takers.” The compliant subpopulation that we expect to be responsive to our
instrument is thus the group of startups with applications of middling quality.33 Accordingly, the
leniency instrument identifies the effect of patent approval on firms with middling inventions.
An important consequence is that our 2SLS estimates, being local average treatment effects,
cannot be generalized to the average startup. In fact, it is likely that our LATE estimates
overstate the value of patents for the average startup. This is because we expect smaller treatment
effects among never-takers and among always-takers than among the compliant subpopulation of
startups with middling inventions. Startups with clearly bad inventions are unlikely to prosper
even if they were somehow granted a patent; startups with clearly great inventions are likely to
prosper regardless of whether they receive a patent. Average treatment effects (or ATE) are
hence likely smaller than our LATE estimates.
This discussion helps explain why our 2SLS estimates in Tables 4 and 5 are larger than their
OLS counterparts. By definition, OLS estimates equal ATE plus the selection bias. We expect
the selection bias to be positive and thus our OLS estimates to be upwardly biased estimates of
the ATE of patent grants: applicants of higher unobserved quality are both more likely to have
produced a “novel, useful, and non-obvious” invention worthy of a patent and to perform better
going forward, regardless of the patent. Despite this positive selection bias, 2SLS estimates can
be larger than their OLS counterparts if the difference between our estimated LATE and the ATE
of a patent grant is larger than the selection bias, that is, if LATE>(ATE + selection bias). This

33

There is no reason to expect the presence of “defiers” in our setting: no startup should be less likely to receive a
patent as a result of being randomly assigned to a more lenient examiner. The monotonicity assumption that is
necessary for our IV estimates to be LATE is hence likely satisfied in our setting.

24

appears to be the case in our setting, which is consistent with our expectation that compliant
startups benefit more from a patent grant than the average startup.34
3. What drives the real effects of patents?
Our findings so far establish that winning the patent lottery (first time around) helps startups
grow and innovate. As Figure 2 shows, the gains in employment and sales growth are not
instantaneous. The same is true for follow-on innovation: the average sample startup submits its
next patent application 1.5 years after first-action on its first application. These time lags suggest
that the mechanism linking patent approval to positive firm-level outcomes is one that requires
time to take effect. A prime candidate mechanism is access to external capital. Transforming a
startup’s patented ideas into new products and processes that eventually support jobs and yield
revenues typically requires investments in operations and marketing, and these investments in
turn require upfront funding.
In this section, we investigate whether patents facilitate access to three sources of capital:
venture capital (VC), public investors in the IPO market, and specialized lenders. A significant
body of research discusses the importance of these funding sources for startups (Gorman and
Sahlman 1989, Hellmann and Puri 2000, Gompers and Lerner 2001, Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and
Lu 2007, Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend 2016, and Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis 2018).
However, establishing a causal link between a patent grant and funding is subject to the same
identification challenges researchers face when measuring the effect of patents on growth and
follow-on innovation. Our identification strategy helps overcome these challenges.
Specifically, we estimate 2SLS linear-probability models of the following general form:
Φ

+

(4)

34

Card (2001) uses the same argument to explain why IV estimates of the returns to schooling tend to be larger than
OLS estimates, even though OLS likely produces upward-biased estimates of the ATE of schooling on earnings.

25

separately for each of our three capital sources, (i) VC funding, (ii) an initial public offering of
equity, or (iii) a loan obtained by pledging a patent or patent application as collateral. We again
use the examiner’s prior approval rate to instrument for the likelihood that the application is
approved and report OLS results in the Internet Appendix for completeness. As before, we
include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. In addition, we control for the log
number of prior VC rounds the startup has raised when we estimate the probability of receiving
funding from a VC or through an IPO.35
3.1 Venture capital funding
Table 7 reports the results for VC funding. Approval of a firm’s first patent application
causes a startup’s chances of obtaining VC funding in the following year to increase by 1.7
percentage points (p=0.053 in column 1). Extending the window increases the effect to 2.7, 3.0,
3.4, and 3.6 percentage points over two, three, four, and five years, respectively (p<0.01). These
effects are economically large. To illustrate, the 3 percentage-point increase in column 3
represents a 46.9% increase relative to the 6.4% unconditional probability of a sample firm
raising VC funding in the three years following the first-action decision.
These estimates point to a steep change in a startup’s ability to raise VC funding around one
to two years after the first-action date. The raw data support the inference that startups that win
the patent lottery tend to raise VC funding quite quickly after the first-action decision: the
median successful applicant that raises VC funding during our five-year window does so a mere
10 months after the first-action date. Figure 3 illustrates the extent to which fundraising events

35

Of the 34,215 startups in our sample, 92.5% had raised no VC funding before the first-action date. For these,
equation (4) identifies the effect of patent approval on their ability to raise their first VC round. For firms with at
least one prior VC round, equation (4) identifies the effect on their ability to raise a follow-on round. Specifically,
2.4% of our sample firms had raised one VC round before their first-action; 1.9% had raised two prior VC rounds;
1.4% had raised three prior rounds; and the remaining 1.8% had raised four or more prior rounds. Pledging a patent
application as collateral before the first-action date is virtually unheard of, and none of the sample startups had filed
for an IPO before first-action.

26

are bunched shortly after first-action. This timing fits our conjectured mechanism well: startups
use patent grants to first raise external capital; they then use the capital to fund investments in
operations and marketing to turn their patented ideas into new products and processes which
subsequently yield increases in sales.
Of course, this is not to say that VCs only help startups by supplying capital. In addition to
capital, VCs have been shown to provide monitoring and advice (Hellmann and Puri 2002,
Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend 2016),36 access to networks of potential customers, suppliers,
and strategic partners (Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu 2007), and help recruiting talented staff
(Gorman and Sahlman 1989).
3.2 Fundraising in the IPO market
While the IPO market is sometimes viewed narrowly as a venue in which VCs “exit” their
investments in startups, its dominant function in the U.S. has in fact traditionally been to help
firms raise relatively large amounts of new capital at relatively low cost.37 We thus investigate
the extent to which patents facilitate startups’ access to the IPO market. 267 (or 0.78%) of the
34,215 startups in the sample go public between their (first) first-action date and November
2018, with the median startup taking 5.5 years to do so.38 Column 6 of Table 7 shows that a
successful first patent application boosts a startup’s chances of raising capital through an IPO by
one percentage point (p=0.048), a 128% increase over the unconditional probability of 0.78%.

36

For example, VCs could help a startup by sharing their experience on how to commercialize patents.
Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003) report that 85.6% of VC-backed firms that went public between 1996 and 2000
saw the VCs sell no shares at all in the IPO. Including non-VC-backed firms, 92.5% of shares sold to IPO investors
were “primary,” representing fundraising from IPO investors, rather than “secondary” sales by existing investors.
38
Firms that remain private by November 2018 may yet go public in the future. The traditional way to deal with
right-censoring of this kind is to estimate a duration model. However, duration models cannot accommodate
instrumental-variable techniques, so we estimate a simple linear-probability model instead. The model includes artunit-by-application-year fixed effects, which control for the fact that startups that applied for their first patent in the
later years of our sample have had less time to go public than earlier applicants.
37

27

3.3 Loans from banks and specialized lenders
As Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis (2018) document, firms frequently pledge their patent
rights as collateral for loans obtained from banks or specialized patent lenders. What is less well
known is that firms can also pledge pending patent applications (after first-action but before final
approval) and even rejected patent applications. Typically, firms pledge not single patent rights
(or applications) but a bundle of their intangible assets, which can include either accepted or
rejected applications alongside trademarks, copyrights, etc. A rejected patent application may not
have passed the standards of patentability but is still considered prior art and may serve as a
description of the holder’s intellectual assets, particularly when offered as part of a bundle.
This observation is important, because it allows us to estimate whether startups have an
easier time obtaining a loan collateralized by their patent application if the patent application was
approved rather than denied: even those with denied patent applications can, in principle, obtain
such a loan, but presumably less easily. As expected, then, Table 8, Panel A shows that startups
whose first patent application is approved are 8.6 percentage points (p<0.001) more likely to
pledge that application as collateral than are startups whose first application is rejected, a 119%
increase over the unconditional sample probability of 7.2%. We find similar results in Panel B,
which excludes sample startups that receive VC funding. For this restricted sample of startups, a
successful patent application increases the probability of securing a collateralized patent loan by
5.9 percentage points (p<0.001), a 93% increase over the unconditional probability of 5.5%.
4. How do patents facilitate access to capital?
Why do suppliers of external funding favor startups that have secured patents? Prior work
suggests several factors may be at play. First, to the extent that patents are monopoly rights, the
market power they confer may increase profits, thus making startups with patents more attractive

28

to investors. Second, patents can facilitate transactions such as licensing agreements and alleviate
investors’ concerns regarding the firm’s ability to monetize an invention (Arora, Fosfuri, and
Gambardella 2001). Third, entrepreneurs with patents may be more willing to share the details of
their invention with investors without fear of expropriation (Arrow 1962, Anton and Yao 1994,
Biais and Perotti 2008). Fourth, the patent application itself can help to credibly communicate
the technical details of the invention (Hegde and Luo 2018). Finally, since patents are certified to
have cleared the USPTO’s requirements of novelty, non-obviousness, and utility, they can serve
as a quality signal to investors in a market characterized by information asymmetries that are
often severe (Long 2002, Hsu and Ziedonis 2013).39
This section explores whether financiers respond to patents differently under different
circumstances, which in turn may shed light on the reasons behind their preference for startups
that have been granted a patent. We readily acknowledge that these tests are suggestive in nature:
discriminating among the five or more factors at play is obviously challenging. To keep the
amount of hand-collection of the required data manageable, we focus on estimating
heterogeneous effects in the context of a startup’s ability to raise VC funding (rather than an IPO
or a collateralized patent loan). To conserve space, we report results for a three-year window
following first-action; our conclusions are robust to using alternative time windows.
4.1 Variation in VC funding round
The first three columns of Table 9 split startups by the number of VC rounds raised before
(first) first-action. Though somewhat noisily estimated, this exercise reveals that VCs appear to
pay attention to a first patent grant for both new prospects and existing portfolio companies.

39

Melero, Palomeras, and Wehrheim (2017) find that patent grants reduce the mobility of employee inventors,
which they argue reflects the fact that patents make inventors’ innovation implementation skills more specific to
their current employer. Our findings in Section 3 suggest another complementary explanation: by facilitating
startups’ access to capital, patents may make it easier for them to retain their inventor talent.

29

Specifically, for startups without prior VC funding, approval increases the likelihood of raising
VC funding by 1.3 percentage points (p=0.08 in column 1), or 76.5% from the unconditional
probability of 1.7%. For startups with one prior VC round under their belt, approval increases the
likelihood of raising a second VC round by 45.5 percentage points (p=0.048 in column 2), or
97.2% from the conditional probability of 46.8%. And for startups with two prior VC rounds,
approval increases the likelihood of raising further VC funding by 26.9 percentage points
(p=0.059 in column 3), or 43.7% from the unconditional probability of 61.5%.
The fact that the patent grant effect is largest (in relative terms) for firms raising their first or
second VC round is consistent with the notion that informational asymmetries between VCs and
startups are highest when raising early rounds, at which point patents serve as a screening device
and/or a way to mitigate Arrow’s (1962) disclosure paradox.40 At the same time, the continued
large effect of a first patent grant on the likelihood of raising funding for firms that have already
raised two or more prior funding rounds suggests that at later stages, patents are valued for the
monopoly rights they entail.
4.2 Variation in prior entrepreneurial experience
A potentially useful proxy for the uncertainty and information frictions surrounding a startup
is the experience of its founders: all else equal, startups run by experienced entrepreneurs are less
risky and thus easier for investors to finance (Hsu and Ziedonis 2013). To code prior founder
experience, we use hand-collected data from Capital IQ for startups that raise VC funding at
some point in their lives. This restricts the sample to firms with at least one prior VC round

40
The large approval effect we observe for firms trying to raise a second VC round is consistent with the notion that
the first (or seed) round is typically small, and so VCs may not do a lot of due diligence before their initial
investment. Indeed, Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) show that VCs increasingly follow a “spray and pray”
strategy, making small seed investments in a large number of startups. Our results suggest that VCs may use patent
outcomes when deciding which startups they support beyond the seed round.

30

before first-action. Of these firms, 57% have a founding team with at least one experienced
founder, while the rest are run by teams made up exclusively of first-time entrepreneurs.
Column 4 of Table 9 allows the effect of a patent grant on the likelihood of VC funding to
vary with prior founder experience. The results confirm that patent approval facilitates access to
capital the most for inexperienced founders. Patent approval increases a startup’s likelihood of
raising VC funding in the next three years by nearly 33 percentage points among inexperienced
founders (p=0.053); for experienced founder teams, the effect is virtually zero (p=0.989).
4.3 Variation in startup agglomeration across U.S. states
Two facts combine to suggest that the value of a patent grant in obtaining VC funding varies
geographically. First, VCs have a well-known preference for investing locally (Lerner 1995,
Sorenson and Stuart 2001). Second, startup activity varies considerably across the country, with
hotspots like California, Massachusetts, and New York being particularly popular places to start
an innovative business. Combined, these two facts imply that VCs operating in areas with larger
startup populations have more potential investments to choose among than those operating in
areas with fewer startups. To deal with the larger number of investments to screen, VCs may rely
more on easily observable signals such as patent grants in areas with high startup activity.41
Column 5 of Table 9 allows the effect of a patent grant on the likelihood of raising VC
funding to differ between startups headquartered in a state with an above- or below-median
startup agglomeration in the year of a startup’s first patent application.42 This yields results
consistent with the idea that patents play a key role in helping startups located in hubs of

41

This is likely to be the case even if such areas also concentrate a large number of VCs, given that even in highVC-density areas like California, most VC firms tend to be small (Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf 2015) and competing
VC firms do not coordinate their screening efforts.
42
We measure startup agglomeration using the number of first-time patent applicants in the state. We obtain similar
results if we simply code California, Massachusetts, and New York (which have consistently been the three states
with the most startup activity according to the 2016 NVCA Yearbook) as states with high startup agglomeration.

31

innovative activity to stand out from the crowd. In states with below median startup activity, the
patent approval effect on the likelihood of raising VC funding is small (1.6 percentage points)
and insignificant (p=0.157). In startup hubs like California, Massachusetts, or New York, the
patent approval effect is 2.7 percentage points larger (p=0.012), a sizeable difference relative to
the unconditional probability of 6.4%. Interestingly, startups whose first application is rejected
are 1.6 percentage points less likely to raise VC funding in a startup hub than in a non-hub state
(p=0.058), which suggests that it is indeed a priori harder to stand out in such hubs.
4.4 Variation across industries
IT and biochemistry have, for a long time, been the main focus of VCs in the U.S. (Gompers
and Lerner 2001, Graham et al. 2009). There are reasons to expect the information value of a
patent to be different in these two industries (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000). IT startups tend
to be founded by younger entrepreneurs (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2018) and their
inventions often face substantial demand uncertainty and imitation risk. Thus, a favorable
decision on an IT startup’s first patent application can provide a particularly valuable early signal
about the quality of its technology and its founders, while also allowing the founders to more
freely discuss their idea with VCs without the fear of expropriation. Evidence from interviews at
semiconductor firms suggests that the primary function of a patent in that industry is “securing
capital from private investors [for firms] in the startup phase” (Hall and Ziedonis 2001).43
Biochemistry startups, in contrast, tend to be founded by experienced scientists, the quality of
whose research can more readily be evaluated using a variety of sources such as academic
publications or National Institutes of Health grants (Li and Agha 2015). Biochemistry startups
face relatively little demand uncertainty or risk of imitation, with the greatest uncertainty instead

43

Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis (2018) and Mann (2018) document the existence of a well-developed secondary
market for IT patents, which alleviates investors’ downside risk if the firm ends up being unviable.

32

coming from the probability of technical success and the regulatory process (DiMasi, Hansen,
and Grabowski 2003). As a result, early patent decisions reveal relatively little information about
the quality of the founders or the potential commercial success of their inventions.
Consistent with this discussion, column 6 of Table 9 shows that the approval of an IT firm’s
first patent application increases its probability of raising VC funds in the next three years by 6.3
percentage points (p=0.003). In biochemistry, on the other hand, patent approval has no
statistically significant effect on VC funding.44
4.5 Subsequent patent applications
Column 7 of Table 9 reports the effects of the second patent application on the probability of
the startup raising any VC funding in the next three years. Although the coefficient estimate for
the second patent grant is comparable in magnitude to the corresponding estimate for the first
patent grant in Table 7 (2.8 versus 3.0 percentage points), it is not statistically significant
(p=0.139). This pattern mirrors the finding reported in Section 2.4.4 that a startup’s first patent is
special: later patents do not boost growth. However, when we restrict the sample to startups
whose first patent application was rejected, we find economically large (albeit statistically
insignificant) evidence that a successful second patent application – i.e., the firm’s first patent
grant – may facilitate access to VC funding (p=0.113 in column 8).
5. Conclusions
We estimate the magnitude of the economic benefits (in terms of growth and follow-on
innovation) that U.S. startups derive from obtaining an early patent grant, over and above the

44
In fact, the sum of First patent application approved and First patent application approved × biochemistry in
column 6 is negative, though not significantly so (p=0.109). “Other industries” behave like IT firms, consistent with
the fact that many of the technological groups that fall in the “other” category (in particular, electronic commerce,
construction, mechanical engineering, transportation, and manufacturing) tend to be closer to IT than biochemistry
in that their founders are usually not well-known, experienced scientists.

33

economic benefits startups derive from their inventions. To disentangle the value of patents as
distinct from the value of the underlying inventions and to identify causal effects, we use
plausibly exogenous variation in patent approvals generated by the random allocation of patent
applications to examiners with varying propensity to approve applications at the USPTO. Our
analysis shows that patent approvals have a substantial and long-lasting impact on startups,
especially the first time startups apply for patent protection: startups whose first patent
application is approved create more jobs, enjoy faster sales growth, and are more innovative than
startups with only randomly different inventions that fail to win patent protection. Successful
second and third applications only significantly boost follow-on innovation but not growth.
We relate the positive effects of patents to their role in facilitating startups’ access to capital,
which helps startups turn ideas into products and products into revenues. Patents are particularly
beneficial for startups founded by inexperienced entrepreneurs, for those located in states with
many startups competing for funding, and for IT startups.
While our results by no means rule out the existence of negative effects of patents, they show
that patents convey substantial economic benefits on startups, not least by facilitating contracting
between them and their investors. We emphasize that our findings do not imply that the patent
system is optimal, or even net welfare-increasing. Instead, taken together with empirical analyses
of the patent system’s spillover effects on other firms (Griliches 1984, Jaffe 1986, Heller and
Eisenberg 1998, Williams 2013, Galasso and Schankerman 2015, Sampat and Williams 2018),
our findings on the beneficial effects of patents on their owners contribute to a more complete
understanding of the patent system. Specifically, we disentangle the benefits of patent rights
from those of the underlying inventions they protect identify an important channel through which
how these benefits operates. Reforms of the patent system that do not take this channel into

34

account run the risk of stifling growth by negatively impacting the availability of capital for
innovative startups.

35

References
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, 2009, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Anton, James J., and Dennis A. Yao, 1994, “Expropriation and Inventions: Appropriable Rents
in the Absence of Property Rights,” American Economic Review 84, 190–209.
Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri, and Alfonso Gambardella, 2001, Markets for Technology: The
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Arrow, Kenneth, 1962, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,”
in: Harold M. Groves, ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and
Social Factors (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Balasubramanian, Natarajan, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, 2011, “What Happens When Firms
Patent? New Evidence from U.S. Economic Census Data,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 93, 126–146.
Becker, Gary, and Richard A. Posner, 2013, “On Reforming the Patent System,” available at
http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2013/07/on-reforming-the-patent-system-becker.html.
Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard Townsend, 2016, “The Impact of Venture Capital
Monitoring,” Journal of Finance 71, 1591–1622.
Biais, Bruno, and Enrico Perotti, 2008, “Entrepreneurs and New Ideas,” RAND Journal of
Economics 39, 1105–1125.
Card, David, 2001, “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems,” Econometrica 69, 1127–1160.
Carley, Michael, Deepak Hegde, and Alan Marco, 2015, “What is the Probability of Receiving a
U.S. Patent?,” Yale Journal of Law and Technology 17, 204–223.
Cockburn, Iain M., Samuel Kortum, and Scott Stern, 2003, “Are All Patent Examiners Equal?
Examiners, Patent Characteristics, and Litigation Outcomes,” in: Wesley M. Cohen and
Stephen A. Merrill, ed., Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy (Washington, D.C.:
National Academies Press).
Cohen, Wesley, Richard Nelson, and John Walsh, 2000, “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),” NBER
Working Paper No. 7552.
Conti, Annamaria, Jerry Thursby, and Marie Thursby, 2013, “Patents as Signals for Startup
Financing,” Journal of Industrial Economics 61, 592–622.
DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski, 2003, “The Price of
Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs,” Journal of Health Economics 22,
151–185.
Ewens, Michael, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2015, “Is a VC Partnership Greater Than the Sum
of Its Partners?,” Journal of Finance 70, 1081–1113.
Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, “Cost of Experimentation
and the Evolution of Venture Capital,” Journal of Financial Economics 128, 422–442.
Federal Trade Commission, 2018, “The Evolving IP Marketplace: Aligning Patent Notice and
36

Remedies with Competition,” (2011), retrieved Dec 12, 2018 from
https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/evolving-ip-marketplace-aligningpatent-notice-and-remedies-competition-report-federal-trade/110307patentreport.pdf.
Frakes, Michael, and Melissa F. Wasserman, 2017, “Is the Time Allocated to Review Patent
Applications Inducing Examiners to Grant Invalid Patents? Evidence from Microlevel
Application Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 99, 550–563.
Galasso, Alberto, and Mark Schankerman, 2015, “Patents and Cumulative Innovation: Causal
Evidence from the Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 317–369.
Gaule, Patrick, 2018, “Patents and the Success of Venture-Capital Backed Startups: Using
Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects,” Journal of Industrial Economics 66, 350–
376.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2001, “The Venture Capital Revolution,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, 145–168.
Gorman, Michael, and William A. Sahlman, 1989, “What Do Venture Capitalists Do?,” Journal
of Business Venturing 4, 231–248.
Graham, Stuart J.H., and Ted M. Sichelman, 2008, “Why Do Start-Ups Patent?” Berkeley
Technology Law Journal 23, 1064–1097.
Graham, Stuart J.H., Robert P. Merges, Pamela Samuelson, and Ted M. Sichelman, 2009, “High
Technology Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent
Survey,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 24, 255–327.
Griliches, Zvi, 1984, R&D, Patents and Productivity (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2005, “Market Value and Patent
Citations,” RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16–38.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, 2001, “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An
Empirical Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995,” RAND
Journal of Economics 32, 101–128.
Hegde, Deepak, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2017, “Patent Scope and Speed,” Working Paper.
Hegde, Deepak and Hong Luo, 2018, “Patent Publication and the Market for Ideas,”
Management Science 64, 495–981.
Heller, Michael A., and Rebecca S. Eisenberg, 1998, “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research,” Science 280, 698–701.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2000, “The Interaction Between Product Market and
Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital,” Review of Financial Studies 134, 959–
984.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, “Whom You Know Matters:
Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance,” Journal of Finance 62, 251–301.
Hochberg, Yael V., Carlos J. Serrano, and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, 2018, “Patent Collateral,
Investor Commitment, and the Market for Venture Lending,” Journal of Financial
Economics 130, 74–94.
Hsu, David H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, 2013, “Resources as Dual Sources of Advantage:
37

Implications for Valuing Entrepreneurial Firm Patents,” Strategic Management Journal 34,
761–781.
Jaffe, Adam, 1986, “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
Patents, Profits and Market Value,” American Economic Review 76, 984–1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Josh Lerner, 2004, Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent
System Is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press).
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, 2002, “Courts and Relational
Contracts,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 18, 221–77.
Kerr, William, and Shihe Fu, 2008, “The Survey of Industrial R&D-Patent Database Link
Project,” Journal of Technology Transfer 33, 173–186.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, 2017, “Technological
Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 665–
712.
Lamoreaux, Naomi. R., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, 1999, “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for
Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” in: N.R. Lamoreaux,
D.M.G. Raff, and P. Temins, eds., Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries
(Chicago IL: Chicago University Press).
Lemley, Mark A., 2001, “Rational Ignorance at the Patent Office,” Northwestern University Law
Review 95, 1497–532.
Lemley, Mark A., and Bhaven N. Sampat, 2008, “Is the Patent Office a Rubber Stamp?,” Emory
Law Journal 58, 181–209.
Lemley, Mark A., and Bhaven N. Sampat, 2012, “Examiner Characteristics and Patent Office
Outcomes,” Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 817–827.
Lemley, Mark A., and Carl Shapiro, 2005, “Probabilistic Patents,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 19, 75–98.
Lerner, Josh, 1995, “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms,” Journal of Finance
50, 301–318.
Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru, 2015, “The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issues for Corporate
Finance and Beyond,” NBER Working Paper No. 24053.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, 1987,
“Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 3, 783–831.
Li, Danielle, and Leila Agha, 2015, “Big Names or Big ideas: Do Peer-Review Panels Select the
Best Science Proposals?,” Science 348, 434–438.
Lichtman, Douglas, 2004, “Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel,” University of Chicago
Law Review 71, 151–182.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William Wilhelm, 2003, “IPO Pricing in the Dot-Com Bubble,”
Journal of Finance 63, 723–752.
Long, Clarisa, 2002, “Patent Signals,” University of Chicago Law Review 69, 625–679.
38

Mann, William, 2018, “Creditor Rights and Innovation: Evidence from Patent Collateral,”
Journal of Financial Economics 130, 25–47.
Melero, Eduardo, Neus Palomeras, and David Wehrheim, 2017, “The Effect of Patent Protection
on Inventor Mobility,” Academy of Management Proceedings 1.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall, 2005, “Employment Dynamics and Business
Relocation: New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series,” NBER Working
Paper No. 11647.
Nordhaus, William, 1969, Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of
Technological Change (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Righi, Cesare, and Timothy Simcoe, 2017, “Patent Examiner Specialization,” NBER Working
Paper No. 23913.
Sampat, Bhaven N., and Mark A. Lemley, 2010, “Examining Patent Examination,” Stanford
Technology Law Review.
Sampat, Bhaven N., and Heidi L. Williams, 2018, “How Do Patents Affect Follow-On
Innovation? Evidence from the Human Genome,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Schankerman, Mark, 1998, “How Valuable is Patent Protection? Estimates by Technology
Field,” RAND Journal of Economics 29, 77–107.
Scherer, Frederic, 1972, “Nordhaus’ Theory of Optimal Patent Life: A Geometric
Reinterpretation.” American Economic Review 62, 422–427.
Sorenson, Olav, and Toby Stuart, 2001, “Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution of
Venture Capital Investments,” American Journal of Sociology 106, 1546–1588.
Williams, Heidi, 2013, “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human
Genome,” Journal of Political Economy 121, 1–27.
Williams, Heidi, 2017, “Patents and Research Investments: Assessing the Empirical Evidence,”
NBER Working Paper No. w21889.

39

Appendix A. Variable definitions.
Firm survival during year t after the first-action decision on a firm’s first patent application is set to 1 if the firm is
matched with the NETS sample and employment (or sales) data are available either for the year t or for any year
after t. The variable is set to zero if the firm is matched with the NETS sample and employment (or sales) data are
not available for the year t or for any year after t.
Employment growth after the first-action decision on a firm’s first (or second) patent application is employmentt+k /
employmentt −1, where t is the first-action year and k =1…5. If a firm dies and thus does not appear in NETS in year
t+k, we set employmentt+k = 0.
Sales growth after the first-action decision on a firm’s first (or second) patent application is salest+k / salest −1, where
t is the first-action year and k =1…5. If a firm dies and thus does not appear in NETS in year t+k, we set salest+k = 0.
Pre-patent-filing employment growth is employmentt /employmentt-1 −1, where t is the year that a firm’s first patent
application is filed.
Pre-patent-filing sales growth is salest /salest-1 −1, where t is the year that a firm’s first patent application is filed.
No. subsequent patent applications is the number of applications with a filing date greater than the first-action date
of a firm’s first (or second) application.
No. subsequent approved patents is the number of approved applications with a filing date greater than the firstaction date of a firm’s first (or second) application.
Approval rate of subsequent patent applications is defined as (no. subsequent approved patents) / (no. subsequent
patent applications). It is only defined for firms with at least one subsequent patent application.
Total citations to all subsequent patent applications is the number of citations received by all subsequent patent
applications combined. (This number is zero for firms with no subsequent applications.) We measure citations over
the five years following each patent application’s public disclosure date, which is typically 18 months after the
application’s filing date.
Average citations-per-patent to subsequent approved patents is the average number of citations received by those
subsequent patent applications that are approved. It is only defined for firms with at least one subsequent approved
patent.
Examiner experience is the number of years since the examiner joined the USPTO.
Examiner grade is the examiner’s grade according the government’s General Schedule. Most examiners start at
grade GS-7 or GS-9. Examiners at grades GS-7 through GS-11 need senior examiners to sign off on their decisions.
GS-13 examiners undergo a period when they have partial signatory authority (during which time their work is
subject to random checks). Examiners at levels GS-14 and above have full signatory authority.
Experienced founder is an indicator set equal to one if at least one of the up to five key executives of the startup
listed in Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ database previously founded a different firm, according to the professional
background provided by Capital IQ.
High startup agglomeration state is an indicator set equal to one if the startup is headquartered in a state with above
median startup agglomeration in the year of the startup’s first patent application. We measure startup agglomeration
using the number of first-time patent applicants in the state.
Industry classification. IT startups are those whose first patent application is reviewed by an examiner belonging to
an art unit in one of the following USPTO technology centers: 21 (computer architecture, software, and information
security); 24 (computer networks, multiplex communication, video distribution, and security); 26 (communications);

40

or 28 (semiconductors, electrical and optical systems and components). Biochemistry startups are those whose first
patent application is reviewed by one of the following technology centers: 16 (biotechnology and organic
chemistry); or 17 (chemical and materials engineering). Startups belonging to other industries are those whose first
patent application is reviewed by one of the following technology centers: 36 (transportation, construction,
electronic commerce, agriculture, national security and license & review); or 37 (mechanical engineering,
manufacturing, products).

41

Figure 1. Distribution of Patent Examiners’ Approval Rates.

0

.05

Fraction
.1

.15

.2

The figure shows the sample distribution of patent examiner approval rates, defined as in equation (2), estimated
within an art unit and year using a regression of approval rates on a full set of art-unit-by-application-year fixed effects.

-1

-.5
0
Examiner approval rate (residual)

.5

42

Figure 2. The Effect of Patent Grants on Startup Growth.
The figure plots the estimated patent approval effect on employment growth (Panel A) and sales growth (Panel B)
over the five years following the first-action decision on a startup’s first patent application. Specifically, the solid line
shows the estimated patent approval effect obtained by estimating equation (1) by 2SLS separately over horizons from
one to five years after the first-action date. We use the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application
as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. The dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals.

Panel A. Employment growth.
90%

70%

50%

30%

10%

-10%

1

2

3

4

5

Patent approval effect: increase in employment after t years

Panel B. Sales growth.
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

1

2

3

4

5

Patent approval effect: increase in sales after t years

43

Figure 3. Time Lag between Patent Decision and VC Funding Round.

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

The figure shows the distribution of the time lag (in months) between the first-action date and the VC investment date
for successful first-time patent applicants that go on to raise funding from a VC. VC funding events that take place
more than five years after the first-action decision are not shown.

0

20
40
Months from first-action decision to VC investment

60

44

Table 1. Summary Statistics.
The table reports summary statistics for the firms in our sample of first-time patent applicants (or “startups”), broken
down by whether their first application is approved or rejected. Data on age, employment, and sales are only available
for those startups that can be matched to the National Establishment Times Series (NETS) database. For variable
definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A.
Firms whose first patent
application is …
approved
rejected
No. firms
% of firms
Scope: number of allowed independent claims

Panel A. Pre-filing characteristics
Age at first patent filing (years)
Employees at filing date

Sales at filing date ($ million)

Pre-patent-filing employment growth (%)
Pre-patent-filing sales growth (%)

Panel B. Subsequent growth in employment and sales
Employment growth after first-action decision on the firm’s
first patent application, measured over the following …
… 1 year
… 3 years
… 5 years
Sales growth after first-action decision on the firm’s first patent
application, measured over the following …
… 1 year
… 3 years
… 5 years

mean
median
st.dev.

22,084
0.6454
3.2
3.0
2.6

12,131
0.3546
0
0
0

median
mean
median
st.dev.
mean
median
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.

2.0
29.6
8.0
61.9
4.3
0.8
9.9
16.2
68.7
20.1
87.9

2.0
29.0
8.0
61.2
4.2
0.7
10.0
16.0
68.1
18.4
83.8

mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.

6.6
50.1
19.3
122.2
24.7
159.3

-0.1
47.8
2.3
111.0
-2.1
124.7

mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.
mean
st.dev.

11.1
73.7
34.3
184.0
50.2
255.9

2.5
66.1
11.7
161.2
16.1
211.8

45

Table 1. Continued.
Firms whose first patent
application is …
approved
rejected
Panel C. Subsequent patenting: patent applications filed after first-action decision on firm’s first application
No. subsequent patent applications
mean
3.1
1.2
st.dev.
11.7
5.7
No. subsequent approved patents
mean
1.8
0.5
st.dev.
7.4
2.7
Approval rate of subsequent patent applications (%)
70.5
47.9
Total citations to all subsequent patent applications
mean
8.3
2.2
st.dev.
77.8
26.6
Average citations-per-patent to subsequent approved patents
mean
2.0
1.5
st.dev.
3.8
3.0
Panel D. Subsequent VC funding and IPOs
% of startups that raise VC funding after first-action
% of startups that go public after first-action

8.0
0.9

5.6
0.6

Panel E. Subsequent pledges of patents as collateral
% of startups that pledged their first patent application as collateral
after first-action decision, measured after the following …
… 1 year
… 3 years
… 5 years

mean
mean
mean

1.3
4.0
6.6

0.9
2.1
2.6

% of startups without VC funding that pledged their first patent
application as collateral after first-action decision, measured after the
following …
… 1 year
… 3 years
… 5 years

mean
mean
mean

0.9
3.1
5.1

0.7
1.6
2.0

46

Table 2. Examiner Leniency: First-stage Results.
The table reports the results of estimating various versions of the first-stage equation (3) of our 2SLS analysis. The
first stage uses the past approval rate of the patent examiner in charge of reviewing a startup’s first patent application
to predict whether the application will be approved. Identification assumes that applications are assigned to examiners
quasi-randomly within an art unit and year. Accordingly, our baseline specification shown in column 1 includes artunit-by-year fixed effects. Columns 2 through 6 consider threats to identification arising from potential violations of
quasi-random assignment. Columns 2 through 4 investigate the possibility of quality-based assignment, using
characteristics of the applicant or the application to proxy for quality. Columns 5 and 6 investigate the possibility of
assignment based on examiner characteristics, controlling for examiner specialization by including technologysubclass-by-year fixed effects (in columns 5 and 6) and proxies for examiner experience and seniority (in column 6).
The number of observations varies depending on data availability (e.g., sales and employment data are only available
for startups that can be matched to NETS) and due to a varying number of singletons. All specifications are estimated
using least squares. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (twosided), respectively.
(1)
IV: patent examiner approval rate

(2)

First patent application approved?
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

0.670***

0.669***

0.674***

0.682***

0.692***

0.689***

0.017

0.021

0.022

0.019

0.022

0.033

Applicant characteristics
ln(employees at first-action)

-0.003
0.004

ln(1 + sales at first-action)

0.003
0.004

employment growth
at first action
sales growth at first action

0.010
0.009

0.003
0.007

Application characteristics
ln(# independent claims in
application)
Examiner characteristics
ln(examiner experience)

0.032***
0.004

-0.010
0.007

examiner grade GS-9

-0.020

examiner grade GS-11

-0.029*

examiner grade GS-12

-0.020

examiner grade GS-13

-0.014

examiner grade GS-14

0.018

examiner grade GS-15

-0.051

0.016
0.017
0.021
0.021
0.023
0.034

Fixed effects
art unit × year
HQ state
tech subclass × year
Diagnostics
R2
F-test: IV = 0
No. of observations (firms)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

25.7%
1,504.1***
34,215

27.8%
1,062.6***
21,564

Yes
Yes
No
28.2%
967.7***
20,207

Yes
Yes
No
25.7%
1,316.0***
29,001

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

42.1%
966.7***
28,299

42.2%
440.7***
28,294

47

Table 3. Examiner Leniency: Instrument Validity.
The table reports the results of regressing the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each firm’s first patent
application on the characteristics of the applicant, the application, or the examiner. The number of observations varies
depending on data availability (e.g., sales and employment data are only available for startups that can be matched to
NETS) and due to a varying number of singletons. In columns 5 and 6, the sample is restricted to patent applications
that are also filed with the European and Japanese patent offices, respectively. All specifications are estimated using
least squares. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath
the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

(1)
Applicant characteristics
ln(employees at filing date)

(2)

IV: Patent examiner approval rate
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

0.001
0.002

ln(1 + sales at filing date)

-0.000
0.001

employment growth during year
prior to filing date
sales growth during year prior
to filing date
Application characteristics
ln(# independent claims in
application)
Examiner characteristics
ln(examiner experience)

-0.002
0.004

0.000
0.003

0.002
0.002

0.039***
0.004

examiner grade GS-9

0.038***

examiner grade GS-11

0.080***

examiner grade GS-12

0.131***

examiner grade GS-13

0.191***

examiner grade GS-14

0.226***

examiner grade GS-15

0.197***

0.007
0.009
0.010
0.011
0.012
0.020

Approval by foreign patent office
European Patent Office

-0.005
0.013

Japanese Patent Office

0.014
0.029

Fixed effects
art unit × year
HQ state
tech subclass × year
Diagnostics
R2
No. of observations (firms)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

58.6%
20,151

59.1%
17,546

57.1%
29,001

80.4%
28,294

85.4%
2,745

92.4%
568

48

Table 4. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Employment Growth, Sales Growth, and Survival?
Panels A and B report the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s subsequent
growth in employment and sales, respectively, over the one to five years following the first-action date. For startups that die, we set the growth rate to –100% in
the year of exit. Panel C reports the results of linear probability models of firm survival. We code a startup as being alive in year t if it continues to be included in
the NETS database that year. The variable of interest in each panel is approval of a startup’s first patent application. Panels A and C control for log employment at
first-action, while Panel B controls for log sales at first-action (not shown). All columns report 2SLS results using the approval rate of the examiner reviewing the
patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Employment and sales data come from NETS; thus, startups that cannot be matched to NETS are excluded. NETS data are available through 2011, resulting in
reduced sample sizes as we widen the window from one to five years. The sample is restricted to firms for which NETS reports non-zero sales and employment
for the year of the first-action decision. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications include art-unit-by-year and
headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates.
We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A. Employment growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel C. Survival
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

1 year
(1)

2 years
(2)

3 years
(3)

4 years
(4)

5 years
(5)

0.061*

0.228***

0.333***

0.489***

0.545***

0.033

0.061

0.093

0.132

0.149

1,063.6***
4.3%
21,564

1,063.6***
10.2%
21,564

879.3***
13.8%
18,745

621.6***
17.2%
15,417

490.2***
17.4%
12,655

0.010

0.276***

0.512***

0.796***

0.795***

0.013

0.082

0.137

0.208

0.246

1,065.0***
8.2%
21,530

1,064.6***
18.3%
21,537

880.1***
27.0%
18,729

622.1***
36.5%
15,410

493.2***
40.9%
12,651

0.010

0.031*

0.046**

0.024

0.032

0.013

0.018

0.023

0.031

0.039

1,063.6***
95.8%
21,564

1,063.6***
91.2%
21,564

879.3***
86.8%
18,745

621.6***
83.8%
15,417

490.2***
79.7%
12,655

49

Table 5. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Subsequent Innovation?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s follow-on innovation.
Data on subsequent applications come from the USPTO internal databases and include all applications that receive a final decision through December 31, 2013.
Column 3 includes only startups filing at least one patent application after the first-action decision on the startup’s first patent application and for which we can
measure the approval rate of subsequent applications. Column 5 includes only those startups with at least one subsequent patent approval and for which we can
measure the average number of citations-per-patent to subsequently approved patents. We measure citations over the five years following each patent application’s
public disclosure date, which is typically 18 months after the application’s filing date. In untabulated results, we find that the effects in columns 4 and 5 are even
stronger when we measure citations over seven or ten years. For variable definitions and further details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are
estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. We use the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as
an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Follow-on innovation

Log (1 +
subsequent patent
applications)
(1)
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Uncond. mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (firms)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved patents)
(2)

Approval rate of
subsequent patent
applications
(3)

Log (1 + total
citations to
subsequent patent
applications)
(4)

Log (1 + avg.
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved patents)
(5)

0.448***

0.353***

0.244***

0.472***

0.285***

0.039

0.030

0.043

0.049

0.094

1,504.1***
2.4
34,215

1,504.1***
1.3
34,215

570.5***
65.8%
12,595

1,504.0***
6.1
34,214

305.0***
1.9
9,793

50

Table 6. The Effect of a Startup’s Second Patent Application
This table repeats the analysis shown in Panels A and B of Table 4 and in Table 5, except that it models the effect of the approval of a startup’s second patent
application. All columns report 2SLS results using the approval rate of the examiner reviewing the second patent application as an instrument for the likelihood
that the application is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. For variable definitions and details of their construction
see Appendix A. All specifications include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art
unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

Panel A. Employment growth
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

Panel C. Follow-on innovation
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (firms)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1 year
0.108*

2 years
0.000

3 years
-0.019

4 years
0.008

5 years
-0.091

0.058

0.112

0.156

0.220

0.286

547.3***
6.2%
8,798

547.3***
12.1%
8,798

491.7***
16.4%
7,284

308.6***
20.6%
5,660

213.4***
19.8%
4,279

1 year
0.148

2 years
0.024

3 years
0.092

4 years
0.202

5 years
0.496

0.097

0.171

0.282

0.396

0.560

551.7***
13.1%
8,781

551.9***
28.6%
8,784

495.3***
41.8%
7,279

309.1***
51.8%
5,658

213.3***
58.9%
4,278

Log (1 +
total
citations to
subsequent
patent
applications)
0.563***

Log (1 + avg.
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)
0.052

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
0.496***

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
0.404***

Approval
rate of
subsequent
patent
applications
0.141***

0.080

0.062

0.053

0.094

0.096

768.9***
4.5
12,653

768.9***
2.4
12,653

276.0***
66.4%
6,103

769.0***
12.4
12,652

211.2***
2.1
4,883

51

Table 7. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to VC Funding and the IPO Market?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise funding
from a VC or in the IPO market. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 5 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup raises VC funding at some point in
the 1…5 years following the first-action decision, respectively. The dependent variable in column 6 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup goes public after
the first-action decision on its first patent application, and zero otherwise. All specifications are estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarterstate fixed effects. We use the past approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is
approved. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and
* to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup
raise VC funding …

in the next 1
year?
(1)
First patent application approved
Log (1 + no. prior VC rounds)
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to
VC round or IPO for successful applicants
No. of observations (firms)

in the next 2
years?
(2)

in the next 3
years?
(3)

in the next 4
years?
(4)

in the next 5
years?
(5)

Does the
startup raise
capital in the
IPO market?
(6)
0.010**

0.017*

0.027***

0.030***

0.034***

0.036***

0.009

0.010

0.010

0.011

0.011

0.005

0.272***

0.380***

0.416***

0.425***

0.429***

0.044***

0.009

0.009

0.009

0.009

0.009

0.004

1,497.9***
3.9%

1,483.6***
5.7%

1,483.6***
6.4%

1,484.0***
6.8%

1,486.0***
7.0%

5.2
34,167

8.1
34,111

9.2
34,060

10.0
34,013

10.3
33,981

1,503.1***
0.78%
65.7
34,215

52

Table 8. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to Debt?
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise debt.
The dependent variable in columns 1 through 5 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup pledges its patent application as collateral in a security agreement
(recorded as a patent reassignment by the USPTO) at some point in the 1…5 years following the first-action decision, respectively; the dependent variable in
column 6 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup pledges its patent application as collateral in a security agreement at any point after first-action. All
specifications are estimated by 2SLS and include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. We use the past approval rate of the examiner reviewing each
patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup
pledge the application as collateral …
at any
in the next 1
in the next
in the next
in the next
in the next point in the
year?
2 years?
3 years?
4 years?
5 years?
future?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: All firms
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to application pledge
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Firms without VC funding
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to application pledge
No. of observations (firms)

0.004

0.018**

0.029***

0.039***

0.058***

0.086***

0.006

0.008

0.009

0.010

0.010

0.012

1,530.0***
1.1%
6.0
33,520

1,530.0***
2.3%
11.8
33,520

1,530.0***
3.3%
17.8
33,520

1,530.0***
4.3%
23.0
33,520

1,530.0***
5.2%
27.5
33,520

1,530.0***
7.2%
38.9
33,520

-0.002

0.011

0.019**

0.026***

0.044***

0.059***

0.005

0.007

0.008

0.009

0.010

0.011

1,370.7***
0.8%
5.9
31,161

1,370.7***
1.7%
12.2
31,161

1,370.7***
2.5%
18.6
31,161

1,370.7***
3.2%
23.0
31,161

1,370.7***
3.9%
27.5
31,161

1,370.7***
5.5%
39.6
31,161

53

Table 9. How Do Patents Affect a Startup’s Access to VC Funding? Subsample Analyses.
The table examines how the effect of a patent on facilitating access to VC funding varies across different types of startups. The dependent variable equals one if
the startup raises VC funding at some point in the three years following the first-action decision on its patent application. Columns 1 through 3 split startups by the
number of VC rounds raised before first-action. Column 4 captures variation in founders’ prior entrepreneurial experience. Data on founder experience come from
Capital IQ. Capital IQ’s coverage of founders’ backgrounds is most complete for firms that have raised VC funding, and so column 4 restricts the sample to firms
that have raised at least one VC round before first-action. Column 5 splits the approval effect according to whether startups are headquartered in a state with abovemedian startup agglomeration in the year of their first patent application. (This indicator is time-varying and so is identified in the presence of headquarter-state
fixed effects.) Column 6 splits the approval effect by industry. Columns 7 and 8 focus on approval of the second patent application, with column 8 restricting the
sample to startups whose first application was rejected. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated
by 2SLS using the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application is approved. Columns 38 include the log number of prior rounds; columns 4-6 include the interaction of the examiner approval rate and the splitting variable as instrument for the interacted
patent approval indicator(s). The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. All specifications include art-unit-by-year fixed effects and
headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates.
We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
In the three years following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup raise …
its first VC
its second
a higher VC
round?
VC round?
round?
any VC funding?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
First patent application approved

0.013*

0.455**

0.269*

0.007

0.227

0.142

0.002

0.016

0.063***

0.178

0.011

0.021

0.326*

… × inexperienced founder

0.167

0.027**

… × high startup agglomeration
state
… × biochemistry

0.011

-0.107***
0.035

… × other industries

-0.028
0.024

Second application approved

0.028

0.091

0.019

0.057

11.3%
751.1***
12,455

10.2%
139.3***
2,782

-0.262**

Inexperienced founder

0.110

-0.016*

High startup agglomeration state

0.009

Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
Weak-instrument test
No. of observations (startups)

1.7%
1,260.6***
31,057

46.8%
20.8***
406

61.5%
43.24***
1,306

61.3%
17.4***
1,086

6.4%
744.8***
34,060

6.4%
212.9***
34,060

54

INTERNET APPENDIX

(NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION)

Table IA.1. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Employment Growth, Sales Growth, and Survival?
The table repeats the analysis in Table 4 in the paper, except that it uses as the first stage of the 2SLS analysis the specification shown in column 6 of Table 2.
These same additional controls are then also included in the second stage (not shown). The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A. Employment growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel C. Survival
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

1 year
(1)

2 years
(2)

3 years
(3)

4 years
(4)

5 years
(5)

0.101**

0.257**

0.299*

0.500**

0.668***

0.051

0.101

0.156

0.204

0.223

344.6***
4.3%
16,522

344.6***
10.1%
16,522

294.9***
13.5%
14,299

229.2***
16.8%
11,602

178.8***
16.4%
9,433

0.080

0.212

0.433*

0.672**

0.893**

0.073

0.139

0.222

0.313

0.353

349.1***
8.1%
16,487

349.5***
18.1%
16,494

298.5***
26.5%
14,276

228.6***
36.2%
11,594

179.0***
40.3%
9,428

-0.002

0.014

0.023

0.041

0.035

0.025

0.032

0.045

0.059

0.062

344.6***
95.7%
16,522

344.6***
91.0%
16,522

294.9***
86.7%
14,299

229.2***
83.5%
11,602

178.8***
79.3%
9,433

1

Table IA.2. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Subsequent Innovation?
The table repeats the analysis in Table 5 in the paper, except that it uses as the first stage of the 2SLS analysis the specification shown in column 6 of Table 2.
These same additional controls are then also included in the second stage (not shown). The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Follow-on innovation

Log (1 +
subsequent patent
applications)
(1)
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Uncond. mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (firms)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved patents)
(2)

Approval rate of
subsequent patent
applications
(3)

Log (1 + total
citations to
subsequent patent
applications)
(4)

Log (1 + avg.
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved patents)
(5)

0.489***

0.386***

0.286***

0.506***

0.250

0.063

0.051

0.084

0.080

0.268

454.8***
2.4
28,192

454.8***
1.3
28,192

129.2***
65.8%
8,285

454.9***
6.2
28,191

62.3***
2.1
5,815

2

Table IA.3. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to VC Funding and the IPO Market?
The table repeats the analysis in Table 7 in the paper, except that it uses as the first stage of the 2SLS analysis the specification shown in column 6 of Table 2.
These same additional controls are then also included in the second stage (not shown). The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup
raise VC funding …

in the next 1
year?
(1)

in the next 2
years?
(2)

in the next 3
years?
(3)

in the next 4
years?
(4)

in the next 5
years?
(5)

Does the
startup raise
capital in the
IPO market?
(6)

First patent application approved

0.012

0.023

0.039**

0.041**

0.046***

0.014*

0.015

0.016

0.017

0.017

0.017

0.007

Log (1 + no. prior VC rounds)

0.264***

0.370***

0.405***

0.415***

0.419***

0.041***

0.009

0.010

0.010

0.010

0.010

0.004

450.4***
4.2%

452.6***
6.1%

444.6***
6.8%

445.7***
7.2%

449.1***
7.4%

Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to
VC round or IPO for successful applicants
No. of observations (firms)

5.3
28,147

8.0
28,090

9.1
28,042

9.9
27,997

10.2
27,965

452.9***
0.82%
62.1
28,192

3

Table IA.4. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to Debt?
The table repeats the analysis in Table 8 in the paper, except that it uses as the first stage of the 2SLS analysis the specification shown in column 6 of Table 2.
These same additional controls are then also included in the second stage (not shown). The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup
pledge the application as collateral …

Panel A: All firms
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to application pledge
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Firms without VC funding
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to application pledge
No. of observations (firms)

in the next
3 years?
(3)

in the next
4 years?
(4)

in the next
5 years?
(5)

at any
point in the
future?
(6)

0.013

0.041***

0.053***

0.085***

0.109***

0.013

0.015

0.017

0.018

0.021

456.9***
1.1%
6.1
27,542

456.9***
2.3%
12.0
27,542

456.9***
3.4%
18.0
27,542

456.9***
4.4%
23.1
27,542

456.9***
5.3%
27.4
27,542

456.9***
7.3%
39.2
27,542

0.005

0.008

0.031**

0.038***

0.066***

0.073***

0.008

0.011

0.013

0.014

0.015

0.018

451.9***
0.8%
5.9
25,293

451.9***
1.7%
12.4
25,293

451.9***
2.5%
18.7
25,293

451.9***
3.2%
23.0
25,293

451.9***
4.0%
27.4
25,293

451.9***
5.5%
40.1
25,293

in the next 1
year?
(1)

in the next
2 years?
(2)

0.008
0.009

4

Table IA.5. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Employment Growth, Sales Growth, and Survival? OLS
Results.
The analysis is analogous to Table 4, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at
the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

Panel A. Employment growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel C. Survival
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

1 year
(1)

2 years
(2)

3 years
(3)

4 years
(4)

5 years
(5)

0.065***

0.126***

0.152***

0.212***

0.247***

0.008

0.014

0.019

0.026

0.032

13.0%
4.3%
21,564

13.6%
10.2%
21,564

13.8%
13.8%
18,745

14.9%
17.2%
15,417

14.5%
17.4%
12,655

0.083***

0.153***

0.214***

0.297***

0.333***

0.048

0.082

0.137

0.208

0.246

12.3%
8.2%
21,530

13.1%
18.3%
21,537

14.0%
27.0%
18,729

13.7%
36.5%
15,410

13.8%
40.9%
12,651

0.029***

0.051***

0.060***

0.069***

0.078***

0.003

0.005

0.006

0.007

0.008

12.7%
95.8%
21,564

13.6%
91.2%
21,564

14.3%
86.8%
18,745

15.2%
83.8%
15,417

15.6%
79.7%
12,655

5

Table IA.6. Effects of the First Patent Application on Employment and Sales Growth Controlling for Review Speed.
The table reports the results of estimating the effects of the first patent application on employment and sales growth while controlling for patent review speed (not
shown). Doing so removes a possible confound that could arise if lenient examiners were also faster and review speed had an independent effect on outcomes.
Given that review speed is plausibly endogenous, we instrument it using a measure of administrative delays described in Hegde and Ljungqvist (2017). The
instrument builds on the notion that the time it takes to receive a first-action decision on a patent application can be decomposed into two parts: the time from filing
to the application being assigned to the examiner’s docket (which reflects quasi-random administrative delays at the USPTO that are unrelated to invention quality
or application complexity) and the time the examiner takes from the docket to the first-action date (which is potentially endogenous). Thus, we instrument review
speed using the sum of the time an application takes from filing to being assigned to an examiner’s docket and the average time that examiner has taken in the past
from docket to first-action. Panel A models the effect of patent approval of a startup’s first patent application on the startup’s subsequent growth in employment
over the next 1 to 5 years. Panel B models the effect on subsequent sales growth. Panel A controls for log employment at first-action, while Panel B controls for
log sales at first-action (not shown). All columns report 2SLS results. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. Employment and
sales data come from NETS; thus, startups that cannot be matched to NETS are excluded. NETS data are available through 2011, resulting in reduced sample sizes
as we widen the window from 1 to 5 years. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications include art-unit-by-year
and headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient
estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Employment or sales growth after USPTO first-action on the firm’s first patent
application, measured over the following …
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Employment growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

0.032

0.178***

0.285***

0.418***

0.465***

0.036

0.066

0.101

0.148

0.161

447.5***
4.3%
21,531

447.5***
10.3%
21,531

359.3***
13.8%
18,711

262.0***
17.2%
15,390

208.3***
17.3%
12,632

0.060

0.225**

0.461***

0.664***

0.652**

0.051

0.090

0.148

0.230

0.263

447.7***
8.2%
21,498

447.9***
18.3%
21,504

361.1***
27.0%
18,695

263.6***
36.5%
15,383

210.5***
40.8%
12,628

6

Table IA.7. How Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Subsequent Innovation? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s follow-on innovation.
The analysis here is analogous to Table 5, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered
at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (twosided), respectively.

First patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (startups)

Follow-on innovation
Approval rate
Log (1 + total
of subsequent
citations to all
patent
subsequent patent
applications
applications)
(3)
(4)

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
(1)

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
(2)

0.361***

0.294***

0.199***

0.013

0.010

0.012

21.5%
2.4
34,215

20.6%
1.3
34,215

21.0%
65.8%
12,595

Log (1 + average
citations-per-patent
to subsequent
approved patents)
(5)

0.344***

0.079***

0.017

0.022

21.0%
6.1
34,214

29.6%
1.9
9,793

7

Table IA.8. The Effect of a Startup’s Second Patent Application. OLS Results.
This table repeats the analysis shown in Panels A and B of Table 4 and in Table 5, except that it models the effect of the approval of a startup’s second patent
application on the growth (Panels A and B) or follow-on innovation (Panel C) following the first-action decision on the second patent application. The analysis
here is analogous to Table 6, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit
level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
(1)
Panel A. Employment growth
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Sales growth
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

Panel C. Follow-on innovation
Second patent application approved
Diagnostics
R2
Unconditional mean of non-logged dep. var.
No. of observations (firms)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

2 years
0.062**

3 years
0.097**

4 years
0.099**

5 years
0.142**

0.015

0.026

0.038

0.050

0.063

21.0%
6.2%
8,798

22.0%
12.1%
8,798

22.9%
16.4%
7,284

24.6%
20.6%
5,660

25.2%
19.8%
4,279

2 years
0.089**

3 years
0.175**

4 years
0.223**

5 years
0.405***

0.024

0.044

0.073

0.096

0.131

21.2%
13.1%
8,781

22.5%
28.6%
8,784

23.8%
41.8%
7,279

24.5%
51.8%
5,658

25.4%
58.9%
4,278

1 year
0.045***

1 year
0.054**

Log (1 +
total
citations to
subsequent
patent
applications)
0.463***

Log (1 + avg.
citations-perpatent to
subsequent
approved
patents)
0.026

Log (1 +
subsequent
patent
applications)
0.448***

Log (1 +
subsequent
approved
patents)
0.385***

Approval
rate of
subsequent
patent
applications
0.165***

0.023

0.017

0.013

0.030

0.030

29.3%
4.5
12,653

29.9%
2.4
12,653

30.6%
66.4%
6,103

30.7%
12.4
12,652

38.0%
2.1
4,883

8

Table IA.9. Cross-Industry Differences in the Effects of a First Patent Application.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (1) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent
application affects the startup’s various outcomes separately in the IT sector. Each row represents one regression.
Column 1 reports estimates obtained by running regressions in our full sample of startups, as reported in Tables 4 and
5. Column 2 reports estimates obtained by running regressions in the subsample of startups in the IT sector. For
variable definitions and further details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated by 2SLS
using the approval rate of the examiner reviewing each patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the
application is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We
use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Effect of patent grants for …

Employment growth
1-year employment growth

All
startups
(1)

0.061*

IT
startups
(2)

-0.022

0.033

0.058

2-year employment growth

0.228***

0.190*

0.061

0.109

3-year employment growth

0.333***

0.271*

0.093

0.150

4-year employment growth

0.489***

0.283

0.132

0.185

5-year employment growth

0.545***

0.396*

0.149

0.210

Sales growth
1-year sales growth

0.096**

-0.006

0.048

0.081

2-year sales growth

0.276***

0.386***

0.082

0.134

3-year sales growth

0.512***

0.630***

0.137

0.205

4-year sales growth

0.796***

0.602**

0.208

0.293

5-year sales growth

0.795***

0.885***

0.246

0.333

0.448***

0.569***

Follow-on innovation
No. subsequent patent applications

0.039

0.068

No. subsequent approved patents

0.353***

0.445***

0.030

0.054

Approval rate of subsequent patent applications

0.244***

0.262***

0.043

0.091

Total citations to all subsequent patent applications

0.472***

0.725***

0.049

0.093

Average citations-per-patent to subsequent approved patents

0.285***

0.441**

0.094

0.201

9

Table IA.10. The Effect of a Startup’s Second Patent Application Split By the First Application’s Outcome.
This table restricts the sample used in Table 6, Panels A and B, to startups whose first patent application was either approved (Panel A) or rejected (Panel B). All
columns report 2SLS results using the approval rate of the examiner reviewing the second patent application as an instrument for the likelihood that the application
is approved. The weak-instrument test uses the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All
specifications include art-unit-by-year and headquarter-state fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in
italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
First application is approved
First application is rejected
Employment or sales growth after USPTO first-action on the firm’s second patent application,
measured over the following …
1 year
3 years
5 years
1 year
3 years
5 years
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Employment growth
Second patent application approved

0.083

-0.043

-0.333

0.109

-0.042

-0.382

0.080

0.234

0.421

0.140

0.387

0.653

Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

224.0***
6.7%
6,264

222.5***
19.6%
5,313

103.2***
23.4%
3,252

95.4***
5.0%
1,711

75.6***
9.4%
1,305

Panel B. Sales growth
Second patent application approved

0.124

-0.038

-0.201

0.005

0.403

1.259

0.124

0.410

0.849

0.262

0.762

1.251

227.8***
13.4%
6,251

226.1***
45.4%
5,309

93.7***
12.3%
1,704

75.0***
28.6%
1,303

Diagnostics
Weak-instrument test
Unconditional mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (firms)

103.4***
64.7%
3,252

24.7***
10.3%
557

24.8***
39.0%
557

10

Table IA.11. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to VC Funding and the IPO Market? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (4) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise funding
from a VC or in the IPO market. The analysis here is analogous to Table 7, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup
raise VC funding …

in the next 1
year?
(1)

in the next 2
years?
(2)

0.023***

in the next 4
years?
(4)
0.024***

in the next 5
years?
(5)

First patent application approved

0.012***
0.002

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.001

Log (1 + no. prior VC rounds)

0.012***

0.020***

0.023***

0.024***

0.025***

0.044***

0.002

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.004

3.9%

5.7%

6.4%

6.8%

7.0%

0.78%

5.2
35.3%
34,167

8.1
44.0%
34,111

9.2
46.3%
34,060

10.0
46.2%
34,013

10.3
46.0%
33,981

Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. months from first-action to
VC round or IPO for successful applicants
R2
No. of observations (firms)

0.020***

in the next 3
years?
(3)

0.025***

Does the
startup raise
capital in the
IPO market?
(6)
0.004***

65.7
15.4%
34,215

11

Table IA.12. Does a Startup’s First Patent Application Affect Access to Debt? OLS Results.
The table reports the results of estimating equation (4) to examine how the approval of a startup’s first patent application affects the startup’s ability to raise debt.
The analysis here is analogous to Table 8, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered
at the art unit level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (twosided), respectively.
Following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the
startup pledge the application as collateral …
at any
in the next in the next in the next in the next in the next
point in
1 year?
2 years?
3 years?
4 years?
5 years?
the future?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: All firms
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. of months from first-action to application
pledge
R2
No. of observations (firms)
Panel B. Firms without VC funding
First patent application approved
Diagnostics
Mean of dep. variable
Median no. of months from first-action to application
pledge
R2
No. of observations (firms)

0.004***

0.011***

0.022***

0.033***

0.044***

0.068***

0.001

0.002

0.002

0.003

0.003

0.003

1.1%

2.3%

3.3%

4.3%

5.2%

7.2%

6.0
10.4%
33,520

11.8
10.6%
33,520

17.8
10.6%
33,520

23.0
10.5%
33,520

27.5
10.6%
33,520

38.9
11.5%
33,520

0.003**

0.009***

0.017***

0.025***

0.034***

0.054***

0.001

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.003

0.8%

1.7%

2.5%

3.2%

3.9%

5.5%

5.9
10.5%
31,161

12.2
10.4%
31,161

18.6
10.0%
31,161

23.0
9.8%
31,161

27.5
9.7%
31,161

39.6
10.3%
31,161

12

Table IA.13. How Do Patents Affect Access to VC Funding? OLS Subsample Analyses.
The table examines how the effect of patent grants on facilitating access to VC funding varies across different subsamples. The analysis here is analogous to Table
9, with the only difference being that we use OLS instead of 2SLS. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the art unit level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
In the three years following the first-action decision on its first patent application, does the startup raise …
its first VC
its second
a higher VC
round?
VC round?
round?
any VC funding?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
First patent application approved

0.008***

0.199***

0.188***

0.167***

0.016***

0.044***

0.002

0.067

0.033

0.054

0.003

0.006

… × inexperienced founder

-0.034
0.081

0.013***

… × high startup agglomeration
state
… × biochemistry

0.004

-0.031***
0.008

-0.030***

… × other industries

0.006

Second application approved
Inexperienced founder

0.033***

0.051***

0.006

0.013

54.4%
11.3%
12,455

57.6%
10.2%
2,782

-0.045
0.063

High startup agglomeration state

-0.007
0.006

Diagnostics
R2
Mean of dep. variable
No. of observations (startups)

13.0%
1.7%
31,057

59.1%
46.8%
406

61.5%
41.3%
1,306

50.4%
61.3%
1,086

46.3%
6.4%
34,060

46.4%
6.4%
34,060

13

