                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LIVING UP TO EXPECTATIONS:
       HOW JOB TRAINING MADE WOMEN BETTER OFF AND MEN WORSE OFF

                                          Paloma Acevedo
                                         Guillermo Cruces
                                            Paul Gertler
                                         Sebastian Martinez

                                        Working Paper 23264
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23264


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2017




The authors are grateful to Julián Amendolaggine, Gustavo Bobonis, Brigida García, Evelyn
Vezza, Sigrid Vivo for useful comments and for inputs for the preparation of this document. They
also acknowledge the work of the professionals from the Dominican Republic and the World
Bank who designed and carried out the intervention; specifically, José Luis Polanco, Douglas
Hasbún, Brígida García, Isabel Tavernas from the Ministerio de Trabajo; and Juan Martín
Moreno, and Cornelia Tesliuc from the World Bank. Funding for this evaluation was provided by
the BNPP, GAP and SIEF Trust Funds at the World Bank. G. Cruces further acknowledges
financial support from the IDRC, Canada. The funders had no role in the analysis or
interpretation of the results and the authors have no financial or material interests in the results of
the study. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paloma Acevedo, Guillermo Cruces, Paul Gertler, and Sebastian Martinez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Living Up to Expectations: How Job Training Made Women Better Off and Men Worse Off
Paloma Acevedo, Guillermo Cruces, Paul Gertler, and Sebastian Martinez
NBER Working Paper No. 23264
March 2017
JEL No. J08,J24,J31,J68

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the interaction between job and soft skills training on expectations and labor market
outcomes in the context of a youth training program in the Dominican Republic. Program
applicants were randomly assigned to one of 3 modalities: a full treatment consisting of hard and
soft skills training plus an internship, a partial treatment consisting of soft skills training plus an
internship, or a control group. We find strong and lasting effects of the program on personal skills
acquisition and expectations, but these results are markedly different for young men and young
women. Shortly after completing the program, both male and female participants report increased
expectations for improved employment and livelihoods. This result is reversed for male
participants in the long run, a result that can be attributed to the program’s negative short-run
effects on labor market outcomes for males. While these effects seem to dissipate in the long run,
employed men are substantially more likely to be searching for another job. On the other hand,
women experience improved labor market outcomes in the short run and exhibit substantially
higher levels of personal skills in the long run. These results translate into women being more
optimistic, having higher self-esteem and lower fertility in the long run. Our results suggest that
job-training programs of this type can be transformative – for women, life skills mattered and
made a difference, but they can also have a downside if, like in this case for men, training creates
expectations that are not met.

Paloma Acevedo                                            Paul Gertler
InterAmerican Development Bank                            Haas School of Business
Washington DC                                             University of California, Berkeley
palomaa@iadb.org                                          Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                          and NBER
Guillermo Cruces                                          gertler@haas.berkeley.edu
CEDLAS
Univesidad Nacional de La Plata                           Sebastian Martinez
Calle 6 entre 47 y 48, 5to. piso, oficina 516             Inter American Development Bank
(1900) La Plata                                           smartinez@iadb.org
Argentina
gcruces@cedlas.org
1.      INTRODUCTION

Vocational training programs have long been one of the mainstays of active labor market policies.
The basic premise of these programs is that by providing skills rewarded in the labor market, the
unemployed will find better paying jobs faster. In a simple labor supply model, the new skills raise
wage offers to program participants so that there are now jobs available above their reservation
wages. The evidence on the effectiveness of these programs, however, is decidedly mixed
(Blattman and Ralston, 2015; Brown and Koettl, 2015).1

        Among the possible hypothesized reasons for the mixed results of these programs is that
the labor market may not value the specific skills being taught. In particular, the curricula may
lack important “soft” personal and social (“non-cognitive”) skills training (Heckman et al. 2006;
Cunningham and Villaseñor 2014). Another concern with these programs is that they might
generate expectations that are ultimately not rewarded by the labor market, and participation in the
program might thereby end up discouraging workers. Increased expectations might raise the
reservation wage, but if the training does not transfer skills that are sufficiently well rewarded in
the labor market, the subsequent wage offers would not match these enhanced expectations. In this
case, the worker would not be able to find jobs that matched her expectations, and over time, could
become discouraged.

        In this paper we use an at-scale randomized field experiment to examine the impact of
imbedding a soft skills component into an at-scale vocational training for youth in the Dominican
Republic on skill development, future expectations, labor market outcomes, and well-being. The
program, “Programa Juventud y Empleo” (PJyE), was designed to improve the employment
opportunities of at-risk youth,2 given the relatively high level of unemployment among youth.3
PJyE’s main objective is to improve the employment opportunities of at-risk youth by building
their vocational and soft skills. The program provides in-classroom training and an internship in a
private business. It also financed participants’ transportation, medical and accident insurance, and


1
 For extensive reviews of job training programs see Betcherman, et al. 2004 and 2007, Card et al. 2010 and 2015,
Greenberg et al. 2003, Heckman et al. 1999, J-PAL 2013, and Kluve 2010.
2
  PJyE, like many vocational training programs in low and middle-income countries, is targeted to low-income youth
who have not completed secondary education (Vezza, 2014).
3
  The unemployment rate youth age 15 to 24 was 9.2% compared to 3.6% those aged between 25 and 65 in 2000
(CEDLAS and World Bank, 2016).


                                                        1
provided them with a small stipend. Between 2002 and 2013, the program conducted 3,627 courses
training over 72,500 youth, of which 57% were women.

          We consider two interventions randomly assigned to program participants: (1) vocational
training combined with soft skills training and an internship and (2) soft skills only training with
an internship. We study both the short (12-month) and long run (36-month) effects, testing the
effectiveness of the two alternative curricula. For women, we find that both curricula have strong
positive effects on soft skills and on expectations of future labor market and life success. For men,
however, there appears to be no effect of either curriculum on skills, but a positive effect on
expectations from the curricula with vocational training. Hence, for men, we have the conditions
that might lead to a discouraged worker effect where expectations exceed the returns to acquired
skills.

          In fact, there were striking gender differences in the effects on short-run labor market
outcomes. For women, both curricula were associated with higher employment rates in higher
paying jobs with higher job satisfaction 12 months after program completion. Remarkably, there
were no differences in effects between the vocational and soft-skills only curricula suggesting
limited marginal value of the vocational training on top of soft-skills training plus internship.
However, while for men there was no effect from the soft-skills only curricula on labor market
outcomes, and there was a negative effect of the vocational curricula on short-run employment.
This latter effect is consistent with the program having had no effect on skills but creating
expectations of higher wage offers that did not materialize, which may have led to higher
unemployment. The higher expectations induced by the program may have raised the reservation
wage, perhaps resulting in men turning down more job offers.

          In the long run neither curricula had an impact on the labor market outcomes of either
women or men. However, the results and their interpretation differ by gender. The training gave
women skills that allowed them to find higher paying jobs faster than those in the control group.
Over time, the women in the control group were able to catch up. On the other hand, men in the
treatment group lowered their expectations over time and eventually accepted whatever jobs they
could get.

          The different labor market experiences of men and women led to different effects on long-
term welfare. After 3 years, women in the treatment group still had significantly higher positive


                                                  2
expectations about future labor market and life success than did the control group. They also
reported higher job satisfaction and self-esteem and that they now needed higher salaries to meet
their basic needs. On the other hand, men in the treatment group reported higher rates of active job
search (even if employed), lower self-esteem, and lower salaries necessary to meet their basic
needs. In other words, while the program positively improved women’s lives, men were ultimately
disappointed and discouraged, leading to deterioration in the quality of their lives.

           This paper makes a number of contributions to the literature. First, to our knowledge, this
is the first study to shed light on understanding why vocational training programs may have limited
and even negative impact on labor market outcomes by focusing on how programs affect both
expectations and skills.

           Second, it helps to disentangle the marginal impact of the vocational component from the
soft-skills component and the internship. Despite the popularity of training programs that combine
different skills trainings (usually vocational, soft-skills, and apprenticeships), the evidence on the
effectiveness of each of the components is very scarce. There are several experimental evaluations
of training programs in low- and middle-income countries with a combination of different skills
tracks and apprenticeships.4 However, none of these studies separate out the marginal effects of
the different components. An exception is Groh et al. (2016), who show that a soft-skills training
for females in Jordan increased the optimism and the expectations of the females about the future;
however, the authors found no impact on labor outcomes. To date, this is the first study that
identifies the marginal impact of the vocational component. Since the vocational component
generally accounts for the bulk of the resources of these programs, this has practical implications
in term of cost-effectiveness.

           Third, it provides long-term experimental evidence of the impact of training programs in
developing countries. While long-term effects of training programs have been studied in developed
countries5, the long-term experimental evidence in developing countries is still scarce. Attanasio
et. al (2015) use experimental data of a training program in 2005 in Colombia and find that even
up to ten years later, the program had a positive and significant effect on the probability of working


4
 See for example Adoho et al. (2014), Alzua et al. (2016), Attanasio (2011), Bandiera et. al (2012), Card et al. (2011),
Ibarraran (2015), and Diaz and Rosas (2016).
5
    For example see Couch (1992), Cave et al. (1993), Schochet et al. (2008), and Flores- Lagunes et al. (2010)


                                                            3
in the formal sector, and earnings were 11.8% higher. Hirshleifer et al. (2014) used administrative
data to study the impacts of a vocational training in Turkey six years after the intervention; Alzua
et al. (2016) studied the effects of the program Entra 21 in Argentina 36 months after the
completion of the project; and Ibarraran et al. (2014) follows a different cohort of the PJyE for six
years.

         Finally, our results on gender differences are consistent with findings described by
Attanasio et al. (2011), who evaluated Colombia’s Jovenes en Accion program, which has a similar
curriculum as PJyE. Conducted 20 months after the beginning of the intervention, the authors
found positive labor market effects for females but not for males.6

    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the interventions considered in this
study. Section 3 describes the experimental evaluation design including random assignment, data
collection, descriptive statistics, and estimation strategy. Section 4 presents the results and the final
section concludes.


2. INTERVENTION

We consider two interventions: (1) vocational training combined with soft skills training and an
internship and (2) soft skills only training with an internship. This allows us to identify the
marginal impact of the vocational training, the most expensive part of the intervention. We study
both the short (12-month) and long run (36-month) effects, testing the effectiveness of the two
alternative curricula.

    2.1. Training Curriculum and Internships

         PJyE built job skills through classroom training and internships, offered by private
institutes known as Operation Centers for the System (COS) that are authorized by the National
Institute for Professional Training (INFOTEP). INFOTEP also determines and standardizes the
curriculum content of courses offered in the PJyE. The Program Coordination Unit (UCP) of the
Ministry of Labor monitors the COS in order to ensure that the courses and internships meet
minimum standards.



6
 There are two other studies that look at female-only programs. Both studies found positive effects on employment
outcomes (Maitra and Mani 2014; and Adoho et al. 2014).


                                                       4
       The classroom component of the program consisted of vocational training (hard skills)
and/or personal skills development (soft skills). The vocational training module included 150 hours
of training in occupations, such as sales, beauty salon assistant, tourism and hospitality, carpentry,
electricity and others. The personal skills component consisted of 75 hours focused on promoting
self-esteem and self-realization, communication skills, conflict resolution, life planning, time
management, teamwork, decision-making, hygiene and health, and coaching on risky behaviors.
Once the in-classroom training phase was completed, all participants were also assigned to 240-
hour internships at private companies, for which participants received a daily stipend of
approximately US$2 and basic insurance. During this period, participants received oversight and
job counseling.

       PJyE follows what Card et al. (2011) call the “Chilean model” of job training programs in
Latin America, where private institutions rather than employers provide classroom training and
arrange for internships. The vocational training curricula were developed jointly with the private
sector to cover the technical skills that participants would need for the subsequent internship phase.
In 2009, the program offered 520 courses for 49 occupations. Over 91% of courses in 2009 targeted
the commerce and service sectors, with only 3% in agriculture and 6% in others. Sixty percent of
the courses were concentrated in six occupations: sales (23%), waiter-waitress (10%), beauty salon
assistant (9%), pharmaceutical assistant (7%), sales assistant (7%) and secretarial assistant (6%).
Other occupations available included graphic and web designer, network technician, network
administrator, PC repairer, agro-industry manufacturing assistant, tractor operator and private
security guard, among others. Table 1 provides a breakdown of the main occupations of the courses
and the percentage of participants in the sample of the study that applied for each of them.

       The personal skills development component consisted of 75 classroom hours and
assignments to be completed by students after class. The curricula aimed to develop participant’s
“soft skills” contributing to their development as human beings and to provide participants with
the tools to face and manage social risks. Major crosscutting themes in the curricula include values,
attitudes and basic personal skills (self-fulfillment, basic cognitive abilities, and social skills) for
a successful family, and social and work life. Table 2 describes the personal skills development
course content.




                                                   5
     2.2. Eligibility and Recruitment

The COSs promote the program, maintain applicant registries, and evaluate applicant eligibility.
The UCP conducts a second review of the applicant registry and examines each candidate’s
application for eligibility. Eligible program applicants were individuals between the ages of 16
and 29, found to be at-risk, and Dominican Republic citizens in possession of a personal
identification card. At-risk was defined as unemployed or underemployed and not having
completed secondary school. Moreover, eligible applicants must belong to households with a per
capita income not exceeding US$120 per month and located in regions known as Priority I and II
according the SIUBEN index.7 A special effort is made to reach out to enroll women. These criteria
were meant to target PJyE to the poorest sectors of the population.

        Each COS conducted a preliminary screening of candidates who expressed interest in
enrolling to ensure that they met the program’s eligibility criteria. Eligibility screening included a
crosscheck of the applicant’s identity card with the official national identity database, as well as
other sources of auxiliary information. The UCP also intervened on occasion to help confirm an
applicant’s eligibility and supervised promotion of the program and pre-selection of youth by
crosschecking each of the courses’ participants with other available data, prior to enrollment. Of
the more than 20,000 youth that applied for the program in 2009, 16,373 fulfilled the eligibility
requirements and were selected by their respective COS to be part of the selection process.


3.   EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

One of the most innovative aspects of PJyE was the inclusion from the onset of an ongoing
experimental enrollment process. Individuals applied to PJyE by filling out an application form,
which was used to check applicants’ socioeconomic and work background in order to confirm
eligibility. Following this initial screening, applicants were randomly assigned to either enroll in
the program (treatment) or not (control).8


7
  SIUBEN (Unified System of Beneficiaries by its Spanish acronym) is a database of poor households in the
Dominican Republic that determines eligibility for social programs.
8
  This design was exploited in two experimental evaluations of previous editions of the PJyE for both the 2004 and
the 2008 cohorts. The 2004 program included vocational training in the classroom and an internship. The program
had no effects on employment but did have statistically significant but modest effects on salaries and benefits 10 to


                                                         6
    3.1. Random Assignment

        Enrollment for this study was conducted in two waves, a first cohort enrolling between
January 2009 and February 2009, and a second cohort between July 2009 and August 2009. As in
previous editions of the program, the number of applicants exceeded the slots available in the
program. In this context, eligible applicants were randomly assigned to the program through a
lottery process, seen as an inherently fair way to allocate limited places. The primary innovation
in 2009 relative to previous years was the expansion of the personal skills component, whereby
the program opened a number of soft-skills only courses. Participation in these courses was also
randomly assigned within the pool of eligible applicants, allowing for the identification of
differential impacts through the complete course package relative to the soft-skills only component
and a control. Both treatment groups also included internships with private employers.

        The random assignment process was accomplished by means of a lottery under the
coordination of the UCP. Each COS recruited 35 applicants per course and sent the list of names
and ID numbers to the UCP. Next, applicants were randomly assigned to one of four groups using
a computerized process, stratifying by gender to maintain a proportional number of males and
females in each group relative to the original applicant pool.9 From each course-cohort of 35
applicants, 20 individuals were randomly assigned to the hard and soft skills course; 5 individuals,
to the soft-skills only course; 5 individuals, to a waiting list (granted admission if a vacancy
became subsequently became available); and 5 individuals, to the control group (not granted
admission to the program).10 The soft skills only courses grouped 5 applicants from 4 separate
course-cohorts, making up a total of 20 individuals per soft-skills only course. Figure 1 illustrates
the random assignment process.

         Of the more than 20,000 youth who applied for the program in 2009, 16,373 fulfilled the


14 months later (Card et al., 2011). In 2008, the program added a “soft” life skills training component. Results showed
that 2008 PJyE also had no effect on employment, but significant positive effects on non-cognitive skills, salaries and
benefits (Ibarrarán et al., 2014). A six-year follow-up of the same cohort found no eﬀ ects on employment or job
quality, although there are significant long run effects on formal work (Ibarrarán et al., 2015).
9
  In other words, if a third of the applicants were male, then a third of the spots would be randomly assigned to male
applicants, and two thirds would be randomly assigned to female applicants.
10
   During the initial days of each course, the program replaced students who were absent or who dropped out with
individuals randomly selected from the waitlist. The Information System of the PJyE (SIPJyE) only maintained
registrations of selected applicants in treatment or control once replacements were made. Thus, the lottery used is not
strictly the original lottery, but rather the selection in place 10 days following the start of the course.


                                                          7
eligibility requirements and were selected by their respective COS to be part of the selection
process. Of this group, by means of random assignment, 10,397 individuals were offered
admission to a hard and soft skills course and 1,604 were offered admission to a soft-skills only
course, with the remainder either waitlisted or assigned to the control group.

       3.2. Data Collection

           Data were collected in three survey rounds (Table 3). Upon applying to PJyE, applicants
completed an enrollment form that doubled as a baseline survey. The survey included questions
covering socioeconomic and demographic characteristics, as well as employment and educational
histories.

           Follow-up surveys were conducted on a random sample of individuals from treatment and
control groups. The evaluation sample included a total of 4,700 youth, of whom 1,638 applicants
had been offered admission to a hard and soft skills course, 1,613 to a soft-skills only course and
1,449 applicants were from the control group (see Figure 1).11

           Three short telephone surveys were conducted within the first year of completing the
program (see Figure 2). Surveys were conducted using Computer-Assisted Telephone
Interviewing (CATI), which was supplemented by in-person interviews for a sub-sample of youth
who could not be reached by telephone.12 The purpose of these telephone surveys was to keep
updated re-contact information for the evaluation sample and measure short-term results. The
survey included a limited set of questions on job search and employment, number of hours worked,
wages and job satisfaction, and future expectations. The response rate was over 90% when both
telephone and personal interviews were used.

           A final round of data was collected from the evaluation sample approximately 3.5-4 years
after program completion. The survey covered both labor and non-labor long-term outcomes
including employment histories, risk behaviors, attitudes and expectations, participation in social
networks, and life skills. While the survey’s response rate was lower in the telephone surveys, it
still exceeded 80%. Contrasting the final measurements with the baseline data illustrates that data
loss in this study stayed at acceptable levels, and as detailed below, the attrition patterns were

11
 Sample sizes were calculated to achieve minimal detectable effect sizes on the main outcomes of interest (labor
market outcomes and cognitive and non-cognitive abilities), maintaining 95% confidence and a power of 80%.
12
     The size of this sub-sample was approximately 10% of the total sample.


                                                           8
similar for the treatment and control groups.

     3.3. Descriptive Statistics, Baseline Balance and Attrition

Baseline data presented in Table 4 suggests that the program’s selection process was successful in
reaching its target population of young Dominicans with low education levels, from poor
households and who were unemployed or underemployed. On average, applicants were 21 years
old; 62% were female; and 79% of applicants were single. Almost all applicants had not completed
secondary school, which reflected the program’s focus on youth who have either dropped out or
put off completion of their secondary education.

         Confirming program eligibility rules, unemployment amongst applicants was substantially
higher than for the same age group in the general population. About 60% of applicants reported
being unemployed during the week before their application; whereas, the national labor force
survey (Encuesta Nacional de Fuerza de Trabajo (ENFT)) reported 24% unemployment for the
same age group during the first semester of 2009. On the other hand, amongst those employed, the
level of underemployment is similar between program applicants and the general population of the
same age range with 72% of employed applicants reporting temporary or occasional employment.
Finally, only 19% of applicants were students—a number that complies with the participation
quota for students.

         Table 5 reports baseline characteristics for treatment and comparison groups. As expected,
a majority of characteristics are balanced, and there are no economically meaningful differences.
Amongst males, a few notable exceptions include age, residence in Santo Domingo and poverty
score, which we attribute to chance. Despite these differences amongst males, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis of the F-statistic of joint significance for these variables at a 95% level of
confidence.13 Moreover, an analysis of the attrition patterns for the telephone and household
surveys is shown in Appendix 1. It indicates that there was no correlation between treatment status
and participation in the follow-up surveys14.


13
  P-values for the F-statistic test of joint significance comparing control group vs. soft-skills only are 0.46 for females
and 0.02 for males; control group vs. hard and soft skills are 0.14 for females and 0.02 for males; and soft-skills only
vs. hard and soft skills are 0.17 for females and 0.61 for males.
14
  . As an additional robustness check, we replicated the main results of the paper by controlling for the unbalanced
characteristics found at baseline and in the attrition analysis. We find no significant differences. The results are
available upon request.


                                                            9
       3.4. Estimation

We estimate intention-to-treat (ITT) effects by comparing the outcomes of individuals randomly
assigned to the treatment and the control groups irrespective of compliance with the treatment
status. We argue that the ITT effects capture the policy relevant parameter, since policy makers in
most cases can only offer job training, and participation is voluntary.

           For the analysis, we work with the sample of individuals who responded to both the third
round of the telephone survey and to the final household survey. We also excluded individuals
from training centers that did not offer both the combined training and soft-skills only training
(Vezza et al., 2014). The final analytic sample consists of 1,051 males and 1,728 females from 70
COSs.

           We present simple OLS regressions of outcomes against binary variables representing each
of the two treatment groups separately for men and women. We include a minimum set of
controls15 with the purpose of improving estimate precision (Duflo et al. 2008). In terms of
inference, we cluster standard errors by COS and treatment group.


4. RESULTS

We report the effect of PyJE on skills, expectations, labor market outcomes and well-being
measures both 12 months and three years after the intervention ended. The results are presented
separately for females and males. For each outcome we present three sets of results: (1) effects for
the combined vocational plus soft skills training, (2) soft-skills only training, and (3) a pooled
coefficient that combines both treatment arms. We also include p-values for two-sided tests of
statistical significance adjusted to account for multiple hypotheses within each outcome category
based on Romano and Wolf (2005).

           4.1.     Skills Acquisition

           The program sought to improve participant’s labor market prospects by building
technical/vocational skills and improving so called “soft” non-cognitive personal-social skills.



15
     The variables included are COS and the sector of the course with fixed effects for cohort.


                                                            10
Because vocational skills varied from course to course, we were unable to construct a single
standardized measure for vocational skills.                We are, however, able to measure soft skills
acquisition using a battery of skills tests adapted for the Dominican Republic from the Grit indices
(Duckworth et al., 2007), which measure the tendency to sustain interest and effort in obtaining
long-term goals, and Social and Personal Competencies (CPS, its Spanish acronym) scales that
measure personal and social skills, including leadership, conflict resolution, social skills, order,
and empathy.16 The soft-skills scales were based on a combination of validated survey modules
from existing literature that were piloted and adapted by professional psychologists to suit the local
context.17 The definitions for the measures are presented in Figure 3. All indicators were rescaled
in terms of standard deviations of the control group, and as such the means of the control group
are all zeros.

         The results are presented in Table 6a for females and 6b for males. Each column represents
a different dependent variable. Even measured three years after program completion, women in
both treatment groups exhibited substantially higher levels of soft skills than those in the control
group. The impacts are positive for all measures and statistically significant for the seven
indicators in the combined vocational and soft-skills group, and the effects are positive in the soft-
skills only group. Moreover, we cannot reject that the effects for combined vocational plus soft
skills training improved skills, since the indicators are not statistically different than the soft-skills
only training. In pooled estimates, the estimated effects are all significantly different from zero. In
the last column, we combine all of the skills into a single summary index by averaging the
individual indices. The effect of treatment on the summary soft skills index is statistically
significant across the board with a treatment effect of approximately 0.1 standard deviations.

         On the other hand, we find no detectable effects on either treatment on any of the soft skills
measure for men (Table 6b). Estimated coefficients on all of the measures are close to zero with
many of the signs being negative and not statistically significant for either treatment arm. This



16
  Because of the duration of the tests, the measures were collected only in the long-term follow up.
17
  The CPS scales were adapted modules from the Positive Youth Development Student Questionnaire-Institute for
Applied Research in Youth Development (Lerner et al., 2005), the Self-Description Questionnaire-II (Marsh, 1990),
the Life Effectiveness Questionnaire (Neill et. al., 1997), the Review of Personal Effectiveness (Richards et. al, 2002),
the Adolescent Coping Scale (Frydenbergand Lewis, 1993), and the Sense of Community Scale (McMillan and Chavis,
1986). See Brea (2011) for details of the adaptation of these survey tools to the context of the Dominican Republic
and of the PJyE program.


                                                           11
indicates that the program had no lasting effects on soft-skills acquisition for participating men.

        4.2.     Short-Run Expectations

        Next, we examine the effects of PJyE on expectations for future employment and
livelihoods measured 12 months after the training completed. One of the objectives of the soft
skills components was to increase optimism about the future. We find that participating in the
training had positive and significant effects on expectations of improved future employment
conditions and of improved future living conditions for both treatment groups for women
(Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7). Again, we cannot reject that the estimated effects are different for
the combined and soft-skills only groups. The pooled samples show increases of 3.5 percentage
points for the expectations of improving employment opportunities and 3.0 percentage points in
the expectations of improving living conditions. Similarly, we find that for men, the training
increased the expectations of improved employment conditions by 3.6 percentage points in the
pooled sample (Column 3). However, in contrast to women, there was no effect on expectations
of improved living conditions for men (Column 4).

        4.3.     Short Run Labor Market Outcomes

        The program’s impact on labor market outcomes 12 months after the training completed is
markedly different for women and men. The impact on the probability of employment for women
is 7.0 percentage points in the combined vocational and soft skills treatment arm and 5.2
percentage points in the soft-skills only group, which represents relative increases of 32% and
23.6% respectively (column 1 of Table 8A). There is no statistical difference in the estimated
impacts between the two arms on employment. In the pooled sample, we find an increase in
employment of 5.9 percentage points that translates into an increase of 26.8%.

        We also find that both intervention arms are associated with women not only finding more
employment, but also higher quality employment in terms of salary and job satisfaction. We find
a large and positive effect on women’s salaries of about 17%, with very similar effects for the two
treatment arms (column 3 of Table 8A).18 We also find a large and positive effect on the share of
women who are satisfied with their jobs, again with very similar effect size for the two treatment


18
  Although the adjusted Romano-Wolf p-value for the combined training is not significant at standard levels, we
cannot reject that the combined and the soft skills coefficient are equal and the p-value for the Romano-Wolf of the
pooled sample is also significant.


                                                        12
arms (column 4 of Table 8A).19 On average, women in the combined treatment group are 16.3
percentage points more likely to be satisfied with their job, which is a 39% increase in job
satisfaction.

        In contrast, the impact of the program on men’s employment is substantially different and
contingent on the type of treatment: the combined vocational and soft skills treatment led to a
negative and strongly significant effect on short-run employment of -0.11 percentage points, a
relative reduction of about -20% with respect to the control group. On the other hand, men in the
soft-skills only group experienced no detectable changes in employment relative to the control
group. We can reject the equality of coefficients at the 5% level between the combined and soft
skills only arms, which indicates that the negative effect on employment for men was caused by
the hard skills/vocational component of the program’s curricula as men who participated in the
soft-skills only training had no significant changes in the likelihood of holding a job. There are
also no significant effects of either treatment on salaries or job satisfaction.

        Taken together, these results indicate that, in the short run, the intervention successfully
increased employment in higher quality jobs for women but not for men, and the hard skills
training resulted in a nontrivial and negative short-run employment effect for men and no
improvements in earnings. Given that the estimated coefficients for both groups are statistically
indistinguishable for skills, employment, salary and job satisfaction, it is likely that the vocational
training component of the program did not contribute to the improved labor market outcomes for
women. Rather, short-run employment effects appear to be generated through increased soft skills
combined with labor market experience through internships. This suggests that the soft-skills
training and internship, and not vocational training, led women to achieve higher employment in
jobs with higher salaries that are more satisfying.

        The labor market outcome effects are consistent with the results on skills and expectations.
Women acquired more skills and appear to have been rewarded for these skills in the labor market.
Men on the other hand did not acquire skills, but did raise their expectations in the combined
vocational and soft skills treatment. Since men did not acquire skills, their wage offers may not



19
  Although the adjusted Romano-Wolf p-value for the combined training is not significant at standard levels, we
cannot reject that the combined and the soft skills coefficient are equal and the p-value for the Romano-Wolf of the
pooled sample is also significant.


                                                        13
have risen. However, men may have turned down job offers that they otherwise might have
accepted but now did not meet their higher expectations, and hence leading to lower employment
rates.



         4.4.   Longer Run Labor Market Outcomes

         Table 9 presents the effects of PJyE on the main employment outcomes three years after
the program ended. In contrast with the results for the short term, there are no lasting effects of the
program on the probability of working on the quality of employment for women or men after three
years. All of the estimated coefficients for all groups are statistically insignificant and close to
zero.

         Taken together with the short-term employment findings above, these results indicate that
the training contributed to large gains in employment, increased salaries and higher job satisfaction
for women in the short term, but these effects dissipated in the longer term. For men, the vocational
training component reduced the likelihood of working in the short run, but that effect again
dissipated in the longer run. Men in the soft-skills only training course seem to have been largely
unaffected by the program either in the short or longer term.

         4.5.   Longer-Term Well-being

         Finally, we explore effects of PJyE on the well-being of program beneficiaries in the three
years after the training, measured in terms of job satisfaction (Table 9), future expectations, and
self-esteem. Women in the treatment group seem to be just as satisfied with their current
employment as those in the control group in that they are not more likely to be searching for
another job. However, men in the treatment groups are more unsatisfied with their current
employment in the treatment groups and are more likely to be searching for better opportunities.
Moreover, the treatment effect for men on job search while employed is very large in magnitude.
Men in the pooled treatment group are 11 percentage points more likely to be searching, which
translates into a 54% higher rate of search than the control group.

         Women in the treatment groups also report significantly higher optimism about the future
than those in the control group even after three years out the program, while men in the treatment
group report significantly diminished future expectations (Table 10). Specifically, women in the


                                                  14
treatment groups are significantly more likely to expect higher future salaries and that their
children will lead good lives. Women in treatment groups also report higher relative wealth
positions compared to those in the control group. In contrast, compared to the control group, men
in the combined vocational and soft skills treatment group report significantly lower expectations
for salaries in the future and that their children will be worse off.

       Finally, we report results for the effect of the training on self-esteem (Table 10). After
three years it appears that women in the treatment groups had significantly higher self-esteem than
those in the control group. In contrast, men in the treatment groups seem to have lower self-esteem
than those in the control group, although the effects are not statistically significant.

       These long-run effects are consistent with the fact that, despite both females and males
having finished the training with high future expectations (12 months), only females acquired skills
and achieved results in the labor market after completion of the course. In the long run, the effects
in the labor market disappeared for females, but they still maintain the gains in soft skills acquired
in the training, keeping their self-esteem high and maintaining higher expectations for a better
future. Males, on the contrary, had increased labor market expectations, but failed to gain soft
skills and experienced reduced short-run employment in the combined training arm. While the
program had no sustained long-run employment effects other than increased job search amongst
males, men show signs of discouragement in terms of reduced optimism about future employment
and wealth for themselves and future generations.


5. Discussion

Job training programs for poor and at-risk youth in developing countries are widespread, despite
relatively weak empirical evidence as to their effectiveness and cost-effectiveness (Blattman and
Ralston, 2015). While the specific curricular and quality of the intervention content varies from
program to program, these interventions have generally consisted of a mix of hard (i.e. vocational)
skills and soft (i.e., inter-personal) skills that are meant to improve beneficiaries’ job prospects,
reduce poverty, and improve their well-being. One salient aspect of these programs that has
received less attention is their potential to alter beneficiaries’ employment and livelihood
expectations. If in fact these programs generate high expectations that are not met in reality, they
could result in discouraged workers with worse long-term outcomes.



                                                  15
       We explore the short- and long-term effects of a vocational and soft-skills training program
in the Dominican Republic using a unique experiment that randomly assigned potential
participants to receive a combined package of vocational training, soft skills and internship; a soft
skills and internship only arm, or a control group. This design allows us to sort out the marginal
contribution of the vocational training component, which makes up the bulk of time and costs
related to most job-training programs.

       Our findings add a number of insights to the existing body of evidence. We find that the
program increased short-run expectations for both men and women, but that the effects on labor
market outcomes are different for these two groups. Young women benefited from the program in
the short run; whereas, men did not experience any improvements in employment. The interaction
of these common expectations and different labor market results produce very different long-run
outlooks on life. For women, the increased short-term expectations are met with positive effects
in terms of both soft skills acquisition and short-term employment. While women in the control
group catch up to the treatment in terms of employment and salary over time, women in the
treatment groups retain a more positive outlook for the future and have higher self-esteem in the
long run. For men, on the other hand, the increased short-run employment expectations are not
born out in the labor market. In fact, men in the vocational training arm experience a reduced
likelihood of employment in the short run, and men have sustained negative impacts on their long-
run expectations and wellbeing.

       Our interpretation is that women benefited substantially from both the soft and hard skills
components of the training, and that the positive effects on expectations were further reinforced
by the short-run positive effects on employment. While these expectations did not pan out in the
labor market outcomes in the long run, the lasting positive effect on skills seems to have been
rewarded as reflected in the higher future expectations and self-esteem.

       Our interpretation indicates a completely different effect of the program for men. While
the program seems to have induced higher employment expectations, these did not materialize
even in the short run. One explanation for this is that these men may not seem to have acquired
skills from the training. These unmet prospects are reflected in the negative effects of the program
on expectations in general in the long run, which were also probably reinforced by the relatively
worse labor market outcomes in terms of non-satisfaction (on-the-job-search) and employment



                                                 16
quality (lower formal employment). These results, taken together, might explain the pattern of
program effects on self-esteem in the long run. While we find virtually no effect on men, there is
a positive and significant effect for women.

       For women, the program implied a reinforcing pattern of skill acquisition and strengthened
expectations despite the dissipation of positive short-run employment effects in the long run. For
men, on the other hand, the failure to acquire skills and the negative employment results in the
short run seems to have reinforced a cycle of negative outcomes and expectations. Men seem to
have waited to find better jobs because of their higher expectations, but they did not acquire skills
– which is reflected in the lack of reward in the labor market, which in turn makes them become
disillusioned.

       While there are effects from both types of training, hard skills training seems to have
induced a higher level of skill acquisition (even for soft skills) and higher expectations for women,
although the lack of personal skills and the negative employment outcomes also implied higher
levels of frustration for men in the long run from this type of training. Women get skills and a
better view of the future; men become discouraged.

       The main message is that programs of this type can be transformative – for women, soft
skills training mattered and made a difference, but they can also have a downside if, like in this
case for men, training creates expectations that are not met. Moreover, governments in both
developed and developing countries will most likely continue carrying out programs of this type,
so it is very important that research efforts also identify their potential downsides and help inform
their design and implementation to mitigate them. Further research could concentrate on the
mechanisms through which these programs seem to be more effective for women than for men,
and attempt to derive conditions under which male youth could also benefit from training in both
their hard and soft skills and their employment outcomes in the longer run. Finally, while we have
provided evidence to disentangle the effects of hard and soft skills training, future experimental
designs could also attempt to isolate the effect of internships on labor market outcomes but also
on skills, expectations and self-esteem, since it is likely that these early work experiences can
shape future career prospects and participants’ well-being in general.




                                                 17
References
Adoho, F., S. Chakravarty, D. T. Korkoyah, M. K. A. Lundberg, and A. Tasneem (2014). “The
      Impact of an Adolescent Girls Employment Program: The EPAG Project in Liberia,”
      World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6832.
Alzua, M. L., Cruces, G. and Lopez, C. (2016). “Long run effects of youth training programs.
       Experimental evidence from Argentina”, Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
Attanasio, O., Kugler, A. and Meghir, C. (2011). Subsidizing Vocational Training for
       Disadvantaged Youth in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Trial. American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 3(3), pages 188-220.
Attanasio, O., Guarín, A., Medina, C. and Meghir, C. (2015). “Long Term Impacts of Vouchers
       for Vocational Training: Experimental Evidence for Colombia,” NBER Working Paper
       No. 21390.
Bandiera, Oriana, Buehren, N., Burgess, R., Goldstein, M., Gulesci, S., Rasul, I., and Sulaiman,
       M. (2012) “Empowering Adolescent Girls: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial in
       Uganda”, Mimeo. LSE.
Blattman C. and L. Ralston (2015) “Generating Employment in Poor and Fragile States: Evidence
       from Labor Market and Entrepreneurship Programs,” SSRN Working Paper
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2622220
Betcherman, Gordon, Karina Olivas, and Amit Dar. 2004. “Impacts of Active Labor Market
       Programs: New Evidence from Evaluations with Particular Attention to Developing and
       transition Countries.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank, Social Protection Discussion Paper
       Series 0402.
Betcherman, Gordon, Martin Godfrey, Olga Susana Puerto, Friederike Rother, and Antoneta
       Stavreska. 2007. “Global Inventory of Interventions to Support Young Workers: Synthesis
       Report.” World Bank. Washington, D.C. Processed.
Brea, Mayra (2011). “Interpretación De Las Escalas CPS, Rosenberg y Grit y Propuestas de
      Revisión Para Mejorar la Confiabilidad,” World Bank Working Paper.
      http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/418161467995809251/Informe-de-la-
      interpretacion-de-las-escalas-CPS-Rosenberg-y-grit-y-propuestas-de-revision-para-
      mejorar-la-confiabilidad
Brown, A. J. G. and Koettl, J. (2015). “Active Labor Market Programs: Employment Gain or Fiscal
              Drain?,” IZA Journal of Labor Economics 4:12.
Card, D., Ibarrarán, P., Regalia, F., Rosas-Shady, D. and Soares, Y. (2011). The Labor Market
       Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic: Evidence from a Randomized
       Evaluation. Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 3(2), pages 267-300.
Card, D., Kluve, J. and Weber, A. (2010). “Active Labor Market Policy Evaluations: A Meta-


                                              18
       Analysis,” Economic Journal, vol. 120(548), pages F452-F477, November.
Card, D., J. Kluve and A. Weber. 2015. “What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active Labor
       Market Program Evaluations”. NBER Working Paper 21431.
Cave, G. (1993). “JOBSTART: Final Report on a Program for School Dropouts.” New York:
      MDRC.
CEDLAS and World Bank (2016), Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and the
     Caribbean, online database.
Couch, K.A. (1992). “ New Evidence on the Long-Term Effects of Employment Training
      Programs,” Journal of Labor Economics 10, no. 4: 380-388.
Cunningham W, Villaseñor P (2014). “Employer voices, employer demands, and the implications
      for public skills development policy,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no.
      6853.
Greenberg, D. H., Michalopoulos, C., and Robins, P. K. (2003). “A meta-analysis of government-
      sponsored training programs.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 57(1), 31-53.
Diaz, J. and Rosas, D. (2016) “Impact evaluation of the Job Youth Training Program Projoven”,
        IDB Working Paper Series IDB-WP-693
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
     passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087-
     1101.
Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., and Kremer, M. (2008), Using Randomization in Development
       Economics Research: A Toolkit. Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4.
Frydenberg, E.,& Lewis, R. (1993). “The adolescent coping scale. Manual.” Melbourne.
      Australian Council for Educational Research. García, L., & Fumero
Groh, M., Krishnan, N., McKenzie, D., and Vishwanath, T. (2016) “Do Wage Subsidies Provide
      a Stepping-Stone to Employment for Recent College Graduates? Evidence from a
      Randomized Experiment in Jordan”. The Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 98, No.
      3, Pages 488-502
Heckman, J.J,. J. Sixrud and S. Urzua 2006 “The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on
     labor market outcomes and social behavior” National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Working paper 12006.
Heckman, J.J., R.J. LaLonde and J.A. Smith. 1999. “The economics and econometrics of active
     labour market programs”. In: Ashenfelter, O. and D. Card, editors. Handbook of Labor
     Economics 3. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Hirshleifer, S., McKenzie, D., Almeida, R. and Ridao-Cano, C. (2014). “The Impact of Vocational
       Training for the Unemployed. Experimental Evidence from Turkey,” Economic Journal,


                                               19
       forthcoming.
Ibarrarán, P., Ripani, L., Taboada, B., Villa, J. and Garcia, B. (2014). “Life Skills, Employability
        and Training for Disadvantaged Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation Design.”
        IZA Journal of Labor & Development 3 (1), 1-24.
Ibarrarán, P., Kluve, J., Ripani, L. and Rosas, D. (2015). “Experimental Evidence on the Long-
        Term Impacts of a Youth Training Program,” IZA Discussion Paper 9136.
Inter-American Development Bank – IDB (2006), “Informe de terminación de proyecto”.
J-PAL. 2013. “J-PAL Youth Initiative Review Paper.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel
      Poverty Action Lab.
Kluve, J. (2010). “The Effectiveness of European Active Labor Market Programs,” Labour
       Economics 17 (2010), 6, pp. 904–918.
Kugler, A., Kugler, M., Saavedra, J. and Herrera Prada, L. (2015). “Long-term Direct and Spillover
       Effects of Job Training: Experimental Evidence from Colombia,” NBER Working Paper
       No. 21607.
Lerner, R. M., Lerner, J. V., Almerigi, J., Theokas, C., Phelps, E., Gestsdottir, S. Naudeau, S.,
       Jelicic, H., Alberts, A. E., Ma, L., Smith, L. M., Bobek, D. L., Richman-Raphael, D.,
       Simpson, I., Christiansen, E. D., & von Eye, A. (2005). “Positive youth development,
       participation in community youth development programs, and community contributions of
       fifth grade adolescents: Findings from the first wave of the 4-H Study of Positive Youth
       Development.” Journal of Early Adolescence, 25(1), 17-71.
Maitra, P. and Mani, S. (2014). “Learning and Earning: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation
       in India,” IZA Discussion Papers 8552.
Marsh, Herbert W. (1990) “The structure of academic self-concept: The Marsh/Shavelson model”
       Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol 82(4), Dec 1990, 623-636.
McMillan, D. W., & Chavis, D. M. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory. Journal
      of community psychology, 14(1), 6-23.
Neill, J.T., Marsh, H.W., & Richards, G.E. (1997). The Life Effectiveness Questionnaire:
        Development and Psychometrics. Sydney, NSW, Australia: The University of Western
        Sydney.
Richards, G. E., Ellis, L. A., Neill, J. T. (2002). “The ROPELOC: Review of Personal
       Effectiveness and Locus of Control: A comprehensive instrument for reviewing life
       effectiveness.” Self-Concept Research: Driving International Research Agendas, 6-8
       August,Sydney.
Romano, J.P. and Wolf, M. (2005). “Exact and approximate stepdown methods for multiple
     hypothesis testing,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 100, 94-108.



                                                20
Schochet, P., Burghardt, J. and McConnell, S. (2008). “Does job corps work? Impact findings
      from the national job corps study”, American Economic Review 98: 1864-1886.
Vezza, E., García, B., Cruces, G. Amendolaggine, J. (2014). “Impact Evaluation Report. 2008-
       2009 Cohorts, Youth and Employment Program, Ministry of Labor, Dominican Republic.”
       Mimeo, Dominican Republic’s Ministry of Labor and The World Bank.




                                            21
Figures

Figure 1: Random assignment.


                                 Eligible Applicant Youth
                                      35 per course
                                       520 courses
                                                                       Random
                                                                       Assignment


           Vocational +      Life Skills (5)
                                                    Wait List (5)       Control (5)
          Life Skills (20)   341 courses

                              3 to 5 youth per group * #courses                 Random
                                                                                Sample
               T1 = 1560         T2 = 1560
                                                      C = 1560 youth
                 youth             youth




Figure 2: Intervention and survey timeline




                                               22
Figure 3: Definitions of Soft Skills Measures

 Skill              Measure definition

 Perseverance       The measure assesses the belief that it is important to sustain efforts to achieve long-term
                    goals and complete plans. It is a true positive indicator of long-term success and
                    disassociated with a disciplined and deeply rooted desire to achieve individual success.

 Ambition           The measure assesses the desire for power or superiority.



 Leadership         The measure assesses the ability to influence peers and work towards a common goal, to be
                    known and admired by peers, willingness to actively participate in important community
                    issues, and the ability to work with others and commit to come to agreement and coordinate
                    activities with others.

 Conflict           The measure assesses the ability to recognize, express and manage emotions and before
 Resolution         acting, as well as the ability to identify the source of a social or interpersonal conflict, to
                    understand the perspectives of all parties involved in the conflict, and to propose solutions.

 Social Skills      The measure assesses the ability to establish and maintain social ties and the knowledge of
                    how to behave in a social context to function.

 Organization       The measure assesses the ability to plan activities and the willingness to maintain the order of
                    the tools and materials that are used in everyday development. It also implies a commitment
                    to the goals set by the team and the social environment of the person.

 Communication      The measure assesses the ability to understand and accept other people, to take the place of
                    these, to receive the views of others and be respectful (a) to people, ideas, values, and / or
                    customs different from the individual’s own. At the same time, it is also the ability to express
                    and understand ideas or messages accurately and safely, which may subject you to maintain a
                    good relationship and social adjustment.




                                                        23
Tables




                           Table 1: Courses and Participants by Sectors (2009)
                     Courses                                                        1
                                                   Percentage of Participants
                     Sales                                    38%
                     Hotel and Restaurant                     20%
                     Professional Services                    11%
                     Beauty                                   10%
                     Health                                   9%
                     Commerce                                 4%
                     Agriculture                              3%
                     Computer/IT                              3%
                     Security                                 2%
                     Construction                             0%
                     1
                         Participants are assigned to the course they applied for




                         Table 2: Competencies Addressed in Soft Skills Training
         Competencies                                                                   Hours
         Development of Self-Esteem, Personal Skills and Self-Fulfillment                20
           Self awareness
           Communication skills
           Management of human relationships
         Development of Skills for Life and Work Success                                 35
           Development of a life project
           Working with quality and being productive
           Decision making
           Hygine, health, and labor rights
         Development of Social Skills                                                    20
           Management of conflict resolution
           Participation in social solidarity networks
                                                       Total number of hours             75




                                                      24
                                       Table 3: Data Sources and Sample Sizes

                               Registration Form                       Telephone Survey              Household Survey
Time after the training:       Before the training        0 months        6 months   12 months             3 years

Treatment                             3,251                    2,856        2,940         2,935             2,697
   Hard and Soft Skills               1,638                    1,419        1,481         1,470             1,366
   Soft Skills                        1,613                    1,437        1,459         1,465             1,331

Control                               1,449                    1,259        1,298         1,286             1,176
Total Number
                                     4,700                4,115        4,238        4,221                      3,873
Observations
Source: Baseline data came from the registration form that the participants had to fill out to apply for the program. Short
term follow up data come from three rounds of telephone surveys: the first one was conducted inmediatly after the
program finished following the rolling basis scheme of the program (from November 2009 to March 2010), the second was
conducted six months after the program (from May to July 2010), and the third round one was conducted one year after
the program concluded (from November 2010 to February 2011). The long term follow up data was collected in a
household survey from October 2012 to March 2013, that is aproximately 3 years after the training concluded for our
study sample.



                                   Table 4: Applicant Characteristics at Baseline

                                                     Mean study
                                                                              Mean Population
                                                      sample


                           Female                       62%                          50%
                           Age                          20.9                         20.9
                           Household Size                3.8                          4.7

                           Education (maximum level attained, not necessarily completed)
                           Elementary                 25%                       31%
                           Secondary                  72%                       49%
                           Tertiary                   0%                        17%
                           Colleage                   0%                        3%
                           Don't Know                 2%                        0%

                           Marital Status
                           Single                        79%                        69%
                           Civil Union                   19%                        22%
                           Married                        2%                        3%
                           Divorced                       0%                        6%
                           Widow                          0%                        0%
                           Source: Baseline study sample and National Labor Survey 2009
                           Note: The study sample is restricted to individuals in training
                           facilities that offered the two treatments, and to individuals who
                           were found in both the 12 months' follow up telephone survey
                           and the 3 years' follow up household survey.




                                                           25
                                                Table 5: Baseline Balance

Females
                                                   Mean at Baseline                                     P-Values
                                                                                     Hard and Soft                        Hard and
                                             Hard Skills                                               Soft Skills vs
                                                             DCB      Control          Skills vs                         Soft Skills vs
                                           and Soft Skills                                               Control
VARIABLES                                                                               Control                           Soft Skills

Age                                            21.176        21.159   21.092              0.903            0.886             0.772
Family Size                                     3.984         3.841    3.821              0.156            0.033             0.340
Urban=1                                         0.783         0.796    0.771              0.778            0.889             0.644
Sto. Domingo=1                                  0.251         0.216    0.255              0.208            0.538             0.952
Poverty Score                                  60.355        61.106   61.131              0.022            0.050             0.914
Years of Education                              9.904         9.789    9.822              0.198            0.644             0.518
Studying=1                                      0.269         0.266    0.240              0.860            0.296             0.192
Literacy head of household                      0.891         0.909    0.923              0.080            0.063             0.756
Literacy spouse of head household               0.400         0.436    0.402              0.192            0.703             0.082
Working                                         0.026         0.020    0.029              0.465            0.845             0.354
Related Experience=1                            0.093         0.111    0.120              0.190            0.615             0.503
Unemployed=1                                    0.538         0.553    0.547              0.971            0.976             0.943
Previous Work=1                                 0.107         0.106    0.096              0.746            0.168             0.079
Receive remittances                             0.040         0.039    0.031              0.929            0.227             0.159
Has children=1                                  0.547         0.506    0.547              0.192            0.721             0.097
Number of children                              0.897         0.818    0.935              0.323            0.275             0.041
Single=1                                        0.745         0.723    0.710              0.281            0.108             0.462



Males
                                                   Mean at Baseline                                    P-Values
                                                                                     Hard and Soft                       Hard and
                                          Hard and Soft                                               Soft Skills vs
                                                        Soft Skills Control            Skills vs                        Soft Skills vs
                                              Skills                                                    Control
VARIABLES                                                                               Control                          Soft Skills

Age                                            20.31         20.53       20.86               0.01            0.13           0.23
Family Size                                     3.70          3.74        3.70               0.98            0.85           0.86
Urban=1                                         0.79          0.82        0.84               0.18            0.66           0.38
Sto. Domingo=1                                  0.25          0.29        0.24               0.03            0.19           0.04
Poverty Score                                  62.95         63.27       61.67               0.03            0.02           0.94
Years of Education                              9.63          9.74        9.60               0.41            0.21           0.70
Studying=1                                      0.26          0.27        0.24               0.18            0.12           0.99
Literacy head of household                      0.90          0.92        0.88               0.12            0.02           0.38
Literacy spouse of head household               0.37          0.38        0.37               0.96            0.93           0.97
Working                                         0.06          0.06        0.06               0.29            0.98           0.24
Related Experience=1                            0.14          0.16        0.12               0.82            0.29           0.43
Unemployed=1                                    0.68          0.68        0.72               0.09            0.08           0.90
Previous Work=1                                 0.22          0.22        0.18               0.09            0.07           0.98
Receive remittances                             0.06          0.08        0.10               0.17            0.69           0.24
Has children=1                                  0.12          0.12        0.16               0.33            0.09           0.48
Number of children                              0.17          0.16        0.22               0.37            0.16           0.71
Single=1                                        0.91          0.90        0.88               0.10            0.12           0.87
Source: Baseline study survey
Note: The study sample is restricted to individuals in training facilities that offered the two treatments, and to individuals who
were found in both the 12 months' follow up telephone survey and the 3 years' follow up household survey.



                                                              26
                                               Table 6a. Impact on Skills after 3 Years, Females
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                             Conflict
                            Perseverance     Ambition       Leadership                      Social Skills   Organization   Communication
                                                                            Resolution

Combined Vocational and soft skills training
   β1                        0.211***        0.188***         0.095*           0.095*          0.102*         0.141**          0.159**
   Standard Error             (0.058)         (0.060)         (0.063)          (0.065)         (0.064)         (0.066)          (0.060)
   Romano Wolf p-value         0.001           0.007           0.068            0.068           0.068           0.034            0.014

Soft skills training only
   β2                           0.104           0.096          0.054            0.078           0.107           0.101            0.026
   Standard Error              (0.054)         (0.056)        (0.056)          (0.057)         (0.055)         (0.057)          (0.055)
   Romano Wolf p-value          0.183           0.183          0.197            0.183           0.183           0.183             0.32

Pooled sample
   β3                         0.147**          0.133**        0.071*           0.085*          0.105*          0.117*           0.079*
   Standard Error              (0.051)          (0.052)       (0.052)          (0.054)         (0.052)         (0.054)          (0.050)
   Romano Wolf p-value          0.029            0.038         0.083            0.082           0.057           0.053            0.082


Observations                    1,728            1,728         1,728           1,728           1,728            1,728            1,728
R-squared                       0.071            0.059         0.038           0.047           0.042            0.046            0.076
Control Mean                      0                0             0               0               0                0                0
p-value β1 =β2                 0.0263           0.0631         0.455           0.763           0.937            0.482           0.0141
p-value β1 =0 & β2 =0         0.00118          0.00709         0.317           0.292           0.126           0.0817           0.0141

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-values in brackets. All regressions
include controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course, and the training cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                       27
                                                 Table 6b. Impact on Skills after 3 Years, Males

                                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                                      Conflict
                                    Perseverance      Ambition       Leadership                      Social Skills   Organization   Communication
                                                                                     Resolution
Combined Vocational and soft skills training
  β1                                   -0.029          -0.066           0.053          -0.008           -0.011          -0.025          -0.076
  Standard Error                      (0.075)          (0.076)         (0.086)         (0.076)         (0.079)          (0.084)         (0.074)
  Romano Wolf p-value                     1               1               1               1                1               1               1

Soft skills training only
   β2                                  -0.065          -0.067           0.017           0.017           -0.003           0.006           0.003
   Standard Error                      (0.070)         (0.072)         (0.073)         (0.072)         (0.073)          (0.075)         (0.069)
   Romano Wolf p-value                    1               1               1               1                1               1               1

Pooled sample
   β3                                  -0.050          -0.066           0.032           0.006           -0.006          -0.007          -0.030
   Standard Error                      (0.064)         (0.065)         (0.067)         (0.064)         (0.064)          (0.067)         (0.063)
   Romano Wolf p-value                    1               1               1               1                1               1               1


Observations                            1,051           1,051           1,051           1,051           1,051           1,051            1,051
R-squared                               0.092           0.089           0.073           0.073           0.080           0.069            0.098
Control Mean                              0               0               0               0               0               0                0
p-value β1 =β2                          0.600           0.988           0.662           0.746           0.928           0.708            0.262
p-value β1 =0 & β2 =0                   0.642           0.594           0.822           0.945           0.991           0.928            0.471

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-values in brackets. All regressions include
controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course, and the training cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                         28
Table 7: Impact on Expectations after 12 Months
                                        (1)            (2)                        (3)                  (4)
                                            A. Females                                    B. Males
                                     Expect       Expect Living                Expect           Expect Living
                                  Employment                                Employment
                                                   Standards to                                  Standards to
                                 Opportunities to    Improve                Opportunities          Improve
                                    Improve                                  to Improve
Combined Vocational and soft skills training
     β1                           0.033**                0.028**               0.045**                0.007
     Standard Error                (0.016)               (0.013)               (0.017)               (0.016)
     Romano Wolf p-value            0.041                 0.041                 0.019                 0.524
Soft skills training only
     β2                           0.037**                0.032***                0.029                0.006
    Standard Error                    (0.014)             (0.012)               (0.018)              (0.015)
    Romano Wolf p-value                0.013               0.013                  0.26                 0.51
Pooled sample
    β3                               0.035**             0.030**                0.036*               0.006
     Standard Error                   (0.014)            (0.011)                (0.016)              (0.014)
     Romano Wolf p-value               0.013              0.013                  0.055                0.475

Observations                          1,728               1,728                  1,051               1,051
R-squared                             0.046               0.036                  0.078               0.061
Mean Control Group                    0.917               0.943                  0.924               0.955
p-value β1=β2                         0.753               0.665                  0.285               0.993
p-value β1=0 & β2=0                   0.039               0.025                  0.032               0.899
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-
values in brackets. All regressions include controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course,
and the training cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    29
   Table 8. Impact on Labor Outcomes after 12 Months
Table 8: Impact on Labor Market Outcomes after 12 Months
                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                                                    Satisfied with
     VARIABLES                             Working         Hours per week        Log (Salary)
                                                                                                          job
     A. Females
     Combined Vocational and soft skills training
          β1                                0.070**              1.814             0.174*              0.197**
          Standard Error                    (0.027)             (2.451)            (0.103)             (0.072)
          Romano Wolf p-value                0.023                0.14              0.066               0.023
     Soft skills training only
          β2                                0.052*              1.532               0.179*             0.143*
           Standard Error                   (0.025)             (2.201)            (0.098)             (0.067)
           Romano Wolf p-value               0.078               0.139              0.078               0.078
     Pooled sample
         β3                                0.059***              1.641             0.177*             0.163***
         Standard Error                     (0.023)             (2.095)            (0.094)             (0.062)
           Romano Wolf p-value               0.009              0.434                0.06               0.009

     Observations                            1,728               448                 445                 451
     R-squared                               0.055              0.144               0.204               0.200
     Mean Control Group                      0.220              39.30               8.431               0.416
     p-value β1=β2                           0.487              0.885               0.944               0.345
     p-value β1=0 & β2=0                     0.025              0.731               0.171               0.021
     B. Males
     Combined Vocational and soft skills training
        β1                              -0.111**                1.867               0.067               0.090
          Standard Error                    (0.040)             (2.051)            (0.076)             (0.061)
          Romano Wolf p-value                0.025               0.386              0.386               0.264
     Soft skills training only
          β2                                 -0.031              -1.228             -0.039              0.010
          Standard Error                    (0.038)             (1.634)            (0.064)             (0.052)
         Romano Wolf p-value                   1                   1                  1                   1
     Pooled sample
         β3                                  -0.065              -0.118             -0.001              0.039
         Standard Error                     (0.035)             (1.493)            (0.059)             (0.048)
         Romano Wolf p-value                 0.323                  1                  1                  1

     Observations                            1,051               519                 512                 522
     R-squared                               0.098              0.197                0.218               0.163
     Mean Control Group                      0.541              45.46                8.775               0.547
     p-value β1=β2                          0.0328              0.137                0.145               0.171
     p-value β1=0 & β2=0                     0.016              0.326                0.344               0.284
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-values in
brackets. All regressions include controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course, and the training
cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        30
 Table
Table 9:9: Impact
        Impact onon Labor
                  Labor   Market
                        Market   Outcomes
                               Outcomes    after
                                        after    3 Years
                                              3 Years
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                                                   Searching for
                                                             Hours per
                                          Working                               Log (Salary)       Work While
                                                               week                                 Employed
     A. Females
     Combined Vocational and soft skills training
        β1                               0.016                  0.600               0.012               -0.042
        Standard Error                  (0.033)                (1.863)             (0.092)             (0.043)
          Romano Wolf p-value                 1                   1                   1                   1
     Soft skills training only
          β2                                0.013               0.334               -0.027              -0.006
          Standard Error                   (0.029)             (1.741)             (0.085)             (0.039)
          Romano Wolf p-value                 1                   1                    1                   1
     Pooled sample
          β3                                0.014               0.440              -0.011              -0.020
           Standard Error                  (0.027)             (1.588)             (0.078)             (0.037)
           Romano Wolf p-value                1                   1                   1                   1

     Observations                         1,728                  844                 747                 844
     R-squared                            0.060                 0.111               0.176               0.099
     Control Mean                         0.490                 35.38               8.259               0.306
     p-value β1=β2                        0.928                 0.875               0.634               0.318
     p-value β1=0 & β2=0                  0.875                 0.949               0.885               0.529
     B. Males
     Combined Vocational and soft skills training
          β1                             -0.009                 -1.019              -0.099            0.136***
          Standard Error                (0.032)                (1.811)             (0.075)             (0.041)
          Romano Wolf p-value             0.649                  0.62                0.39               0.005
     Soft skills training only
          β2                                -0.009              0.103               -0.039            0.092**
          Standard Error                   (0.030)             (1.706)             (0.058)            (0.033)
          Romano Wolf p-value                  1                  1                    1               0.025
     Pooled sample
          β3                                -0.009              -0.354              -0.063            0.110***
          Standard Error                   (0.027)             (1.540)             (0.055)             (0.031)
           Romano Wolf p-value              0.977               0.977               0.589               0.001

     Observations                           1,051                849                  806                848
     R-squared                              0.069               0.116                0.114              0.107
     Control Mean                           0.822               45.22                8.746              0.203
     p-value β1=β2                          0.995               0.505                0.414              0.258
     p-value β1=0 & β2=0                    0.951               0.776                0.414              0.001
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-values in
brackets. All regressions include controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course, and the training
cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        31
 Table
Table  10.Impact
      10:  Impactonon Expectations
                    Expectations   and
                                 and   Self
                                     Self   Esteem
                                          Esteem   after
                                                 after   3 Years
                                                       3 Years
                                         (1)                    (2)                       (3)                  (4)
                                    Log (Expected       Expect Children Will      Expected Relative
                                                                                                          Self Esteem
                                    Future Salary)        Have Better Life        Wealth in 10 Years
  A. Females
  Combined Vocational and soft skills training
     β1                              0.063**                   0.073**                  0.112**              0.137*
       Standard Error                   (0.028)                 (0.037)                 (0.049)             (0.063)
       Romano Wolf p-value               0.041                  0.041                    0.041               0.062
  Soft skills training only
       β2                                0.032                   0.052                   0.010              0.134**
       Standard Error                   (0.026)                 (0.034)                 (0.048)             (0.057)
      Romano Wolf p-value                0.486                  0.486                    0.486               0.038
  Pooled sample
      β3                                 0.044                   0.061                   0.050              0.135**
       Standard Error                   (0.024)                 (0.031)                 (0.044)             (0.053)
       Romano Wolf p-value               0.105                   0.105                   0.105               0.023

  Observations                           1,728                   1,728                    1,728              1,728
  R-squared                              0.100                   0.062                    0.059              0.051
  Control Mean                           9.208                   4.532                    3.947                0
  p-value β1=β2                          0.160                   0.527                   0.0189              0.948
  p-value β1=0 & β2=0                    0.081                   0.132                   0.0275              0.039
  B. Males
  Combined Vocational and soft skills training
     β1                              -0.090*                     -0.093                  0.054               -0.051
     Standard Error                   (0.037)                   (0.049)                 (0.063)             (0.082)
       Romano Wolf p-value               0.087                   0.12                    0.247               0.272
  Soft skills training only
       β2                                -0.019                  -0.068                  0.082               -0.037
       Standard Error                   (0.030)                 (0.044)                 (0.059)             (0.072)
       Romano Wolf p-value                0.681                   0.681                  0.681                0.681
  Pooled sample
      β3                                 -0.049                 -0.078                   0.070               -0.043
       Standard Error                   (0.029)                 (0.041)                 (0.053)             (0.064)
       Romano Wolf p-value               0.287                   0.287                   0.287               0.373

  Observations                           1,051                   1,051                   1,051               1,051
  R-squared                              0.110                   0.072                   0.091               0.077
  Control Mean                           9.534                  4.550                      3.903                 0
  p-value β1=β2                          0.036                  0.547                      0.635              0.862
  p-value β1=0 & β2=0                    0.043                  0.139                      0.373              0.795
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the course and treatment group level in parenthesis. Romano Wolf p-values in
brackets. All regressions include controls for the educational institution, the sector of the course, and the training
cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        32
Appendix 1. Attrition
Dependent variable: Not found either in the follow up survey or in the final survey
                                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                            Female        Male         Female         Male

Hard skills and soft skills training                                        -0.016        -0.018         -0.004       -0.001
                                                                            (0.024)      (0.029)        (0.025)      (0.032)
Soft skills training only                                                   -0.014        -0.023         -0.005       -0.015
                                                                            (0.022)      (0.028)        (0.023)      (0.030)
Age                                                                                                   -0.010***       0.001
                                                                                                        (0.004)      (0.005)
Family Size                                                                                            -0.014**       -0.011
                                                                                                        (0.007)      (0.009)
Urban=1                                                                                                0.061**        0.057
                                                                                                        (0.026)      (0.039)
Sto. Domingo=1                                                                                           0.142     -0.953***
                                                                                                        (0.132)      (0.083)
Poverty Score                                                                                            0.001        0.001
                                                                                                        (0.001)      (0.002)
Years of Education                                                                                    -0.017***      -0.016*
                                                                                                        (0.006)      (0.008)
Studying=1                                                                                               0.003        -0.043
                                                                                                        (0.026)      (0.036)
Literacy head of household                                                                               0.005        -0.037
                                                                                                        (0.035)      (0.050)
Literacy spouse of head household                                                                        -0.022       -0.023
                                                                                                        (0.021)      (0.030)
Working                                                                                                  0.010        -0.049
                                                                                                        (0.065)      (0.064)
Related Experience=1                                                                                     -0.025       -0.020
                                                                                                        (0.033)      (0.038)
Unemployed=1                                                                                            0.044*        -0.045
                                                                                                        (0.025)      (0.041)
Previos Work=1                                                                                           0.026        -0.034
                                                                                                        (0.032)      (0.037)
Receive remittances                                                                                    0.126**        0.044
                                                                                                        (0.055)      (0.050)
Has children=1                                                                                          -0.050*       -0.011
                                                                                                        (0.030)      (0.076)
Number of children                                                                                    0.045***        0.022
                                                                                                        (0.017)      (0.050)
Single=1                                                                                                 -0.020       0.030
                                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.048)

Observations                                                                  2,144        1,374         1,914        1,195
R-squared                                                                     0.053        0.075         0.075        0.097
FE & CL:                                                                      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Baseline Vars:                                                                 No           No           Yes          Yes
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01,
Notes:      ** p<0.05,
       Standard   errors* clustered
                          p<0.1     at the course and treatment group level in parentheses. All regressions include controls for the
educational institution, the sector of the course, and the PJyE cohort. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                33
