                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EARLY EFFECTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT ON HEALTH CARE ACCESS,
          RISKY HEALTH BEHAVIORS, AND SELF-ASSESSED HEALTH

                                     Charles Courtemanche
                                        James Marton
                                       Benjamin Ukert
                                       Aaron Yelowitz
                                        Daniela Zapata

                                       Working Paper 23269
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23269


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We would like to thank Chad Cotti, Andrew Friedson, Amanda Kowalski, seminar participants at
Emory University, the University of Connecticut, Tulane University, the 2015 and 2016 Southern
Economic Association Annual Meetings, and the 2016 Association for Public Policy and
Management Annual Meeting for their valuable comments. Any errors are, of course, our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela
Zapata. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health Care Access, Risky Health Behaviors,
and Self-Assessed Health
Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata
NBER Working Paper No. 23269
March 2017
JEL No. I12,I13,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

The goal of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was to achieve nearly universal health insurance
coverage through a combination of mandates, subsidies, marketplaces, and Medicaid expansions,
most of which took effect in 2014. We use data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System to examine the impacts of the ACA on health care access, risky health behaviors, and
self-assessed health after two years. We estimate difference-in-difference-in-differences models
that exploit variation in treatment intensity from state participation in the Medicaid expansion and
pre-ACA uninsured rates. Results suggest that the ACA led to sizeable improvements in access to
health care in both Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states, with the gains being larger in
expansion states along some dimensions. No statistically significant effects on risky behaviors or
self-assessed health emerge for the full sample. However, we find some evidence that the ACA
improved self-assessed health among older non-elderly adults, particularly in expansion states.


Charles Courtemanche                                       Aaron Yelowitz
Georgia State University                                   University of Kentucky
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                      Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                    335 Business and Economics Building
P.O. Box 3992                                              Lexington, KY 40506-0034
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                                     aaron@uky.edu
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu                                      Daniela Zapata
                                                           Impaq International
James Marton                                               1101 Vermont Avenue
Georgia State University                                   11th Floor
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                      Washington, DC 20005
Department of Economics                                    dzapata@impaqint.com
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
marton@gsu.edu

Benjamin Ukert
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics
University of Pennsylvania
308 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
bukert@wharton.upenn.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

       The goal of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) was to achieve nearly

universal health insurance coverage in the United States through a combination of policies

largely implemented in 2014 (Obama, 2016). Several recent studies, including Frean et al. (2016)

and Courtemanche et al. (2017), have shown that the ACA led to gains in insurance coverage.

The objective of this paper is to evaluate whether or not such coverage increases translated to

changes in access to care, risky health behaviors, and, ultimately, short-run health outcomes.

       A number of 2014 ACA provisions involved overhauling non-group insurance markets in

an effort to ensure that one’s health history did not provide a barrier to obtaining coverage.

Specific regulations included guaranteed issue, which forbids insurers from denying coverage on

the basis of applicant health status, and modified community rating, which imposes uniform

premiums regardless of observable characteristics aside from age and smoking status. In

addition, the federal government established a Health Insurance Marketplace to facilitate

insurance purchases for individuals and small businesses. Each state was given the option of

establishing their own insurance marketplace and fifteen did so in 2014 (KFF, 2014).

       These reforms alone would likely lead to an adverse selection death spiral, with the influx

of high cost beneficiaries causing relatively low-cost beneficiaries to drop their coverage, thus

driving up premiums for those remaining in the insurance pool (Courtemanche and Zapata,

2014). This concern motivated another component of the ACA: the individual mandate.

Beginning in 2014, individuals deemed to be able to afford coverage but electing to remain

uncovered were penalized. The largest penalty that could be imposed was the maximum of either

the total annual premium for the national average price of a Bronze exchange plan or $285




                                                 1
($975) in 2014 (2015).1 In addition, an employer mandate, which required employers with 100 of

more full-time equivalent employees to offer “affordable” coverage to at least 95 percent of their

full-time employees and their dependents (children up to age 26) or face a penalty, took effect in

2015 (Tolbert, 2015).

         The remaining challenge associated with promoting universal coverage, affordability,

was addressed by the ACA in 2014 in two ways. First, sliding scale subsidies in the form of

premium tax credits (PTC) became available to consumers in every state with incomes between

100 and 400 percent of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL) who did not qualify for other affordable

coverage. Second, in states that opted to expand Medicaid via the ACA, anyone with income

below 138 percent FPL became eligible for Medicaid coverage. Previously, Medicaid eligibility

was typically restricted to those with low income among specific groups, such as children, single

parents, pregnant women, the disabled, and the elderly. According to the Kaiser Family

Foundation, 27 states participated in the Medicaid expansion in 2014, with three more

implementing it in 2015 and another two in 2016.2

         Theoretically, the expansion of insurance coverage brought about by the ACA should

increase access to care because of the reduction in out-of-pocket prices, but this is not

automatically the case. On the demand side, newly insured individuals may not have sufficient

knowledge of the health care system to easily secure a regular primary care doctor. Somers and

Mahadevan (2010) report that only 12 percent of adults have proficient health literacy. On the

supply side, concerns have been raised about whether or not there are sufficient numbers of

primary care physicians to treat all of these newly insured patients (Schwartz, 2012; Glied and

1
  The maximum increased to $2,085 in 2016. For more information, see: https://www.healthcare.gov/fees/fee-for-
not-being-covered/
2
  See the following website for further information: http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-
expanding-medicaid-under-the-affordable-care-
act/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D

                                                           2
Ma, 2015). While the federal government increased Medicaid primary care reimbursement rates

to Medicare levels in 2013 and 2014, only a few fully maintained this “fee bump” in 2015.3

        Insurance coverage could influence risky health behaviors – such as smoking, drinking,

and overeating – in either direction (Cawley and Ruhm, 2012). On one hand, improved access to

care could translate to improvements in health behaviors via information, accountability, or

treatments such as smoking cessation drugs or weight loss programs. On the other hand,

insurance can theoretically worsen health outcomes through ex ante moral hazard, as the

reduction in financial risks associated with unhealthy behaviors incentivizes such behaviors.

Moreover, income effects from gaining free or subsidized coverage could influence behaviors by

enabling consumers to spend money they had budgeted for direct purchase of health care on

alcohol, cigarettes, and junk food or, conversely, on healthy food and gym memberships (Simon

et al., 2017).

        The net effect of insurance on health depends on the changes in both access to care and

health behaviors and therefore is also theoretically ambiguous. The extent to which insurance-

induced increases in health care utilization translate to better health depend on one’s initial

location along the health production function. Evidence suggests that “flat of the curve” care –

perhaps due to uncertainty over treatment effectiveness, the principal-agent nature of the patient-

doctor relationship, fee-for-service reimbursement, lack of coordination across health care

providers, or malpractice liability – is common in the U.S. (Garber and Skinner, 2008).

Moreover, the same issues with health literacy that could hamper efforts by the newly insured to




3
 For more on state plans with respect to Medicaid primary care reimbursement see:
http://kff.org/medicaid/perspective/the-aca-primary-care-increase-state-plans-for-sfy-2015/?elq_cid=1679210 and
https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2015/04/23/states-to-continue-medicaid-pay-bump.

                                                        3
find a primary care doctor could also limit their ability to understand and comply with treatment

recommendations.4

         The purpose of this paper is to estimate the impact of the ACA’s 2014 provisions on a

variety of outcomes related to health care access, risky health behaviors, and self-assessed health.

In addition to estimating the overall effect of the ACA on these outcomes, we also examine

differential impacts resulting from state heterogeneity with respect to the choice to expand

Medicaid via the ACA.

         We separately identify the effects of the private and Medicaid expansion portions of the

ACA by using an identification strategy developed in Courtemanche et al. (2017) to estimate the

impact of the ACA on insurance coverage by exploiting differences across local areas in pre-

treatment uninsured rates. To be more specific, we estimate a difference-in-difference-in-

differences (DDD) model with the differences coming from time, state Medicaid expansion

status, and local area pre-treatment uninsured rate. If our objective was merely to isolate the

effect of the Medicaid expansion, this could potentially be achieved with a simpler difference-in-

differences model comparing changes in states that expanded Medicaid to changes in non-

expansion states. However, identifying the impact of the other components of the ACA (e.g.

mandates, subsidies, marketplaces) is more difficult due to their national nature. We therefore

exploit an additional layer of plausibly exogenous variation arising from the fact that universal

coverage initiatives provide the most intense treatments in areas with high uninsured rates.5

         Our data come from the 2011-2015 waves of the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance

System (BRFSS), with the sample restricted to non-elderly adults. The BRFSS is well suited for

4
  Previous literature has shown a relationship between health literacy and health outcomes including health status,
chronic illnesses, and hospitalizations (Cho et al., 2008; Berkman et al., 2011).
5
  Finkelstein (2007) uses a similar strategy to identify the impacts of another national program – Medicare – on
health care spending. Miller (2012a) also uses this approach to estimate the impact of the Massachusetts reform on
emergency room utilization without control states.

                                                          4
our study for three reasons. First, it includes a wide range of questions on health care access and

self-assessed health. Second, with over 300,000 observations per year it is large enough to

precisely estimate the effects of state-level interventions. Third, it was among the first large-scale

health datasets to release data from 2015, allowing us to examine two calendar years of data after

the full implementation of the ACA.

       Our results suggest that the ACA substantially improved access to health care among

non-elderly adults. Gains in insurance coverage were 8.3 percentage points in Medicaid

expansion states compared to 5.3 percentage points in non-expansion states, while reductions in

cost being a barrier to care were 5.1 percentage points in expansion states and 2.6 percentage

points in non-expansion states. The ACA also increased the probabilities of having a primary

care doctor and a checkup by 3.0 and 2.4 percentage points, respectively, in non-Medicaid-

expansion states, with the effects not being statistically different in expansion states. Gains in

access were generally largest among individuals with lower incomes and education levels.

       However, the effects of the ACA on risky health behaviors and self-assessed health were

less pronounced – at least after two years. For the full sample, we observe no statistically

significant impacts on any of the risky behavior or health outcomes in either Medicaid expansion

or non-expansion states. We do, however, find some evidence that the ACA improved self-

assessed health among older non-elderly adults, particularly in expansion states.


II. LITERATURE REVIEW

       In this section we review the literature on the impacts of expansions of insurance

coverage. We divide the literature into studies focusing on coverage expansions prior to 2014

and those that examine the components of the ACA implemented in 2014.




                                                  5
Effects of Pre-2014 Insurance Interventions

       There is an extensive literature spanning several decades examining the impact of the

receipt of both public and private health insurance on a variety of outcomes, including access to

care, utilization, spending, risky health behaviors, and health outcomes. Additional outcomes

considered in this literature include labor market participation, job lock, and other public

program participation. Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) provides a thorough review of the health

insurance literature, while Buchmueller et al. (2015) reviews the literature on Medicaid and

Gruber (2000) reviews the literature on health insurance and the labor market. Here we provide a

brief summary of the evidence on the effects of insurance-related interventions on outcomes

related to access, risky behaviors, and health.

       Causally interpretable evidence on the impacts of health insurance coverage dates back to

the RAND Health Insurance Experiment of the 1970s-1980s, which randomly assigned

individuals to insurance plans with different coinsurance rates and deductibles. Those assigned to

a plan with no cost-sharing incurred about 20 percent higher medical expenses than others

(Manning et al., 1987). However, on average this additional utilization did not translate to

statistically significant effects on self-assessed health, smoking, or weight (Brook et al., 1983).

       A substantial portion of the literature focuses on expansions of the Medicaid program.

Evidence suggests that expansions for children and pregnant women in the 1980s and 1990s

reduced low birthweight (Currie and Gruber, 1996a), infant mortality (Currie and Gruber,

1996b), and avoidable hospitalizations among children (Dafny and Gruber, 2005). However,

other studies suggest that these expansions increased smoking among pregnant women (Dave et

al., 2015) and had inconsistent effects on their health care utilization (Epstein and Newhouse,

1998). Research has also found that Medicaid expansions for childless adults in the early 2000s



                                                  6
increased self-reported access to care and health while reducing mortality, particularly related to

HIV (Sommers et al., 2012; Sommers, forthcoming). Studies of the randomized 2008 Oregon

Medicaid lottery found that Medicaid increased health care access and utilization along a broad

range of dimensions and led to large, immediate gains in self-assessed health (Finkelstein et al.,

2012; Taubman et al., 2014). However, no evidence was found of changes in smoking, obesity,

or clinical indicators of physical health (Baicker et al., 2013; Finkelstein et al., 2012). Tello-

Trillo (2016) shows that a large Medicaid disenrollment in Tennessee reduced access to care and

self-assessed health.

       Another branch of the literature studies the impacts of Medicare, the universal coverage

program for U.S. seniors. Evidence shows that health care utilization increases sharply at the age

of eligibility (Lichtenberg, 2002; Card et al., 2008), while mortality among patients admitted to

the ER falls sharply (Card et al., 2009). However, other studies suggest that Medicare does not

impact mortality more generally (Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008) and slightly worsens smoking

and drinking habits (Dave and Kaestner, 2009).

       Several studies have focused on the 2006 Massachusetts health care reform, a universal

coverage initiative that featured a combination of insurance market reforms, mandates, and

subsidies similar to the ACA. Kolstad and Kowalski (2012), Miller (2012a), Miller (2012b), and

Van der Wees et al. (2013) all present evidence consistent with the reform improving access to

primary care. Van der Wees et al. (2013) and Courtmanche and Zapata (2014) find that the

reform also improved adults’ self-assessed health, though an earlier study by Yelowitz and

Cannon (2010) did not observe a statistically significant result. Courtemanche and Zapata (2014)

also estimate that the reform reduced body mass index (BMI). Sommers et al. (2014) present

evidence that the reform reduced mortality rates, though Kaestner (2015) disputes this finding.



                                                   7
       Finally, another series of papers investigates the effects of the first major insurance

expansion to occur under the ACA: a mandate for insurers to cover dependents up to 26 years

old that took effect in 2010. Evidence suggests that this dependent coverage expansion increased

access to care (Sommers et al., 2013; Barbaresco et al., 2015) and general health care utilization

(Chua and Sommers, 2014; Akosa Antwi et al., 2015) but not utilization of preventive services

(Barbaresco et al., 2015). Chua and Sommers (2014), Barbaresco et al. (2015) and Burns and

Wolfe (2016) present evidence that the dependent coverage provision improved self-assessed

health along some dimensions. Finally, Barbaresco et al. (2015) document a reduction in BMI.

       To summarize, the evidence from these pre-2014 interventions suggests that health

insurance can impact access to care, risky behaviors, and health outcomes but that the effects

often vary substantially across contexts. For instance, the effects of insurance on self-assessed

health appear to have been large and immediate in the cases of the Oregon Medicaid expansion

and Massachusetts reform but more modest after the ACA dependent coverage expansion and

virtually nonexistent in the RAND experiment. As another example, only the Massachusetts

reform and dependent coverage provision appear to have led to weight loss. This underscores the

necessity of obtaining credible evidence on the effects of the 2014 components of the ACA

rather than simply relying on results from other settings.

       In particular, even evidence from the prior interventions that have the most in common

with the ACA – Medicaid and the Massachusetts reform – may not be reliable indicators. In

contrast to the narrower population targeted by Medicaid expansions, the ACA expanded

coverage to a much broader range of low and middle income families and childless adults, with

only part of the expansion occurring via Medicaid. Marketplace plans differ from traditional

Medicaid in terms of cost-sharing and provider networks. The effects of the Massachusetts



                                                 8
reform and ACA could differ because of the relatively low pre-reform uninsured rate in

Massachusetts, differences in the socio-demographic characteristics of those gaining coverage,

the relative public enthusiasm surrounding the Massachusetts law compared to the ACA, and the

fact that the entire expansion among adults was done though subsidized private coverage in

Massachusetts as opposed to the mix of public and private used by the ACA (Gruber, 2008).

Effects of the 2014 Components of the ACA

         Much of the early evidence on the effects of the 2014 components of the ACA focuses on

changes in coverage. At the national level, simple pre-post comparisons find increases in

coverage of between 2.8 and 6.9 percentage points, depending on the time frame, dataset, and

population group (Long et al., 2014; Smith and Medalia, 2015; Courtemanche et al., 2016;

Obama, 2016; Barnett and Vornovitsky, 2016; McMorrow et al., 2016).6 Other recent work uses

more sophisticated econometric techniques to isolate the impact of different components of the

ACA on coverage. Kaestner et al. (2015) and Wherry and Miller (2016) focus on the Medicaid

expansions, while Frean et al. (2016) focus on the Medicaid expansions, subsidized premiums

for Marketplace coverage, and the individual mandate. Using the identification strategy that we

employ in this paper, Courtemanche et al. (2017) aim to estimate the impact of the ACA more

generally, finding that it increased coverage by an average of 5.9 percentage points in Medicaid

expansion states compared to 2.8 percentage points in non-expansion states in 2014.

         A growing number of studies examine health-related outcomes besides insurance.

Shartzer et al. (2015), Polsky et al. (2015), Kirby and Vistnes (2016), Sommers et al. (2015), and

Sommers and Blendon et al. (2016) show that the timing of the ACA coincided with increased

access to care, while Sommers et al. (2015) also document an improvement in self-assessed


6
 Although we focus our discussion on national studies, single-state investigations generally reach similar
conclusions (Sommers et al., 2014, Sommers and Chua et al., 2016, Golberstein et al., 2015; Benitez et al., 2016).

                                                         9
health. However, it is unclear whether estimates based only on time-series variation are able to

disentangle causal effects of the ACA from other national shocks. Three papers use difference-

in-differences (DD) approaches to examine the impacts of the 2014 ACA Medicaid expansion on

access, health behaviors, or self-assessed health after two years.7 Using data from the Gallup-

Healthways Well-Being Index, Sommers et al. (2015) find evidence that the Medicaid expansion

improved access along some dimensions but did not significantly affect self-assessed health.

Abramowitz (2016) finds that the Medicaid expansion was associated with a reduction in self-

reported overall health using data from the Current Population Survey Annual Social and

Economic Supplement. Simon et al. (2017) use data from the BRFSS and find that the Medicaid

expansion increased some aspects of access and preventive care use among low-income childless

adults. However, they find no evidence of effects on risky health behaviors or most of their self-

assessed health measures.

        Relative to these previous studies, our main contribution is to present causally

interpretable evidence on the effects of the full ACA – as opposed to just its Medicaid portion –

on access to health care, risky health behaviors, and self-assessed health. This is critical

information in light of ongoing policy debates about the future of the ACA. While we adopt the

DDD strategy of Courtemanche el al. (2017), our work is distinct because we examine outcomes

beyond just insurance coverage, use a second year of post-treatment data, and use a different

dataset (BRFSS instead of the American Community Survey).

        A secondary contribution of our work is to offer an alternative identification strategy for

the impact of the Medicaid expansion that relies on weaker assumptions than the DD approach

used previously. Specifically, we do not need to assume that any differential changes in the


7
 Additionally, Sommers et al. (2012) find that early Medicaid expansions under the ACA in New York, Maine, and
Arizona were associated with increases in access to care and self-assessed health.

                                                      10
outcomes between the expansion and non-expansion states in 2014 are attributable to Medicaid.

Instead, our approach allows for other factors (e.g. underlying trends or enthusiasm for the other

parts of the ACA) to contribute to this differential as long as they are not correlated with pre-

treatment uninsured rates.


III. DATA

       Our primary data source is the BRFSS, an annual telephone survey conducted by state

health departments and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that collects data on

preventive services, risky behaviors, and self-assessed health for all 50 states and the District of

Columbia. A random digit dialing method is used to select a representative sample of

respondents from the non-institutionalized adult population. The BRFSS is appealing for our

study because its large number of observations, over 300,000 per year, allows us to precisely

estimate the effects of the treatment expansions. This is important since only a fraction of the

population is affected by the change in legislation, limiting plausible effect sizes.

       Our main sample consists of 19-64 year olds from the 2011-2015 waves. We exclude

individuals older than 64 since the ACA was not intended to affect the health care coverage of

seniors. We begin the sample in 2011 because that was the first year in which the BRFSS

included cell phones in their sampling. Since individuals who exclusively use cell phones are

disproportionately young, this results in a discrete change in the sample means of many of our

key variables (including insurance coverage) between 2010 and 2011. An additional benefit of

excluding years prior to 2011 is that this limits the sample to years after the implementation of

the ACA’s dependent coverage expansion, preventing confounding from differences in state

dependent coverage mandates prior to the ACA.




                                                 11
         We utilize fourteen different health-related dependent variables.8 The first four relate to

health care access: dummy variables reflecting whether the respondent has any health insurance,

had any medical care needed but not obtained because of cost in the previous year, has a primary

care physician, and had a well-patient doctor check-up visit (e.g. physical) in the previous year.

The next three outcomes related to risky health behaviors: dummies for whether one smokes,

alcoholic drinks consumed per month, and a continuous variable measuring the respondents’

body weight in the form of BMI.9 Another set of outcomes relates to self-assessed health status:

a dummy for whether overall health is good or better, a dummy for whether overall health is very

good or better, a dummy for whether overall health is excellent, and days of the last 30 not in

good mental health, not in good physical health, and with health-related functional limitations.

Self-assessed health variables, though subjective, have been shown to be correlated with

objective measures of health (e.g. Idler and Benyamini, 1997; DeSalvo et al., 2006; Phillips et

al., 2010). While one might initially be skeptical that insurance expansions could meaningfully

affect health in their first two years, prior evidence from the randomized Oregon Medicaid

experiment (Finketstein et al., 2012) and the Massachusetts universal coverage initiative

(Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014; Van der Wees et al., 2013) have shown that immediate gains

in self-assessed health can indeed occur.

         Our last outcome variable is a summary index of health that incorporates the three health

behaviors, the overall self-assessed health index, and the three self-assessments that pertain to

8
  Note that we do not utilize the screening (e.g. colonoscopy, mammogram, pap test) variables available in the
BRFSS because, in almost all states, they are only available in 2012 and 2014. This means that 2014 would be the
only post-treatment year, which would be especially problematic since the questions use reflection periods of a year
or greater (e.g. pap test in past year). In other words, it is not clear that 2014 would be a true “post-treatment” year
for these outcomes, since part of the reflection period for respondents surveyed in that year would occur prior to the
ACA taking effect.
9
  Results are robust to using an indicator for obesity (BMI ≥ 30) rather than continuous BMI. Self-reports of weight
and height are well-known to suffer from measurement error, but studies implementing a correction method
involving validation data from the NHANES have repeatedly shown that adjusting for this error does not affect the
signs and significance of coefficient estimates (e.g. Cawley, 2004; Courtemanche et al., 2015).

                                                           12
physical/mental health and functional limitations. We follow Chetty et al. (2011) and Yelowitz

(forthcoming) by first transforming each variable so that a higher value represents a more

desirable outcome. We then standardize each of the seven variables by subtracting the mean and

dividing by its standard deviation. Finally, we sum all seven variables and divide by the standard

deviation of the sum to arrive at the final index with a standard deviation of one.

       We include a wide range of control variables. The controls from the BRFSS are dummy

variables for age groups (5-year increments from 25-29 to 60-64, with 19-24 as the reference

group), gender, race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic white with other

as the reference group), marital status, education (high school degree, some college, and college

graduate with less than a high school degree as the reference group), household income category

($10,000-$15,000, $15,000-$20,000, $20,000-$25,000, $25,000-$35,000, $35,000-$50,000,

$50,000-$75,000, and >$75,000, with <$10,000 as the reference group), number of children in

the household (zero to four with five or more as the reference group), whether the respondent

reports her primary occupation as student, and whether the respondent is unemployed. We also

control for the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ seasonally adjusted monthly state unemployment rate

as well as dummy variables for whether states set up their own insurance exchanges and whether

these exchanges experienced glitches (KFF, 2014; Kowalski, 2014).

       A critical variable for our identification strategy is the uninsured rate in the respondent’s

“local area” in the pre-treatment year of 2013. The BRFSS does not contain county level

identifiers continuously throughout our period of analysis, making it impossible for us to

compute county level uninsured rates during the pre-treatment periods. Instead, we use

information collected on type of location within a state. The BRFSS reports whether the

respondents reside in the center city of an MSA, outside the center city of an MSA but inside the



                                                 13
county containing the center city, inside a suburban county of the MSA, or not in an MSA.

However, no location information was collected from cell-phone respondents. We use this

location variable to construct four sub-groups within each state: within a central city, suburbs,

non-MSA, and location unavailable (i.e. cell phone sample). Based on these within-state

classifications we calculate the pre-treatment average uninsured rates by location (considering

“cell phone” to be a location for the sake of convenience) within a state. In order to ensure that

each area contains a sufficient number of respondents to reliably compute pre-treatment

uninsured rates, we combine the seven areas with fewer than 200 respondents in 2013 with other

areas.10 After doing this, there are 194 areas with 2013 uninsured rates computed from between

219 and 5,804 respondents, with the average being 1,475 and the median being 1,205.

        Our Medicaid expansion variable comes from the Kaiser Family Foundation, a non-profit

organization that collects a vast array of health policy information. This information includes

whether a state implemented the Medicaid expansion as well as whether this expansion was done

through private insurance via a Section 1115 waiver. Expanding under the Section 115 waiver, as

done by Arkansas, Iowa, and Michigan, introduced cost sharing and premiums for enrollees and

could therefore have had different effects than expanding via traditional Medicaid. We attempted

to test for such differences but statistical power was insufficient to draw meaningful conclusions;

we therefore simply classify the Section 1115 waiver states as being Medicaid expanders. Thus a

total of 27 states (including the District of Columbia) participated in the 2014 Medicaid

expansion and 30 states (including the District of Columbia) expanded by the end of 2015.

        In our main specifications, we simply classify the 30 states that expanded Medicaid by

2015 as the treatment group for the Medicaid expansion and the other 21 as the control group.

10
  Specifically, we combine the central city and suburban parts of Wyoming into one area, and the same for
Vermont, South Dakota, and Montana. We also combine the suburban and rural parts of Massachusetts, Arizona,
and California.

                                                      14
The majority of the expansion states implemented their expansion in January 2014, with some

exceptions. Michigan’s expansion took effect in April 2014 and New Hampshire’s in August

2014. In 2015, Indiana and Alaska expanded Medicaid in February and September, respectively.

States are classified as part of the treatment group beginning the month of their expansion.

       Table 1 provides pre-treatment means and standard deviations of the dependent variables,

while Online Appendix Table A1 does the same for the controls. We also report the summary

statistics stratified into four groups based on whether the respondent’s state expanded Medicaid

and whether her local area’s pre-treatment uninsured rate was above or below the median for

individuals in the sample. According to Table 1, 79 percent of the sample had insurance at

baseline. For both the high- and low-uninsured rate subgroups, individuals in Medicaid

expansion states were slightly more likely to have insurance prior to 2014 than those in non-

expansion states. Residents of Medicaid expansion states and states with pre-ACA uninsured

rates below the median (column 3) had, on average, better health care access and self-assessed

health than their counterparts even before the ACA was implemented. They were also more

educated, more likely to be employed, and had higher incomes.

       Our econometric design will account for these baseline differences, but will rely on the

assumption of common counterfactual trends in the outcomes on the bases of Medicaid

expansion status and pre-treatment uninsured rates. Figures 1 and 2 show that the pre-ACA

trends are generally similar along these dimensions for most outcomes. Later, we will test the

common trends assumption more formally through an event study analysis.


IV. ECONOMETRIC MODELS

       For each outcome, our econometric objectives are to estimate the effects of both the fully

implemented ACA (including the Medicaid expansion) and the ACA without the Medicaid

                                                15
expansion. A major challenge in doing so is to disentangle the impacts of the nationwide

components of the ACA (e.g. exchanges, mandates, subsidies) from underlying year-to-year

fluctuations that would have occurred even in the law’s absence. We adopt the DDD strategy

Courtemanche et al. (2017) used to identify the impact of the ACA on health insurance coverage,

which exploits variation across space in the intensity of treatment arising from differential pre-

treatment uninsured rates. Adding this layer of geographic variation allows us to include time

period fixed effects while still identifying the effects of the national (private) portion of the law.

        Assuming that the extent of a geographic area’s treatment is proportional to its baseline

uninsured rate, the DDD model is


                                                                                                     (1)

where

             is the outcome for individual i in area type (central city, rest of MSA, non-MSA,

        cell phone) a in state s in time period (month/year) t,

               is an indicator for whether period t is in the post-treatment period of January 2014

        or later,

            is a vector of control variables,

                     is an indicator for whether state s participated in the ACA’s Medicaid

        expansion,

                        is the pre-treatment (2013) uninsured rate in area type a within state s,

           represents time fixed effects for each month/year*area type combination (e.g. central

        city in January 2011); these not only control for time as flexibly as possible but also

        allow time trends to evolve differentially across individuals living in central city,

        suburban, and rural areas as well as those with only cell phones, and

                                                  16
             represents fixed effects for each geographic area (e.g. central city in Alabama).

Note that          is not included in the model since it is captured by the time fixed effects, while

the terms                                    are not separately included since they are captured by

the area fixed effects.

          In (1), the effect of the ACA without the Medicaid expansion is given by

  *                   , which means it is assumed to be 0 in a (hypothetical) area with a 0 percent

uninsured rate at baseline and to increase linearly as the pre-ACA uninsured rate rises. (We have

also experimented with non-linear functional forms for the uninsured rate and found that they do

not reveal any meaningful new information.) The identifying assumption is that, in the absence

of the treatment, any changes in the outcomes that would have occurred in 2014-2015 would not

have varied differentially by area uninsured rates, conditional on the controls. We do not need to

assume that there would have been no changes at all in the outcomes without the ACA

(conditional on the controls), as would be the case in a pre-post comparison that did not utilize

the variation in pre-treatment uninsured rates.

          The effect of the Medicaid expansion is given by                        . As with the other

components of the ACA, the impact of the Medicaid expansion is now assumed to vary linearly

with the state’s baseline uninsured rate. (Again, we found that considering non-linear functional

forms did not reveal new information.) Since the Medicaid expansion should not causally affect

insurance coverage in an area with a 0 percent baseline uninsured rate, we consider        to reflect

unobserved confounders rather than capturing part of the expansion’s causal effect. This

interpretation follows Miller (2012a) and Courtemanche et al. (2017). The identifying

assumption for the impact of the Medicaid expansion is therefore that, without the ACA,

differential changes in the outcomes in 2014-2015 between Medicaid expansion and non-


                                                  17
expansion states would not have been correlated with 2013 uninsured rates. This is a weaker

assumption than would be required by a DD model, in which case one would have to assume

that, conditional on the controls, there would have been no differential changes across expansion

and non-expansion states.

Robustness Checks

       We also conduct a number of robustness checks. The first several vary the set of control

variables to address the possible concern that some of them could be endogenous to the ACA.

Recall that the baseline model includes demographic (age, gender, and race/ethnicity), family

(education, marital status, and number of children), economic (income, employment and student

status, and unemployment rate), and health insurance exchange (interactions of year = 2014 with

whether the state set up its own exchange and whether the exchange had glitches) controls. The

first four robustness checks include only subsets of these variables: demographic controls only,

demographic and family controls, demographic and economic controls, and demographic and

exchange controls.

       Next, recall that we do not know geographic area type (central city, suburbs, or rural) for

individuals interviewed on a cell phone, necessitating our combining of all such individuals into

a separate group within each state. The next robustness check aims to ensure that this decision

does not meaningfully influence the results by dropping those interviewed on cell phones,

ensuring the availability of the area type variable for everyone in the sample.

        The following set of robustness checks addresses the potential concern that interacting

       and                         with the same uninsured rate variable may be problematic

since the Medicaid and private portions of the ACA applied to different income ranges (under

138 percent of the FPL for Medicaid, above 138 percent in Medicaid expansion states and above



                                                18
100 percent in non-expansion states for the exchanges/subsidies). The first such check interacts

         with the pre-ACA uninsured rate for respondents above 100 percent of the FPL and

                       with the rate for those below 138 percent. Additional specifications use a

100 percent cutoff for both groups and a 138 percent cutoff for both groups.

         Next, we consider alternative approaches to computing pre-treatment uninsured rates that

utilize a larger number of individuals per area than our baseline strategy. This addresses possible

concerns about using groups narrower than state to construct this key variable. First, we pool all

three pre-treatment years when computing baseline uninsured rates rather than just using 2013 in

order to increase the number of individuals in each area. Second, we drop the sub-state

classifications and simply compute pre-treatment uninsured rates at the state level (using just

2013).

         In another robustness check, we drop 19-25 year olds. Since this age group was treated

by the 2010 ACA dependent coverage provision, their treatment status is somewhat ambiguous.

With that said, Courtemanche et al. (2017) found that this age group still experienced large

coverage gains in response to the 2014 ACA provisions, so we do not expect dropping 19-25

year olds to meaningfully impact our results.

         The remaining robustness checks deal with the potentially ambiguous Medicaid

expansion treatment status of some states. Many states partially expanded Medicaid under the

ACA prior to 2014. Courtemanche et al. (2017) did not find meaningful differences in coverage

gains between early expanders and states that did not expand at all until 2014, and Frean et al.

(2016) find that many of the people who became eligible for Medicaid under the early

expansions actually did not take up coverage until 2014. We therefore do not expect that

including early expansion states as part of the treatment group will meaningfully impact the



                                                19
results, but we consider alternative classifications to verify. One such approach restricts the

sample to only the nine treatment states and twenty control states that did not have some form of

Medicaid expansion prior to January 2014, as classified by Kaestner et al. (2015). Another uses

the same nine treatment states but the full control group. Next, we only exclude the five states

that Kaestner et al. (2015) describe as having comprehensive early Medicaid expansions prior to

2014. Our final robustness check drops the states that expanded Medicaid in 2014 or 2015 but

whose expansion was not effective as of January 1, 2014.


V. RESULTS

       Tables 2 and 3 report the results from the baseline DDD regression for each outcome.

The top panel presents the coefficient estimates and standard errors for the variables of interest,

while the bottom panel gives the implied effects of the ACA at the average pre-treatment

uninsured rate. Indicators of statistical significance at the 0.1 percent, 1 percent, and 5 percent

level are also shown.

       We begin our discussion with the outcomes related to access – insurance coverage,

having a primary care doctor, cost being a barrier to care in the past 12 months, and checkup in

the past 12 months – which are in the first four columns of Table 2. Because the cost barrier and

checkup variables reflect information from the past 12 months, treatment status in 2014 is

ambiguous for these outcomes. For instance, for someone interviewed in March 2014, only three

of the twelve months that determine one’s answer to these questions are actually in the post-

treatment period. We therefore drop 2014 in the regressions for these outcomes, explaining their

smaller sample size.

       The results suggest that the private portion of the ACA increased access to care along all

observable dimensions. Specifically, at the average pre-treatment uninsured rate it increased the

                                                  20
probabilities of having insurance coverage, a primary care doctor, and a well-patient checkup by

5.3, 3.0, and 2.4 percentage points, respectively, while reducing the probability of cost being a

barrier to care by 2.6 percentage points. The ACA therefore led to sizeable improvements in

access even in states that did not expand Medicaid.

         The Medicaid expansion led to additional gains in access along some dimensions. At the

average pre-treatment uninsured rate, it increased insurance coverage by a statistically significant

3.1 percentage points and reduced the probability of reporting cost being a barrier to care by 2.5

percentage points. We do not find significant effects on having a primary care doctor or a well-

patient checkup, though the magnitude for checkup is an economically meaningful 1.2

percentage points – around two-fifths as large as the effect on insurance.11 Broadly speaking, our

finding that the Medicaid expansion increased access along some but not all dimensions is

consistent with the results from the DD studies by Sommers et al. (2015) and Simon et al.

(2017).12

         Combining the effects of the private and Medicaid components shows that the fully

implemented ACA led to large gains in all access measures. Insurance coverage increased by 8.3



11
   Both the access variables for which we did not find statistically significant effects of the Medicaid expansion
relate to primary care. One possible explanation is that newly enrolled Medicaid recipients may still have trouble
accessing primary care, perhaps due to the temporary nature of the ACA Medicaid fee bump (MACPAC, 2015)
leading to a smaller than expected change in physician Medicaid participation and / or some degree of access crowd-
out due to the concurrent expansion of private (i.e. Marketplace) coverage. However, since the magnitude of the
estimated effect on checkups is meaningfully large despite its statistical insignificance, we are reluctant to strongly
push this explanation.
12
   The only noteworthy differences for specific access outcomes are that we find evidence of an effect on cost being
a barrier to care but not having a primary care doctor, whereas the reverse is true for Sommers et al. (2015) and
Simon et al. (2017). In our view, the difference in results for cost being a barrier to care is not a major discrepancy,
as Sommers et al. (2015) and Simon et al. (2017) find the same signs and magnitudes that are only slightly smaller
than ours – their estimates just do not quite reach statistical significance. The discrepancy in results for primary care
doctor is more substantial, as our point estimate is essentially zero. In unreported regressions (available upon
request), we replicated Simon et al.'s DD model and restriction of the sample to those with incomes below 100
percent FPL. We found that the estimated increase in probability of having a primary care doctor shrinks roughly in
half (from about 4 to 2 percentage points) and becomes slightly statistically insignificant if we add the control for
the state setting up its own exchange. This suggests some upward bias in the DD estimate due to unobserved
differences in state attitudes toward the ACA, which we control for with our DDD approach.

                                                           21
percentage points, probability of having a primary care doctor rose by 3.1 percentage points,

probability of cost being a barrier to care fell by 5.1 percentage points, and probability of having

a checkup rose by 3.6 percentage points. Based on the pre-treatment sample means reported in

Table 2, these results imply that the full ACA reduced the uninsured rate by 44 percent while

also reducing the number of people without a primary care doctor by 12 percent, those with

foregone care because of cost by 28 percent, and those not having an annual checkup by 10

percent.

       The remaining three columns of Table 2 report the results for the three health behavior

variables: BMI, probability of being a smoker, and drinks per month. We observe no statistically

significant effects of the private portion, Medicaid expansion, or overall ACA on any of these

outcomes. Moreover, the magnitudes are relatively small compared to those for the access

outcomes: the estimated effects of the full ACA at the mean pre-treatment uninsured rate on

BMI, smoking, and drinking are just 0.1 percent, 5.3 percent, and 1.8 percent of the

corresponding sample means. Finally, the signs are mixed, with the full ACA reducing BMI and

drinking, but increasing smoking. For these reasons, we suspect that these null results are more

likely to represent “true zeros” than simply a lack of statistical power. Our findings for the

Medicaid expansion are consistent with the null effects on risky behaviors found by Simon et al.

(2017) using DD methods and a sample of only low-income adults.

           Table 3 displays the results for the self-assessed health outcomes. We find no

statistically significant effects of either the private or Medicaid components of the ACA on any

of the outcomes. The implied effects of the full ACA represent just -0.4 percent, -0.4 percent, 2.5

percent, 1.4 percent, -3.7 percent, and 4.2 percent of the pre-treatment means of good or better

health, very good or better health, excellent health, days not in good physical health, days not in



                                                  22
good mental health, and days with health-related limitations, respectively. These relatively small

magnitudes, combined with the inconsistent pattern of signs, again increases our confidence that

these null results reflect “true zeros.” Our small and insignificant estimates contrast the large,

early improvements in these same self-assessed health outcomes seen after the Massachusetts

health care reform (Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014; Van der Wees et al., 2013) and randomized

Oregon Medicaid experiment (Finkelstein et al., 2012). However, our null results for the

Medicaid expansion are consistent with the lack of clear improvements in self-assessed health

found by the DD studies in the ACA Medicaid expansion literature (Sommers et al., 2015;

Abramowitz, 2016; Simon et al., 2017).

       The reported results in Tables 2 and 3 only compute impacts of the ACA at the mean pre-

treatment uninsured rate of 20.2 percent. Because area pre-treatment uninsured rates varied

widely, ranging from 3 to 36 percent with a standard deviation of 8 percent, this approach

disguises a great deal of heterogeneity. Figure 3 therefore shows how the predicted changes in

our access outcomes vary across this range of uninsured rates in both expansion and non-

expansion states. The effects on the health behavior and self-assessed health outcomes are never

significant at any uninsured rate, so we do not present similar graphs for them.

       The predicted effect of the full ACA on the probability of having insurance coverage

reached as high as 14.7 percentage points in the area with the highest pre-treatment uninsured

rate. Without the Medicaid expansion, this impact only reached 9.3 percentage points. The

predicted impact of the full ACA on the probability of having a primary care doctor extends to

5.6 percentage points at the highest uninsured rate, with essentially no difference between

Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states. For the cost barrier and well-patient checkup




                                                 23
outcomes, the maximum predicted effects of the ACA are 9 percentage points and 6.4 percentage

points, respectively, in Medicaid expansion states and 4.5 and 4.3 in non-expansion states.

        Lastly, the results for the robustness checks are available in Appendix Tables A2-A15

(one table for each outcome). In almost all cases, the findings from the baseline regressions

persist across the various robustness checks.


VI. INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES

        A natural question with interpretation of the reduced-form results from the preceding

section is whether we can assume the extensive margin of insurance coverage is the only

mechanism through which the ACA affected the other outcomes. If this is true, then it would be

reasonable to estimate an instrumental variables (IV) specification in which

        and                                                 are instruments and insurance coverage is

the endogenous variable.13 This assumption is difficult to test and may not hold if, for instance,

areas with higher baseline uninsured rates also had higher rates of underinsurance (e.g. bare-

bones privately purchased policies), in which case the intensive margin of coverage quality is

another mechanism through which our treatment variables could affect the other outcomes.

Moreover, general equilibrium effects are possible; for instance, in areas with large numbers of

newly insured residents, continuously covered individuals may face increased difficulty

accessing providers, while those working in the health care industry may experience positive

income shocks. For these reasons, we prefer to emphasize our reduced form approach as it

allows for all of these mechanisms. Nonetheless, IV results can be informative about how large

the effects of coverage on the outcomes would need to be for the extensive margin of coverage to

be the only relevant mechanism.

13
  We are not able to estimate an IV model with both private and Medicaid coverage as endogenous variables
because the BRFSS does not contain information on source of coverage.

                                                      24
         Results from the IV model – with the full set of controls and fixed effects included – are

presented in Table 4. We only report the results for the health care access outcomes since those

were the only ones where significant effects emerged in the reduced form regressions.14 In each

column, we present the second-stage coefficient estimate for the health insurance variable along

with its standard error, the first stage F-statistic from the test of joint significance of the two

instruments, and the p-value for the overidentification test. In this case, the overidentification test

essentially tests the null hypothesis that the estimated local average treatment effects of

insurance would be statistically indistinguishable if either                                          or

                                                 were used as the sole instrument. A rejection of the null

could therefore mean either that the effect of gaining coverage via the Medicaid expansion is

different from the effect of gaining coverage through the private component of the ACA (in

which case the IV specification captures a weighted average of these two effects), or that the

Medicaid and private expansions activate other mechanisms besides simply the extensive margin

of coverage (in which case the IV specification would be inappropriate).

         The results show that the estimated effects of insurance on the other access outcomes are

large and highly significant. Specifically, insurance coverage increases the probability of having

a primary care doctor by 45 percentage points and the probability of having a well-patient doctor

visit by 36 percentage points, while decreasing the probability of having foregone care by 47

percentage points. To provide a reference point, IV estimates from the Oregon Medicaid

experiment show that Medicaid coverage increased similar access outcomes by between 20 and

34 percentage points (Finkelstein et al., 2012). Therefore, even if our IV estimates are slightly




14
  Not surprisingly, IV estimates for the health behavior and self-assessed health outcomes are highly insignificant.
These results are available upon request.

                                                         25
overstated because of the presence of other possible mechanisms, the results still suggest a strong

effect on access from the mix of private and public coverage induced by the ACA.

         We find that our instruments generally perform well in the diagnostic tests. They

generate first stage F-statistics that are more than an order of magnitude above the weak

instrument threshold of 10. The overidentification test only rejects the null hypothesis for

primary care doctor. This is not surprising given the very different reduced-form effects of the

private and Medicaid components of the ACA on the probability of having a primary care doctor

presented previously.


VII. EVENT STUDY MODEL

        As discussed previously, a causal interpretation of our estimates depends on two key

assumptions. First, conditional on the controls, changes in our outcomes in 2014-2015 would not

have been correlated with pretreatment uninsured rates in the absence of the ACA. Second,

differential changes in 2014-2015 between Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states would

not have been correlated with pre-treatment uninsured rates. In this section, we indirectly assess

the plausibility of these assumptions by estimating an event study model that includes the

interactions of the treatment variables with the full set of year fixed effects, with 2013 being the

base year. The model is




                                                                                                     (3)

where Y2011t, Y2012t, Y2014t, and Y2015t are indicators for whether year t is 2011, 2012, 2014,

and 2015, respectively. The tests for differential pre-treatment trends (i.e., falsification tests) are

                                                  26
provided by evaluating whether the coefficients on the “treatment” variables in the pre-treatment

years (θ1, θ2, θ9, θ10) are equal to 0.15

         Table 5 presents the event study results for the seven outcomes related to health care

access and health behaviors and Table 6 presents similar results for the seven outcomes related to

self-assessed health using the full set of controls. In each table, the top panel presents the

coefficient estimates of interest. Between the two tables there are a total of 56 falsification tests

(four parameters of interest in each of fourteen regressions) and only three significant results at

the 5 percent level. Three out of 56 is 5.3 percent, which is essentially the same as would be

expected by chance. These results therefore provide some reassurance about the validity of our

model to estimate causal effects for the “true” ACA.

         Another advantage of the event study specification is that it allows us to distinguish

between the effects of the ACA in 2014 and 2015. The most notable result is that the coverage

gains from the ACA appear to have increased in the second year relative to the first year, with

the increase coming entirely from the private portion. Specifically, in 2014 the fully

implemented ACA increased the probability of a non-elderly adult being insured by 6.6

percentage points, with 3.9 percentage points coming from the private portion and the remaining

2.7 percentage points from Medicaid. These magnitudes are similar to those estimated by

Courtemanche et al. (2017) using American Community Survey (ACS) data. In contrast, in 2015

the coverage gain from the full ACA jumped to 10.3 percentage points, with 6.3 percentage

points coming from the private component and 4 percentage points from Medicaid.16


15
   Recall that the coefficient on the                         variable in our main regression was assumed to capture
unobserved confounders rather than part of the causal effect of the Medicaid expansion. We therefore do not
consider θ1 and θ2 to provide additional falsification tests.
16
   Our finding of additional coverage gains in 2015 is consistent with the Cohen et al. (2016) descriptive
examination of changes over time in coverage using the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). They report in
their table 17 that among non-elderly adults, the increase in those reporting coverage of any type was 4.1 percentage
points between 2013 and 2014 and 3.5 percentage points between 2014 and 2015. For public (private) coverage,

                                                         27
Accordingly, the gains in primary care access and reductions in cost barriers also increased in

2015 relative to 2014, though these increases appear to have come entirely from the Medicaid

expansion. The event study design also causes a few sporadic results to emerge for the health

behavior and self-assessed health outcomes. In particular, the fully implemented ACA increased

the probability of reporting excellent self-assessed health in 2015 (but not 2014) and reduced

days in poor mental health in 2014 (but not 2015). These results, however, could simply be a

byproduct of the large number of hypotheses tested by the event study models.


VIII. SUBSAMPLE ANALYSES

        One possible explanation for the large number of null results, particularly for the

Medicaid expansion, might be that the full sample includes various groups of people with

different probabilities of being treated by the ACA. In this section, we examine whether more

effects show up if we “zoom in” on the subpopulations most likely to experience larger gains in

coverage (those with low-to-middle incomes and those with relatively low education levels) and

/ or larger gains in health and related outcomes (older, but not yet elderly adults) as a result of the

ACA. We do this by running subsample regressions for those below versus above the median

household income, those without a college degree versus college graduates, and those below

versus above the median age. Unfortunately, perhaps due to the demanding nature of the DDD

specification and the need for each subsample to have sufficient numbers of individuals in each

area to reliably compute pre-treatment uninsured rates, splitting the sample into three or more

groups results in estimates that are too imprecise to be useful. This is also why we do not stratify

by race/ethnicity: the sample sizes for minority groups such as blacks and Hispanics are not

sufficient to obtain meaningfully precise results.

their table 18 (19) suggests the increase was 1 (3.1) percentage points between 2013 and 2014 and 1.2 (2.4)
percentage points between 2014 and 2015.

                                                        28
       Tables 7-12 report the results. Tables 7 and 8 stratify the sample by income. It is

reassuring that the sizable gains in access were concentrated in the below-median-income

subsample. The increase in insurance coverage from the full ACA was 11.9 percentage points for

the lower income group – with the majority of this increase coming from the Medicaid expansion

– compared with 2.0 percentage points for the higher income group. The gains in the other access

outcomes appear to have been entirely concentrated among the lower income subsample. For this

group, the effects on having a primary care doctor and an annual checkup were driven mostly by

the private portion of the ACA while the reduction in cost barriers is driven mostly by the

Medicaid expansion.

       The results on risky health behaviors and self-assessed health generally show the same

null effects we saw in Table 3, with a few exceptions. For instance, among the lower income

subsample, the private portion of the ACA increased drinks per month while the Medicaid

expansion decreased drinking by a similar amount. Additionally, the Medicaid expansion

increased smoking among the higher income subsample – a result that seems likely to be

spurious since this group would not have qualified for Medicaid. A couple improvements in the

self-assessed health outcomes emerge for the lower income subsample: an increase in the

probability of reporting excellent health in non-Medicaid-expansion states and a reduction in

days not in good mental health in expansion states. However, we are reluctant to emphasize these

results since they do not seem to fit a broader pattern, and we would expect a couple significant

“effects” to emerge simply by chance given the large number of null hypotheses we are testing in

these tables.

       The patterns in Tables 9 and 10 – for those with less education versus more education –

largely mimic the findings from our income stratification analysis. For those with less than a



                                                29
college degree (which includes young individuals who may still be enrolled in school), the

private portion of the ACA increased access to having a primary care doctor and an annual

checkup; both the Medicaid and private portions increased insurance coverage and reduced cost

barriers. Again, very few of the remaining outcomes on risky health behaviors or self-assessed

health appear to have been affected. For those with a college degree, there are some muted

effects on having a primary care doctor and cost barriers, but we largely see insignificant results.

       Tables 11 and 12 divide the sample by age, where the median individual in our sample

was approximately 43 years old. For both young and old, there were sizable gains in coverage:

8.5 percentage points from the full ACA for younger individuals and 7.2 percentage points for

older ones. The full ACA also significantly increased the other access outcomes by roughly

similar amounts among the two groups. However, there appears to be substantial heterogeneity

in the extent to which these gains in access translated to improvements in health. There were no

significant impacts of the private or public expansions in insurance on any risky health behavior

or self-assessed health outcomes for the younger adults. In contrast, for the older half of our

sample, the full ACA led to significant reductions in reports of days not in good physical health,

not in good mental health, and with health-related limitations as well as an improvement in the

composite health index. These gains appear to come mostly from the Medicaid rather than the

private expansion. The evidence is less clear for the five-point self-reported measure of overall

health: the private portion of the ACA increased the probabilities or reporting very good or

excellent health, but the estimated effects of Medicaid expansion largely offset these gains so

that the effects of the full ACA were insignificant. Nonetheless, the overall pattern of results

appears to suggest an improvement in self-assessed health among the older half of our non-

elderly adult sample along at least some dimensions.



                                                 30
IX. DISCUSSION

       In this paper, we used data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System to

examine the effects of the 2014 ACA provisions on health care access, risky health behaviors,

and self-assessed health. Using a DDD strategy that exploits variation in time, pre-treatment

uninsured rates, and state Medicaid expansion status, we separately estimated the effects in both

Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states. The results suggest that the ACA improved

access to care along all observable dimensions – including health insurance coverage, having a

primary care doctor and a well-patient checkup in the past year, and cost barriers – in both

expansion and non-expansion states. The gain in coverage and reduction in cost barriers were

significantly greater in expansion states. The magnitudes of the estimates imply effects of

insurance on health care access that are at least as large as those observed in the Oregon

Medicaid experiment. We did not observe any statistically or economically significant effects on

the outcomes related to health behaviors or self-assessed health for the full sample of non-elderly

adults. However, we did find evidence that the ACA improved self-assessed health among the

older half of the sample in expansion states.

       Our lack of significant results for risky health behaviors suggest that the ex ante moral

hazard, improved access to health behavior-promoting medical care, and income effects brought

about by insurance coverage either offset each other or are all relatively small. The extent of ex

ante moral hazard may be modest because the consumption value of good health may be a

sufficient deterrent even if an individual is insulated from the financial consequences of illness.

Improved access to medical care may be of only limited value with regard to health behaviors

since they are generally not as easy to treat as acute conditions. Income effects may also be

relatively small given the mixed results in the literature as to the causal impact of income on



                                                 31
health behaviors and the potential for individuals to value in-kind spending on health insurance

at less than its cost.17,18

         Our inability to find clear evidence that the ACA improved self-assessed health contrasts

the large, immediate gains in similar outcomes observed after the Oregon Medicaid experiment

(Finkelstein et al., 2014) and Massachusetts reform (Van der Wees et al., 2013; Courtemanche

and Zapata, 2014). The Oregon experiment was a unique context in that it was purely among

low-income individuals who had demonstrated some interest in their health by actively

registering for the lottery. The effects of the Massachusetts reform could plausibly differ from

those of the ACA for several reasons, including differences in population demographics, the fact

that the Massachusetts reform’s insurance expansions for adults were done completely through

private coverage as opposed to a mix of public and private coverage, and the greater prevalence

of high deductibles in the ACA’s private plans (Wharam et al., 2013). Another possible

explanation is the relative lack of popularity of the ACA compared to these other interventions.19

It has been hypothesized that the large, immediate gains in self-assessed health after insurance

expansions may be attributable at least in part to a “warm glow” from gaining coverage (e.g.

winning the lottery in Oregon, receiving insurance through a popular program in Massachusetts)

rather than from actually utilizing additional medical care (Finkelstein et al., 2012;



17
   See Cawley and Ruhm (2012) for an overview of the literature on the effect of income on risky health behaviors.
Subsequent to their literature review, additional papers using natural experiments have continued to find mixed
results (e.g. Au and Johnston, 2015; Averett and Wang, 2013; Kenkel et al., 2014; Apouey and Clark, 2015; Adams
et al., 2012; Cowan and White, 2015).
18
   Around 84 percent of individuals with a Marketplace plan in 2015 qualified for an advance premium tax credit;
conditional on qualifying, the advance PTC was $272 per month. See
https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2016-Fact-sheets-items/2016-03-11.html.
Gallen (2015) finds that each $1.00 of Medicaid spending is valued at $0.26-$0.35 to participants.
19
   Blendon et al. (2008) report that in June 2008, two years after the implementation of the Massachusetts health care
reform, 69 percent of residents supported the law. In contrast, a tracking poll conducted by the Kaiser Family
Foundation stated that in December 2016 only 43 percent of adults viewed the ACA favorably. For further
information, on this poll see: http://kff.org/interactive/kaiser-health-tracking-poll-the-publics-views-on-the-
aca/#?response=Favorable--Unfavorable&aRange=twoYear.

                                                         32
Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014). Perhaps the amount of “warm glow” is smaller if the

intervention bringing about the coverage is controversial, such as with the ACA.

        Several caveats of our work provide directions for future research. For instance,

investigation of clinical health outcomes is necessary to provide a fuller picture of the ACA’s

health effects. Additionally, future studies should continue to track the indicators used in our

paper over a longer time period, as the effects of insurance on health could take many years to

fully materialize. Next, our identification strategy implicitly assumes that effects of the ACA are

concentrated among those who lacked coverage prior to the law’s implementation. Future

research should investigate whether impacts could also occur among, for instance, those who

switched from catastrophic to more comprehensive coverage as a result of the ACA’s minimum

standards for insurance plans, or who experienced significant income shocks as a result of the

subsidies or changes in premiums.20 Finally, note that understanding the ACA’s effects on health

care access and health outcomes provides only part of the story with regard to evaluating the

welfare effects of the law. For instance, protection against financial risk is a critical component

of the gains from insurance, so the consumption smoothing benefits of the ACA could confer a

sizable benefit even in the absence of discernable short-run health effects. Hu et al. (2016) found

evidence that the ACA’s Medicaid expansion improved financial outcomes from credit report

data. On the other hand, Pauly (2017) questions whether or not the poor should be allowed to

purchase high-deductible marketplace plans. The ACA also contains a number of other

components unrelated to insurance coverage, such as provider payment reforms and tax



20
  For instance, 7.7 percent of non-elderly adults directly purchased individual coverage prior to the 2014 reforms
(author’s calculations using the ACS). For these individuals, the ACA’s premium tax credit could directly substitute
for household income devoted to health insurance. While many of these people likely experienced positive income
shocks, some may have been spending less on insurance prior to the ACA, perhaps because they were purchasing
non-comprehensive policies (Clemans-Cope and Anderson, 2014). Thus, it is possible that the share of their budget
spent on health insurance could have increased even in the presence of the subsidies.

                                                         33
increases, that each represent a part of the overall picture. Thus both the size and scope of the

ACA have generated the need for a great deal of future research in order to better understand the

multi-faceted nature of its impacts.


REFERENCES

Abramowitz, J. (2016). The Effect of ACA State Medicaid Expansions on Medical Out-of-
Pocket Expenditures and Perceived Health. Working Paper.
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. Moriya, and K. Simon (2015). Access to Health Insurance and the Use of
Inpatient Medical Care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Young Adult Mandate. Journal
of Health Economics, 39: 171-187.
Adams, S., M.L. Blackburn, and C.D. Cotti (2012). Minimum Wages and Alcohol-related
Traffic Fatalities among Teens. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3): 828-840.
Au, N. and D.W. Johnston (2015). Too Much of a Good Thing? Exploring the Impact of Wealth
on Weight. Health Economics, 24(11): 1403-1421.
Apouey, B. and A. Clark (2015). Winning Big but Feeling No Better? The Effect of Lottery
Prizes on Physical and Mental Health. Health Economics, 24(5): 516-538.
Averett, S. and Y. Wang (2013). The Effects of Earned Income Tax Credit Payment Expansion
on Maternal Smoking. Health Economics, 22 (11): 1344-1359.
Baicker, K., S. Taubman, H. Allen, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J.P. Newhouse, and the Oregon
Health Study Group (2013). The Oregon Experiment--Effects of Medicaid on Clinical
Outcomes. New England Journal of Medicine, 368 (18): 1713-1722.
Barbaresco, S., C. Courtemanche, and Y. Qi (2015). Impacts of the Affordable Care Act
Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-related Outcomes of Young Adults. Journal of Health
Economics, 40: 54-68.
Barnett, J.C. and M.S. Vornovitsky (2016). Current Population Reports, P60-257(RV), Health
Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2015. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
DC.
Benitez, J.A., L. Creel, and J. Jennings (2016). Kentucky's Medicaid Expansion Showing Early
Promise on Coverage and Access to Care. Health Affairs, 35 (3), 528-34.
Berkman, N., S.L. Sheridan, K.E. Donahue, D.J. Halpern, and K. Crotty (2011). Low Health
Literacy and Health Outcomes: An Updated Systematic Review. Annals of Internal Medicine,
155 (2): 97 -107.
Blendon, R.J., T. Buhr, T. Sussman, and J.M. Benson (2008). Massachusetts Health Reform: A
Public Perspective from Debate through Implementation. Health Affairs, 27 (6): w556-w565.


                                                 34
Brook, R.H., J.E. Ware, Jr, W.H. Rogers, E.B. Keeler, A.R. Davies, C.A. Donald, G.A.
Goldberg, K.N. Lohr, P.C. Masthay, and J.P. Newhouse (1983). Does Free Care Improve Adults’
Health? Results from a Randomized Controlled Trial. New England Journal of Medicine, 309
(23): 1426-1434.
Burns M.E. and B.L. Wolfe (2016). The Effects of the Affordable Care Act Adult Dependent
Coverage Expansion on Mental Health. Journal of Mental Health Policy, 19 (1): 3-20.
Buchmueller, T., J.C. Ham, and L.D. Shore-Sheppard (2016). “The Medicaid Program,” in: R.A.
Moffit (ed.), Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1,
chapter 1: 21-136. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Card, D., C. Dobkin, and N. Maestas (2008). The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review, 98
(5): 2242-2258.
Card, D., C. Dobkin, and N. Maestas (2009). Does Medicare Saves Lives? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124 (2): 597-636.
Cawley, J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39 (2): 451-
474.
Cawley, J. and C. Ruhm (2012). “The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors,” in: T.G. McGuire,
M.V. Pauly, and P.P. Barros (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2, chapter 3: 95-99.
New York, NY: Elsevier.
Chetty, R., J.N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. Whitmore Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan.
(2011). How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project
Star. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 1593-1660.
Cho, Y.I., S.Y.D. Lee, A.M. Arozullah, and K.S. Crittenden. (2008). Effects of Health Literacy
on Health Status and Health Service Utilization amongst the Elderly. Social Science and
Medicine, 66(8): 1809-1816.
Chua, K. and B.D. Sommers (2014). Changes in Health and Medical Spending among Young
Adults under Health Reform. Journal of the American Medical Association, 311 (23): 2437-
2439.
Clemans-Cope, L. and N. Anderson (2014). How many Non-Group Policies were Cancelled?
Estimates from December 2013. Health Affairs Blog. Available from:
http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2014/03/03/how-many-nongroup-policies-were-canceled-estimates-
from-december-2013/.
Cohen, R.A., M.E. Martinez, and E.P. Zammitti (2016). Health Insurance Coverage: Early
Release of Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, 2015. National Center for
Health Statistics. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/ releases.htm.
Courtemanche, C. and D. Zapata (2014). Does Universal Coverage Improve Health? The
Massachusetts Experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33 (1): 36–69.


                                              35
Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, and A. Yelowitz (2016). Who Gained Insurance Coverage in 2014,
the First Year of Full ACA Implementation? Health Economics 25: 778-784.
Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2017). Early Impacts of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-Expansion
States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36 (1): 178-210.
Courtemanche, C., J. Pinkston, and J. Stewart (2015). Adjusting Body Mass for Measurement
Error with Invalid Validation Data. Economics and Human Biology, 19: 275-293
Cowan, B.W. and D.R. White (2015). The Effects of Merit-Based Financial Aid on Drinking in
College. Journal of Health Economics, 44: 137-149.
Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996a). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 431–466.
Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy, 104: 1263–1296.
Cutler, D.M. and R.J. Zeckhauser (2000). "The Anatomy of Health Insurance," in: A.J. Culyer
and J.P. Newhouse (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, chapter 11: 563-643. New
York, NY: Elsevier.
Dafny, L. and J. Gruber (2005). Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access and
Efficiency Effects. Journal of Public Economics, 89: 109–129.
Dave, D. and R. Kaestner (2009). Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from
Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9 (4): 367-390.
Dave, D.M., R. Kaestner, and G.L. Wehby (2014). Does Medicaid Coverage for Pregnant
Women Affect Prenatal Health Behaviors? NBER Working Paper 21049. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

DeSalvo, K.B., N. Bloser, K. Reynolds, J. He, and P. Muntner (2006). Mortality Prediction with
a Single General Self-Rated Health Question. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21 (3): 267-
275.
Epstein, A.M. and J.P. Newhouse (1998). Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Early Prenatal Care
and Health Outcomes. Health Care Financing Review, 19: 85-99.
Finkelstein, A. (2007). The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1): 1-37.
Finkelstein, A. and R. McKnight (2008). What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public Economics, 92:
1644-1668.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J.P. Newhouse, and K. Baicker,
and the Oregon Health Study Group (2012). The Oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence
from the first year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127: 1057–1106.

                                                36
Frean, M., J. Gruber, and B.D. Sommers (2016). Premium Subsidies, the Mandate, and Medicaid
Expansion: Coverage Effects of the Affordable Care Act. NBER Working Paper 22213.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Galen, T.S. (2015). Using Participant Behavior to Measure the Value of Social Programs: The
Case of Medicaid. University of Chicago Working Paper. Available from:
http://web.ics.purdue.edu/~tgallen/Papers/TGallen_Using_Participant_Behavior_2015.pdf
Garber, A. and J. Skinner (2008). Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient? Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22: 27-50.
Glied, S. and S. Ma (2015). How will the Affordable Care Act Affect the use of Health Care
Services? Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief 1804. Available from:
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/files/publications/issue-
brief/2015/feb/1804_glied_how_will_aca_affect_use_hlt_care_svcs_ib_v2.pdf
Golberstein, E., G. Gonzales, and B.D. Sommers (2015). California's Early ACA Expansion
Increased Coverage and Reduced Out-of-Pocket Spending for the State's Low-Income
Population. Health Affairs, 34: 1688-1694.
Gruber, J. (2000). “Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in: A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse
(eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, chapter 12: 645-706. New York, NY:
Elsevier.
Gruber, J. (2008). Incremental Universalism for the United States: The States Move First?
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22: 51–68.

Hu, L., R. Kaestner, B. Mazumder, S. Miller, and A. Wong (2016). The Effect of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions on Financial Well-Being. NBER
Working Paper No. 22170. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Idler, E.L. and Y. Benyamini (1997). Self-Rated Health and Mortality: A Review of Twenty-
Seven Community Studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 38 (1): 21-37.
Kaestner, R. (2015). Did Massachusetts Health Care Reform Lower Mortality? Not According to
Randomization Inference. Statistics and Public Policy, 3(1): 1-6.
Kaestner, R., B. Garrett, A. Gangopadhyaya, and C. Fleming (2015). Effects of the ACA
Medicaid Expansion on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply. NBER Working Paper
No. 21836. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaiser Family Foundation. State Decisions on Health Insurance Marketplaces and the Medicaid
Expansion, 2014. Available from: http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-decisions-for-
creating-health-insurance-exchanges-and-expanding-medicaid/
Kenkel, D., M. Schmeiser, and C. Urban (2014). Is Smoking Inferior? Evidence from Variation
in the Earned Income Tax Credit. Journal of Human Resources, 49 (4): 1094-1120.




                                                37
Kirby, J.B. and J.P. Vistnes (2016). Access to Care Improved for People who Gained Medicaid
or Marketplace Coverage in 2014. Health Affairs, 35(10): 1830-1834.
Kolstad, J. and A. Kowalski (2012). The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and
Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11): 909-929.
Kowalski, A. (2014). The Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act State-by-State. NBER
Working Paper 20597. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lichtenberg, F. (2002). “The Effects of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes,” in
A.M. Garber (ed.), Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 5. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Long, S.K., M. Karpman, A. Shartzer, D. Wissoker, G.M. Kenney, S. Zucherman, N. Anderson,
and K. Hempstead (2014) Taking Stock: Health Insurance Coverage under the ACA as of
September 2014. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. Available from:
http://hrms.urban.org/briefs/Health-Insurance-Coverage-under-the-ACA-as-of-September-
2014.html.
Manning, W., J.P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E.B. Keeler, A. Leibowitz, and M.S. Marquis (1987).
Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.
American Economic Review, 77(3): 251-77.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC) (2015). An Update on the
Medicaid Primary Care Payment Increase. Available from:
https://www.macpac.gov/publication/an-update-on-the-medicaid-primary-care-payment-
increase-3/

McMorrow, S., G.M. Kenney, S.K. Long, and J.A. Gates (2016). Marketplaces Helped Drive
Coverage Gains in 2015; Affordability Problems Remained. Health Affairs, 35 (10): 1810-1815.
Miller, S. (2012a). The effect of insurance on emergency room visits: An analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts health reform. Journal of Public Economics, 96: 893–908.
Miller, S. (2012b). The Impact of the Massachusetts Health Care Reform on Health Care use
among Children. American Economic Review, 102: 502–507.
Obama, B. (2016). United States Health Reform: Progress to Date and Next Steps. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 316 (5): 525-532.
Pauly, M. (2017). Should Lower-Income People be Allowed to Buy Insurance with High Cost
Sharing? American Journal of Health Economics, 3 (1): 1-9.
Phillips, A.C., G. Der, and D. Carroll (2010). Self-Reported Health, Self-Reported Fitness, and
All-Cause Mortality: Prospective Cohort Study. British Journal of Health Psychology, 15(2):
337-346.
Polsky, D., M. Richards, S. Basseyn, D. Wissoker, G.M. Kenney, S. Zuckerman, and K.V.
Rhodes (2015). Appointment Availability after Increases in Medicaid Payments for Primary
Care. New England Journal of Medicine, 372(6): 537-545.


                                               38
Schwartz, M. (2012). Health Care Reform and the Primary Care Workforce Bottleneck. Journal
of General Internal Medicine, 27 (4): 469-472.
Shartzer, A., S.K. Long, and N. Anderson (2015). Access to Care and Affordability have
Improved following Affordable Care Act Implementation; Problems Remain. Health Affairs, 10.
Simon, K., A. Soni, and J. Cawley (2017). The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care
and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36: 390-417.
Smith, J.C., and C. Medalia (2015) U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-253,
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2014. U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC. Available from:
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/demo/p60-253.pdf.
Somers, Stephen A. and Roopa Mahadevan (2010). Health Literacy Implications of the
Affordable Care Act. Center for Health Care Strategies, Inc. Available from:
http://www.chcs.org/media/Health_Literacy_Implications_of_the_Affordable_Care_Act.pdf.
Sommers, B.D. (forthcoming). State Medicaid Expansions and Mortality, Revisited: A Cost-
Benefit Analysis. American Journal of Health Economics.
Sommers B.D., K. Baicker, and A.M. Epstein (2012). Mortality and Access to Care Among
Adults after State Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine, 367: 1025-34.
Sommers, B., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S., Carey, C. and Kronick, R. (2013). The Affordable
Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance and Access to Care for Young
Adults. Health Affairs, 32: 165-174.

Sommers, B.D., R.J. Blendon, and E.J. Orav (2016). Both the ‘Private Option’ and Traditional
Medicaid Expansions Improved Access to Care for Low-Income Adults. Health Affairs, 35: 96-
105.

Sommers, B.D., K.P. Chua, G.M. Kenney, S.K. Long, and S. McMorrow (2016). California’s
Early Coverage Expansion under the Affordable Care Act: a County-level Analysis. Health
Services Research, 51 (3): 825-845.
Sommers, B.D., M.Z. Gunja, K. Finegold, and T. Musco (2015). Changes in Self-Reported
Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health under the Affordable Care Act." Journal of the
American Medical Association, 314 (4): 366-374.
Sommers, B.D., G.M. Kenney, and A.M. Epstein (2014) New Evidence on the Affordable
Care Act: Coverage Impacts of Early Medicaid Expansions. Health Affairs, 33: 78-87.

Taubman, S.L., H.L. Allen, B.J. Wright, K. Baicker, and A.N. Finkelstein (2014). Medicaid
Increases Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon’s Health Insurance Experiment.
Science, 343 (6168): 263-268.



                                              39
Tello-Trillo, D.S. (2016). Effects of Losing Public Health Insurance on Health Care Access,
Utilization, and Health Outcomes. Working paper, University of Virginia. Available from:
https://dsebastiantello.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/tenncare-05212016-21.pdf.
Tolbert, J. (2015). The Coverage Provisions in the Affordable Care Act: An Update. Kaiser
Family Foundation Issue Brief. Available from: http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/the-
coverage-provisions-in-the-affordable-care-act-an-update/.
Van der Wees, P.J., A.M. Zaslavsky, and J.Z. Ayanian (2013). Improvements in Health Status
after Massachusetts Health Care Reform. Milbank Quarterly, 91: 663-689.

Wharam, J.F., D. Ross-Degnan, and M.B. Rosenthal (2013). The ACA and High-Deductible
Insurance — Strategies for Sharpening a Blunt Instrument. New England Journal of Medicine,
369: 1481-1484.

Wherry, L. R. and S. Miller (2016). Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects
Associated With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental Study.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 164 (12): 795-803.

Yelowitz, Aaron. (forthcoming). Local Housing Costs and Basic Household Needs. Empirical
Economics.
Yelowitz, A. and M. Cannon (2010). The Massachusetts Health Plan Much Pain, Little Gain.
Policy Analysis, 657: 1–16.




                                               40
Figures 1 – Changes in Health Care Access and Health Behaviors Over Time By State Medicaid Expansion Status and Pre-
                                              Treatment Uninsured Rate


                           Insurance Coverage                          Primary Care Doctor                             Cost prevented care in past year                               Checkup
              .9




                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                 .65
                                                                                                        .25
       .85




                                                        .75




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                           .2
              .8




                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                                                 .55
                                                                                                        .15
       .75
              .7




                                                        .65




                                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                   2011   2012    2013    2014   2015          2011   2012        2013    2014   2015           2011       2012      2013     2014        2015          2011   2012    2013     2014   2015
                                  Year                                            Year                                               Year                                              Year


                                  BMI                                        Smoking Status                                   Drinks per Month




                                                                                                    15.5
       28.6




                                                        .26
       28.4




                                                                                                           15
                                                        .24




                                                                                                    14.5
       28.2




                                                        .22




                                                                                                           14
              28




                                                                                                    13.5
                                                          .2
       27.8




                                                                                                           13
       27.6




                                                        .18




                   2011   2012    2013    2014   2015          2011   2012        2013    2014   2015           2011       2012      2013     2014        2015
                                  Year                                            Year                                               Year




                                                                         State Above Median Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid

                                                                         State Below Median Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid

                                                                         State Above Median Uninsured Rate and No Expansion

                                                                         State Below Median Uninsured Rate and No Expansion




                                                                                                   41
Figures 2 – Changes in Self-Assessed Health Variables Over Time By State Medicaid Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment
                                                    Uninsured Rate


                               Health good or better                                     Health very good or better                                         Health excellent




                                                                    .56




                                                                                                                               .21
       .85




                                                                    .54
       .84




                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                    .52
       .83




                                                                                                                               .19
                                                                      .5
       .82
       .81




                                                                    .48




                                                                                                                               .18
                   2011     2012        2013        2014     2015               2011    2012        2013        2014    2015               2011      2012         2013         2014      2015
                                        Year                                                        Year                                                          Year


                          Days not in good physical health                             Days not in good mental health                             Days with health related limitations
         4.4




                                                                      4.8




                                                                                                                                       3
         4.2




                                                                      4.6




                                                                                                                                 2.8
                                                                      4.4
               4
         3.8




                                                                      4.2




                                                                                                                                 2.6
         3.6




                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                 2.4
         3.4




                                                                      3.8




                   2011     2012        2013        2014     2015               2011    2012        2013        2014    2015               2011      2012         2013         2014      2015
                                        Year                                                        Year                                                          Year




                                                                      State Above Median Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid

                                                                      State Below Median Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid

                                                                      State Above Median Uninsured Rate and No Expansion

                                                                      State Below Median Uninsured Rate and No Expansion




                                                                                                  42
                                                    Figures 3 – ACA Effects on Access and Risky Health Behaviors at Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates


                                                                                                       Insurance Coverage                                                                                                                                    Primary Care Doctor




                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                         .12 .14 .16 .18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .12 .14 .16 .18
                                                                                                                                                                         Change in Prob. PCP
                               Change in Coverage




                                                                            .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                         .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02 .04 .06 .08
                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                 0   .03   .06   .09   .12    .15    .18   .21     .24                             .27                         .3   .33   .36                          0   .03   .06   .09   .12    .15    .18   .21     .24   .27   .3   .33   .36
                                                                                                             2013 Uninsured Rate                                                                                                                                   2013 Uninsured Rate


                                                                                                 Cost prevented Care in Past Year                                                                                                                                   Checkup




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                             0
                                                     -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .12 .14 .16 .18
Change in Prob. Cost Barrier




                                                                                                                                         Change in Prob. Checkup
                                                                       -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                      -.18 -.16 -.14 -.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02 .04 .06 .08
                                                                       -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                 0   .03   .06   .09   .12    .15    .18   .21     .24                             .27                         .3   .33   .36                          0   .03   .06   .09   .12    .15    .18   .21     .24   .27   .3   .33   .36
                                                                                                             2013 Uninsured Rate                                                                                                                                   2013 Uninsured Rate




                                                                                                               Full ACA                                                                   ACA Without Medicaid Expansion




                                                                                                                                                                                                            43
   Table 1 – Means and Standard Deviations of Dependent Variables By State Medicaid
                    Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
                                 Full      Medicaid   Medicaid      Non-       Non-
                               Sample     Expansion; Expansion; Expansion; Expansion;
                                           ≥ Median   < Median   ≥ Median   < Median
                                           Baseline   Baseline    Baseline   Baseline
                                          Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured
Any Insurance Coverage          0.788        0.791      0.868       0.710      0.805
                               (0.409)      (0.407)    (0.339)     (0.454)    (0.396)
Primary Care Doctor             0.741        0.745      0.826       0.682      0.754
                               (0.439)      (0.436)    (0.378)     (0.465)    (0.431)
Cost Barrier to Care in Past    0.192        0.202      0.144       0.241      0.187
Year                           (0.394)      (0.401)    (0.351)     (0.427)    (0.389)
Well-Patient Doctor Visit in    0.627        0.586      0.673       0.632      0.629
Past Year                      (0.484)      (0.492)    (0.469)     (0.482)    (0.483)
Overall Health Good or          0.840        0.810      0.851       0.824      0.864
Better                         (0.367)      (0.392)    (0.356)     (0.381)    (0.363)
Overall Health Very Good        0.535        0.511      0.565       0.505      0.544
or Better                      (0.499)      (0.499)    (0.496)     (0.499)    (0.498)
Overall Health Excellent        0.204        0.192      0.211       0.199      0.198
                               (0.403)      (0.393)    (0.408)     (0.399)    (0.398)
Days Not in Good Physical       3.660        4.489      3.940       4.149      4.099
Health in Past Month           (7.964)      (8.639)    (8.073)     (8.362)    (8.326)
Days Not in Good Mental         4.118        4.486      3.758       3.755      3.678
Health in Past Month           (8.210)      (8.960)    (8.127)     (8.154)    (8.095)
Days with Health-Related        2.518        3.066      2.553       2.572      2.570
Limitations in Past Month      (6.797)      (7.505)    (6.877)     (6.463)    (6.975)
BMI                            27.875       28.002     27.848      28.202     28.187
                               (6.282)      (6.331)    (6.208)     (6.462)    (6.435)
Smoking Status                  0.216        0.212      0.195       0.218      0.244
                               (0.412)      (0.408)    (0.396)     (0.420)    (0.429)
Drinks per Month               14.285       13.080     13.782      14.103     13.740
                              (35.824)     (32.600)   (32.187)    (37.640)   (35.173)
Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                            44
                              Table 2 – Effects of ACA on Health Care Access and Health Behaviors
                                        Insurance    Primary        Cost      Checkup       BMI                                          Smoker         Alcoholic
                                        Coverage       Care        Barrier                                                                              Drinks per
                                                      Doctor                                                                                             Month
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Medicaid Expansion * Post                 -0.013       0.005        0.019       0.005      0.003                                         -0.022*            0.087
                                         (0.008)      (0.011)      (0.010)    (0.016)     (0.113)                                        (0.009)          (0.538)
Post * Pre-Treatment Uninsured          0.259***     0.148**     -0.127***     0.119*      -0.087                                        -0.0006            3.290
                                         (0.030)      (0.049)      (0.031)    (0.051)     (0.405)                                        (0.046)          (2.119)
Medicaid Expansion * Post * Pre-         0.152**       0.007      -0.123**      0.060      -0.040                                         0.054            -0.607
Treatment Uninsured                      (0.045)      (0.065)      (0.042)    (0.067)     (0.528)                                        (0.045)          (2.397)

Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion        0.053***     0.030**                          -0.026***          0.024*            -0.018          -0.0001            0.667
                                       (0.006)     (0.010)                            (0.006)          (0.010)          (0.082)          (0.009)          (0.429)
Medicaid Expansion                    0.031***      0.001                            -0.025**           0.012            -0.008           0.010            -0.123
                                       (0.009)     (0.013)                            (0.009)          (0.014)          (0.107)          (0.009)          (0.486)
Full ACA (with Medicaid               0.083***     0.031**                          -0.051***         0.036***           -0.026           0.011             0.544
Expansion)                             (0.010)     (0.011)                            (0.010)          (0.009)          (0.094)          (0.007)          (0.571)

Pre-Treatment Mean and Standard                    0.811             0.742            0.183            0.635           27.951             0.208            14.285
Deviation of Outcome                              (0.391)           (0.437)          (0.386)          (0.481)          (6.375)           (0.406)          (35.824)
Sample Size                                      1,322,370         1,321,567        1,071,238        1,072,537        1,264,243         1,300,819        1,225,053
Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. BRFSS sampling weights are used. All regressions include state*location type and year*location type fixed effects as well as the controls.




                                                                                 45
                                     Table 3 – Effects of ACA on Self-Assessed Health
                                     Good or        Very      Excellent    Days Not   Days Not       Days with      Health
                                      Better       Good or     Health      in Good    in Good          Health-      Index
                                      Health        Better                 Physical    Mental          Related
                                                    Health                  Health     Health        Limitations
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Medicaid Expansion * Post              -0.005        0.009          0.004      -0.171       0.006     -0.334*        0.031
                                      (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.111)     (0.210)     (0.165)       (0.021)
Post * Pre-Treatment Uninsured         -0.043        0.028          0.038      -0.584      -0.396      -0.595        -0.003
                                      (0.023)      (0.0327)        (0.025)    (0.555)     (0.763)     (0.695)       (0.096)
Medicaid Expansion * Post * Pre-       0.028         -0.036         0.014       0.336      -0.337       1.114        -0.070
Treatment Uninsured                   (0.030)       (0.041)        (0.033)    (0.537)     (0.878)     (0.811)       (0.104)

Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion          -0.009       0.006           0.008     -0.118      -0.080       -0.121       -0.006
                                       (0.005)      (0.006)        (0.005)    (0.112)     (0.155)      (0.141)      (0.020)
Medicaid Expansion                      0.006        -0.007         -0.003      0.068      -0.068        0.226       -0.014
                                       (0.006)      (0.008)        (0.007)    (0.108)     (0.178)      (0.164)      (0.021)
Full ACA (with Medicaid                 -0.003       -0.002          0.005     -0.050      -0.149        0.105       -0.015
Expansion)                             (0.006)      (0.010)        (0.006)    (0.126)     (0.126)      (0.154)      (0.016)

Pre-Treatment Mean and Standard        0.841        0.537        0.204         3.634       4.071       2.500         -0.036
Deviation                             (0.366)      (0.499)      (0.403)       (7.948)     (8.169)     (6.777)       (0.987)
Sample Size                          1,321,799    1,321,799    1,321,799     1,309,624   1,310,641   1,316,271     1,324,849
See notes for Table 2.




                                                              46
         Table 4 – Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Health Insurance
                              on Health Care Access Outcomes
                                      Primary Care         Cost Barrier         Checkup
                                         Doctor
Any Insurance                           0.446***            -0.469***           0.357***
                                         (0.080)              (0.075)            (0.092)
Sample Size                            1,319,215            1,069,336           1,070,619
First-Stage F Statistic                  618.16               704.79              703.35
Overidentification Test P-Value           0.001                0.144               0.721
See notes for Table 2.




                                             47
                        Table 5 – Event Study Regressions for Health Care Access and Health Behaviors
                                               Insurance Primary        Cost     Checkup       BMI      Smoker    Drinks
                                               Coverage    Care       Barrier                                      per
                                                         Doctor                                                   Month
Coefficient Estimates of Interest (2013 is base year)
2011 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                    0.018   -0.057       0.094    -0.296***      0.602      0.035    -5.326
                                                (0.069)  (0.059)      (0.060)     (0.087)    (0.723)    (0.043)   (3.366)
2012 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                   -0.052   -0.022       -0.011     -0.173*     -0.950      0.022     0.926
                                                (0.067)  (0.081)      (0.056)     (0.066)    (0.622)    (0.046)   (4.642)
2014 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                 0.193***  0.115**     -0.129**     -0.0143     -0.435      0.010    8.360*
                                                (0.046)  (0.045)      (0.054)     (0.050)    (0.723)    (0.050)   (3.968)
2015 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                 0.310***    0.140     -0.106**      -0.021     -0.623      0.041    -3.211
                                                (0.066)  (0.117)      (0.052)     (0.088)    (0.614)    (0.041)   (3.336)
Medicaid Expansion * 2011 * Pre-                  0.027    0.054       -0.047       0.096     -0.167     -0.046     0.462
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.075)  (0.074)      (0.045)     (0.081)    (0.834)    (0.048)   (5.479)
Medicaid Expansion * 2012 * Pre-                 -0.001    0.113       -0.006       0.039      1.552     -0.094   -10.885
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.106)  (0.103)      (0.047)     (0.053)    (0.809)    (0.052)   (5.856)
Medicaid Expansion * 2014 * Pre-                 0.134*    0.011       -0.005       0.046     -0.391      0.019   -8.835*
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.062)  (0.074)      (0.050)     (0.060)    (0.916)    (0.050)   (4.117)
Medicaid Expansion * 2015 * Pre-                 0.197*    0.083     -0.142**       0.100      1.171     -0.024    -0.428
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.082)  (0.115)      (0.048)     (0.077)    (0.793)    (0.042)   (3.684)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion in 2014 0.039***        0.023**     -0.026*       -0.003      -0.088      0.002    1.695*
                                           (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.001)     (0.010)     (0.146)     (0.010)   (0.805)
ACA without Medicaid Expansion in 2015 0.063***          0.028     -0.022*       -0.004      -0.126      0.008     -0.651
                                           (0.013)      (0.024)     (0.010)     (0.018)     (0.124)     (0.008)   (0.677)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion) in     0.066***       0.026    -0.027***       0.006      -0.009      0.006     -0.096
2014                                       (0.012)      (0.015)     (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.128)     (0.011)   (0.752)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion) in     0.103***     0.045**    -0.050***       0.016       0.111      0.004     -0.564
2015                                       (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.182)     (0.007)   (0.845)
See notes from Table 2.


                                                             48
                                     Table 6 – Event Study Regressions for Self-Assessed Health
                                                Good or     Very    Excell- Days Not Days Not        Days with     Health
                                                 Better  Good or      ent      in Good    in Good      Health-     Index
                                                 Health    Better   Health Physical        Mental      Related
                                                          Health                Health     Health    Limitations
Coefficient Estimates of Interest (2013 is base year)
2011 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                    0.047    -0.062   -0.056        0.922      1.492       1.056      -0.105
                                                (0.048)   (0.047) (0.055)       (1.606)    (1.191)     (0.687)     (0.166)
2012 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                    0.025    0.134     0.059        1.477      1.120     1.375*       -0.009
                                                (0.062)   (0.076) (0.044)       (1.664)    (0.769)     (0.650)     (0.157)
2014 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                   -0.039   0.080*     0.061        -.515     -0.213      -0.292      0.039
                                                (0.038)   (0.033) (0.042)       (1.142)    (0.836)     (0.625)     (0.091)
2015 * Pre-Treatment Uninsured                   -0.007    0.088     0.044        0.358      1.300       0.370      -0.098
                                                (0.031)   (0.072) (0.041)       (0.907)    (0.649)     (0.761)     (0.074)
Medicaid Expansion * 2011 * Pre-                 -0.048    0.007     0.124       -1.221     -0.686      -1.093      0.167
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.057)   (0.070)   (0.69)      (1.457)    (1.309)     (0.735)     (0.155)
Medicaid Expansion * 2012 * Pre-                 -0.062    -0.087    0.002        0.447     -0.794      -0.361      0.009
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.068)   (0.089) (0.061)       (1.383)    (0.846)     (0.552)     (0.016)
Medicaid Expansion * 2014 * Pre-                  0.028    -0.081    0.045        0.715     -1.344       0.599      -0.046
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.043)   (0.059) (0.051)       (1.236)    (0.774)     (0.997)     (0.125)
Medicaid Expansion * 2015 * Pre-                 -0.025    -0.066    0.049       -0.072     -0.855       0.873      0.003
Treatment Uninsured                             (0.052)   (0.092) (0.054)       (1.062)    (1.019)     (0.847)     (0.094)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion in 2014      -0.008     0.016*        0.013     -0.105     -0.043        -0.059      0.008
                                           (0.008)    (0.007)       (0.009)   (0.232)    (0.170)       (0.127)     (0.019)
ACA without Medicaid Expansion in 2015      -0.001      0.018        0.009      0.073      0.263         0.075      -0.019
                                           (0.006)    (0.015)       (0.008)   (0.184)    (0.132)       (0.154)     (0.015)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion) in       -0.002    -0.0002        0.003      0.040    -0.316*         0.063      -0.002
2014                                       (0.009)    (0.011)       (0.008)   (0.176)    (0.134)       (0.199)     (0.020)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion) in       -0.006      0.004       0.019*      0.058      0.090         0.252      -0.019
2015                                       (0.009)    (0.014)       (0.009)   (0.175)    (0.150)       (0.168)     (0.019)
See notes from Table 2.


                                                               49
                                           Table 7 – Income Below Median Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.316)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup        BMI       Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                  Month
ACA w/o Medicaid            0.052**          0.041**          -0.016        0.046*        -0.006     -0.005         1.728*
                            (0.017)          (0.013)         (0.009)       (0.018)       (0.153)    (0.012)         (0.693)
Medicaid Expansion          0.067**           -0.002         -0.044*        -0.010        -0.091     0.019          -1.399*
                            (0.026)          (0.021)         (0.017)       (0.023)       (0.209)    (0.014)         (0.643)
Full ACA (w/               0.119***           0.038*        -0.060**         0.035        -0.098     0.013           0.330
Medicaid)                   (0.019)          (0.017)         (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.165)    (0.010)         (0.816)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.674             0.664          0.289          0.581        28.344     0.276          12.508
and Standard Deviation      (0.469)          (0.472)         (0.453)       (0.493)       (6.766)    (0.447)        (37.676)
Sample Size                 672,937          672,627        548,521        549,596       638,395    660,975        640,349

                            Good or        Very Good      Excellent    Days Not in   Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health     or Better      Health          Good      Good Mental     Health-
                                             Health                     Physical       Health        Related
                                                                         Health                    Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             -0.004           0.012       0.012**         -0.316          -0.300      -0.388        0.026
                            (0.008)         (0.011)       (0.004)        (0.159)         (0.243)     (0.247)       (0.026)
Medicaid Expansion           0.005           -0.002        0.004          0.187           -0.233      0.504         -0.014
                            (0.012)         (0.015)       (0.012)        (0.245)         (0.300)     (0.360)       (0.037)
Full ACA (w/                 0.001            0.009        0.016          -0.129         -0.533*      0.116         0.012
Medicaid)                   (0.012)         (0.016)       (0.012)        (0.232)         (0.233)     (0.282)       (0.029)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.768            0.426        0.155          4.798           5.276       3.482         -0.249
and Standard Deviation      (0.422)         (0.495)       (0.362)        (9.052)         (9.262)     (7.969)       (1.077)
Sample Size                 672,765         672,765       672,765       663,572          664,825    668,102        674,849
See notes from Table 2.




                                                               50
                                           Table 8 – Income Above Median Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.062)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup        BMI       Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                 Month
ACA w/o Medicaid           0.026***            0.010          -0.003        -0.006        -0.019     0.005           -0.335
                            (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.005)       (0.012)       (0.061)    (0.005)         (0.340)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.007           -0.006          -0.004        0.010          0.084    0.015**          0.863
                            (0.006)          (0.008)         (0.008)       (0.017)       (0.101)    (0.005)         (0.452)
Full ACA (w/               0.020***            0.005          -0.007        0.004          0.065    0.020**          0.528
Medicaid)                   (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.008)       (0.012)       (0.110)    (0.007)         (0.509)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.933             0.837          0.070         0.684         27.289     0.141          16.474
and Standard Deviation      (0.249)          (0.369)         (0.255)       (0.465)       (5.580)    (0.348)        (33.297)
Sample Size                 649,433          648,940        522,717        522,941       625,848    639,844        627,768

                            Good or       Very Good       Excellent    Days Not in   Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health    or Better       Health          Good      Good Mental     Health-
                                            Health                      Physical       Health        Related
                                                                         Health                    Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             -0.006           0.002        0.006          -0.064          0.095       -0.017        -0.010
                            (0.004)         (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.071)         (0.093)     (0.057)       (0.011)
Medicaid Expansion           0.003           -0.009        0.004          0.048           0.112       0.046         -0.022
                            (0.005)         (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.111)         (0.137)     (0.084)       (0.013)
Full ACA (w/                 -0.003          -0.007        0.010          -0.017          0.207       0.029        -0.032*
Medicaid)                   (0.004)         (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.111)         (0.115)     (0.085)       (0.013)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.931            0.675        0.266          2.214           2.651       1.283         0.234
and Standard Deviation      (0.254)         (0.468)       (0.442)        (6.000)         (6.330)     (4.605)       (0.778)
Sample Size                 649,034         649,034       649,034       646,052          643,712    648,169        650,000
See notes from Table 2.




                                                               51
                                           Table 9 – Non-College Graduate Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.253)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup        BMI       Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                 Month
ACA w/o Medicaid           0.059***           0.030*         -0.025*        0.031*        -0.021     -0.003          1.053
                            (0.007)          (0.013)         (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.107)    (0.011)         (0.606)
Medicaid Expansion         0.040***            0.001         -0.036*         0.010         0.067     0.013           -0.559
                            (0.013)          (0.017)         (0.015)       (0.016)       (0.152)    (0.012)         (0.762)
Full ACA (w/               0.100***           0.032*       -0.062***      0.040***         0.046     0.010           0.494
Medicaid)                   (0.014)          (0.013)         (0.015)       (0.011)       (0.120)    (0.010)         (0.803)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.736             0.708          0.230          0.610        28.332     0.266          14.397
and Standard Deviation      (0.441)          (0.455)         (0.421)       (0.488)       (6.516)    (0.442)        (38.966)
Sample Size                 805,370          804,971        654,250        655,238       767,571    791,481        767,463

                            Good or       Very Good       Excellent    Days Not in   Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health    or Better       Health          Good      Good Mental     Health-
                                            Health                      Physical       Health        Related
                                                                         Health                    Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             -0.010           0.014       0.018***        -0.231          -0.060      -0.154        0.007
                            (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.005)       (0.145)         (0.204)     (0.192)       (0.023)
Medicaid Expansion           0.010           -0.011         -0.008        0.127           -0.176      0.299         -0.017
                            (0.009)         (0.012)        (0.007)       (0.156)         (0.261)     (0.260)       (0.028)
Full ACA (w/                 -0.000           0.003         0.010         -0.104          -0.236      0.146         -0.010
Medicaid)                   (0.009)         (0.014)        (0.008)       (0.161)         (0.175)     (0.239)       (0.021)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.802            0.393         0.168         4.254           4.682       2.967         -0.176
and Standard Deviation      (0.398)         (0.488)        (0.373)       (8.592)         (8.787)     (7.396)       (1.029)
Sample Size                 805,178         805,178        805,178      795,368          796,668    800,482        807,390
See notes from Table 2.




                                                               52
                                              Table 10 – College Graduate Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.075)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup          BMI         Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                     Month
ACA w/o Medicaid           0.021***          0.017**         -0.010*        0.007           -0.013       0.007           -0.157
                            (0.003)          (0.006)         (0.005)       (0.008)         (0.100)      (0.005)         (0.438)
Medicaid Expansion           0.005            -0.007          -0.006        0.015           -0.181       0.002          0.870*
                            (0.003)          (0.007)         (0.007)       (0.016)         (0.116)      (0.005)         (0.380)
Full ACA (w/               0.027***            0.011         -0.016*        0.022           -0.194       0.008           0.713
Medicaid)                   (0.004)          (0.006)         (0.007)       (0.014)         (0.144)      (0.004)         (0.409)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.922             0.791          0.096         0.669           26.709       0.087          14.005
and Standard Deviation      (0.268)          (0.406)         (0.294)       (0.471)         (5.492)      (0.283)        (26.468)
Sample Size                 517,000          516,596        416,988        417,299         496,672      509,338        500,654

                            Good or        Very Good      Excellent     Days Not in      Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health     or Better      Health          Good          Good Mental     Health-
                                             Health                      Physical          Health        Related
                                                                          Health                       Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             0.003           -0.002         -0.013         0.067            -0.152        -0.099        -0.002
                            (0.003)         (0.006)        (0.010)        (0.083)          (0.094)       (0.054)       (0.100)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.002          -0.008         0.013          0.013            0.196        0.201*         -0.013
                            (0.004)         (0.008)        (0.011)        (0.139)          (0.142)       (0.093)       (0.016)
Full ACA (w/                 0.001           -0.010        -0.0003         0.080            0.044         0.102         -0.015
Medicaid)                   (0.003)         (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.145)          (0.161)       (0.092)       (0.017)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.938            0.709         0.296          2.118            2.660         1.912         0.325
and Standard Deviation      (0.242)         (0.454)        (0.457)        (5.736)          (6.233)       (5.776)       (0.754)
Sample Size                 516,621         516,621        516,621       514,256           513,953      515,789        517,459
See notes from Table 2.




                                                                53
                                             Table 11 – Age Below Median Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.233)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup          BMI         Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                     Month
ACA w/o Medicaid           0.056***           0.022*        -0.033**        0.021           -0.032       -0.001          0.882
                            (0.006)          (0.010)         (0.011)       (0.011)         (0.098)      (0.012)         (0.591)
Medicaid Expansion           0.029*            0.005          -0.022        0.019            0.009       0.018           -0.326
                            (0.012)          (0.014)         (0.015)       (0.015)         (0.149)      (0.013)         (0.656)
Full ACA (w/               0.085***           0.027*       -0.055***      0.040***          -0.024       0.017           0.556
Medicaid)                   (0.013)          (0.012)         (0.014)       (0.011)         (0.129)      (0.009)         (0.747)
Pre-Treatment Mean            0.757            0.675          0.208         0.577           27.449       0.225          15.194
and Standard Deviation      (0.429)          (0.468)         (0.406)       (0.494)         (6.273)      (0.417)        (37.965)
Sample Size                 652,429          652,082        531,312        531,987         618,804      640,852        622,490

                            Good or        Very Good      Excellent     Days Not in      Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health     or Better      Health           Good         Good Mental     Health-
                                             Health                      Physical          Health        Related
                                                                          Health                       Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             -0.003           0.003         0.004          -0.285           -0.075        -0.240        0.014
                            (0.007)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.216)          (0.225)       (0.200)       (0.033)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.001          -0.010         -0.004         0.283            -0.113        0.333         -0.037
                            (0.009)         (0.010)        (0.011)        (0.184)          (0.280)       (0.236)       (0.033)
Full ACA (w/                 -0.004          -0.007         0.001          -0.002           -0.188        0.093         -0.023
Medicaid)                   (0.008)         (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.149)          (0.189)       (0.195)       (0.019)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.874            0.571         0.226          2.943            4.130         2.061         0.012
and Standard Deviation      (0.332)         (0.495)        (0.418)        (6.921)          (8.042)       (5.958)       (0.929)
Sample Size                 652,707         652,707        652,707       647,944           647,941      650,873        670,911
See notes from Table 2.




                                                                54
                                             Table 12 – Age Above Median Subsample
                                                (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.149)
                           Insurance      Primary Care Cost Barrier        Checkup          BMI         Smoker        Drinks per
                           Coverage          Doctor                                                                     Month
ACA w/o Medicaid           0.037***           0.036*          -0.002        0.037*          -0.098       -0.004          0.396
                            (0.010)          (0.015)         (0.008)       (0.015)         (0.122)      (0.006)         (0.602)
Medicaid Expansion          0.036**            0.002        -0.036**         0.004           0.120       -0.003          0.585
                            (0.011)          (0.015)         (0.012)       (0.019)         (0.182)      (0.006)         (0.767)
Full ACA (w/               0.072***          0.038**       -0.038***      0.042***           0.022       -0.007          0.981
Medicaid)                   (0.008)          (0.012)         (0.010)       (0.012)         (0.135)      (0.006)         (0.724)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.847             0.861          0.162          0.717          28.635       0.200          12.640
and Standard Deviation      (0.360)          (0.346)         (0.368)       (0.450)         (6.235)      (0.400)        (31.553)
Sample Size                 669,941          669,485        539,926        540,550         645,439      659,967        645,627

                            Good or        Very Good      Excellent     Days Not in      Days Not in   Days with     Health Index
                          Better Health     or Better      Health           Good         Good Mental     Health-
                                             Health                      Physical          Health        Related
                                                                          Health                       Limitations
ACA w/o Medicaid             -0.009          0.016*        0.012**         -0.045           -0.117        -0.098         0.004
                            (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.004)        (0.157)          (0.127)       (0.101)       (0.011)
Medicaid Expansion           0.011          -0.019*         -0.008         -0.295           -0.234        -0.194        0.028*
                            (0.008)         (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.179)          (0.137)       (0.118)       (0.013)
Full ACA (w/                 0.002           -0.003         0.004        -0.340*           -0.351*       -0.292*        0.032*
Medicaid)                   (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.147)          (0.142)       (0.123)       (0.013)
Pre-Treatment Mean           0.779            0.472         0.163          4.956            4.077         3.333         -0.124
and Standard Deviation      (0.415)         (0.499)        (0.369)        (9.423)          (8.479)       (8.013)       (1.080)
Sample Size                 669,092         669,092        669,092       661,680           662,700      665,398        653,938
See notes from Table 2.




                                                                55
    Appendix Table A1 – Summary Statistics for Control Variables By State Medicaid
                   Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
                           Full Sample    Medicaid   Medicaid      Non-        Non-
                                         Expansion; Expansion; Expansion; Expansion;
                                          ≥ Median   < Median    ≥ Median    < Median
                                           Baseline   Baseline    Baseline   Baseline
                                          Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured
Age 25-29                     0.105         0.107      0.104       0.107       0.105
                             (0.306)       (0.308)    (0.303)     (0.300)     (0.307)
Age 30-34                     0.118         0.121      0.117       0.120       0.118
                             (0.323)       (0.325)    (0.320)     (0.317)     (0.322)
Age 35-39                     0.107         0.106      0.102       0.103       0.099
                             (0.302)       (0.306)    (0.299)     (0.296)     (0.302)
Age 40-44                     0.119         0.114      0.118       0.124       0.116
                             (0.323)       (0.320)    (0.320)     (0.318)     (0.320)
Age 45-49                     0.108         0.103      0.108       0.108       0.106
                             (0.309)       (0.304)    (0.305)     (0.306)     (0.303)
Age 50-54                     0.130         0.127      0.131       0.129       0.131
                             (0.336)       (0.332)    (0.333)     (0.337)     (0.329)
Age 55-59                     0.104         0.105      0.106       0.098       0.104
                             (0.304)       (0.306)    (0.302)     (0.308)     (0.297)
Age 60-64                     0.096         0.103      0.096       0.095       0.098
                             (0.294)       (0.299)    (0.293)     (0.295)     (0.292)
Female                        0.497         0.491      0.497       0.499       0.498
                             (0.499)       (0.499)    (0.499)     (0.499)     (0.499)
Black                         0.122         0.066      0.096       0.188       0.134
                             (0.327)       (0.235)    (0.332)     (0.312)     (0.341)
Hispanic                      0.166         0.198      0.172       0.221       0.059
                             (0.372)       (0.385)    (0.370)     (0.300)     (0.424)
White                         0.633         0.651      0.636       0.542       0.750
                             (0.482)       (0.463)    (0.482)      (451)      (0.497)
Married                       0.524         0.521      0.518        0.20       0.553
                             (0.499)       (0.499)    (0.499)     (0.499)     (0.499)
High school degree            0.267         0.278      0.259       0.274       0.289
                             (0.443)       (0.451)    (0.446)     (0.447)     (0.443)
Some College                  0.320         0.347      0.315       0.319       0.331
                             (0.466)       (0.473)    (0.465)     (0.463)     (0.466)
College graduate              0.281         0.236      0.298       0.254       0.272
                             (0.449)       (0.422)    (0.445)     (0.459)     (0.432)
                                    -- CONTINUED --



                                         56
                                     Appendix Table A1 – Continued
                                        Full    Medicaid    Medicaid       Non-         Non-
                                      Sample   Expansion; Expansion;    Expansion;   Expansion;
                                                ≥ Median    < Median     ≥ Median     < Median
                                                 Baseline    Baseline    Baseline     Baseline
                                                Uninsured Uninsured     Uninsured    Uninsured
No child                               0.544      0.553        0.544       0.533        0.555
                                      (0.498)    (0.497)      (0.498)     (0.497)      (0.498)
One child                              0.181      0.175        0.182       0.185        0.177
                                      (0.385)    (0.382)      (0.387)     (0.384)      (0.390)
Two children                           0.166      0.166        0.168       0.167        0.160
                                      (0.372)    (0.366)      (0.371)     (0.370)      (0.372)
Three children                         0.072      0.070        0.071       0.075        0.069
                                      (0.257)    (0.257)      (0.258)     (0.252)      (0.262)
Four children                          0.025      0.025        0.024       0.028        0.026
                                      (0.156)    (0.158)      (0.155)     (0.148)      (0.160)
Unemployed                             0.091      0.102        0.093       0.092        0.078
                                      (0.280)    (0.290)      (0.283)     (0.270)      (0.289)
Unemployment rate                      8.053      8.716        8.421      7.880        6.829
                                      (1.628)    (1.362)      (1.745)    (1.525)      (1.499)
Student                                0.051      0.051        0.055      0.048        0.045
                                      (0.221)    (0.213)      (0.239)    (0.240)      (0.241)
Income 10k to less than 15k            0.058      0.067        0.056      0.067        0.055
                                      (0.235)    (0.231)      (0.233)    (0.209)      (0.253)
Income 15k to less than 20k            0.080      0.095        0.072      0.098        0.081
                                      (0.271)    (0.261)      (0.273)    (0.255)      (0.285)
Income 20k to less than 25k            0.089      0.110        0.081      0.103        0.098
                                      (0.286)    (0.274)      (0.287)    (0.276)      (0.294)
Income 25k to less than 35k            0.103      0.120        0.097      0.112        0.109
                                      (0.304)    (0.294)      (0.304)    (0.294)      (0.310)
Income 35k to less than 50k            0.134      0.141        0.129      0.136        0.148
                                      (0.340)    (0.329)      (0.341)    (0.341)      (0.337)
Income 50k to less than 75k            0.154      0.151        0.156      0.139        0.165
                                      (0.360)    (0.351)      (0.359)    (0.369)      (0.346)
Income more than 75k                   0.309      0.242        0.337      0.268        0.281
                                      (0.460)    (0.476)      (0.461)    (0.476)      (0.448)
Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                  57
    Appendix Table A2 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Any Insurance at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                 <138%       <100%     <138% FPL
                           phic      phic and    phic and     phic and      Phone       FPL         FPL      Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family    Economic Exchange          Sample    Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                >100%       >100%       Private
                                                                                      Private     Private
ACA without Medicaid    0.048***     0.048***    0.052***     0.053***    0.062***   0.052***    0.053***    0.048***
Expansion                (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion       0.031**      0.031**     0.028**     0.031***      0.017    0.060***    0.058***    0.066***
                         (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.009)     (0.015)    (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.010)
Full ACA (with          0.079***     0.080***    0.080***     0.083***    0.078***   0.112***    0.111***    0.114***
Medicaid Expansion)      (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.014)    (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Sample Size             1,333,480 1,328,980 1,322,370 1,322,370            852,953   1,322,370 1,322,370     1,322,370

                                 Uninsured           State          Drop 19-        Drop All           Drop             Drop          Drop Late
                                 Rate from         Baseline         25 Year        States with        Treated        States with      2014 and
                                 2011-2013           2013            Olds             Early         States with      Full Early         2015
                                                  Uninsured                        Expansion           Early         Expansion        Expanders
                                                     Rate                                           Expansion
ACA without Medicaid             0.056***         0.039***         0.056***           0.052***       0.048***         0.049***         0.052***
Expansion                         (0.008)          (0.005)          (0.006)            (0.007)        (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion               0.034***         0.064***         0.029***             0.034*        0.027*            0.024*           0.033
                                  (0.009)          (0.013)          (0.008)            (0.015)        (0.010)          (0.009)          (0.009)
Full ACA (with                   0.089***         0.103***         0.086***           0.085***       0.075***         0.073***         0.084***
Medicaid Expansion)               (0.009)          (0.011)          (0.008)            (0.015)        (0.011)          (0.010)          (0.010)
Sample Size                      1,322,370        1,322,370        1,227,845           746,174      1,129,957         1,207,428        1,274,613
Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used.




                                                                                 58
     Appendix Table A3 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of having a Primary Care Doctor at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                            Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                  <138%       <100%     <138% FPL
                            phic     phic and     phic and    phic and       Phone       FPL         FPL      Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family     Economic Exchange          Sample    Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only      Controls     Controls    Controls                 >100%       >100%       Private
                                                                                       Private     Private
ACA without Medicaid      0.028*      0.028*      0.028**     0.030**        0.012     0.036**     0.037**     0.033**
Expansion                 (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)
Medicaid Expansion         0.003       0.003       -0.001       0.001        0.019      0.006       0.005       0.010
                          (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.017)
Full ACA (with           0.031**     0.031**       0.027*     0.031**      0.031**     0.042**     0.042**     0.043**
Medicaid Expansion)       (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.016)
Sample Size             1,332,661 1,328,160 1,321,567 1,321,567            852,446    1,321,567 1,321,567     1,321,567

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All        Drop          Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion        Early      Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid          0.035***     0.032**     0.035**         0.032**     0.029*       0.030**       0.029**
Expansion                      (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.011)         (0.012)     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)
Medicaid Expansion              0.010       0.009       -0.006          0.001       0.008        -0.001        0.003
                               (0.015)     (0.022)     (0.014)         (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.013)       (0.013)
Full ACA (with                 0.044**     0.041**       0.029          0.033      0.037*        0.030*       0.031**
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.014)     (0.018)     (0.011)         (0.017)     (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.011)
Sample Size                   1,321,567   1,321,567   1,226,827        745,735   1,129,281     1,206,714     1,273,853
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  59
Appendix Table A4– Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of having a Cost Barrier at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                  Robustness Checks
                      Demogra-      Demogra- Demogra-       Demogra-     Drop Cell      <138%       <100%      <138%
                          phic       phic and   phic and     phic and       Phone         FPL         FPL        FPL
                       Controls       Family   Economic      Exchange      Sample     Medicaid,   Medicaid,  Medicaid,
                         Only        Controls   Controls     Controls                   >100%       >100%      >138%
                                                                                        Private     Private    Private
ACA without Medicaid    -0.021*      -0.021*   -0.025*** -0.026***          -0.010    -0.031***   0.031***   -0.027***
Expansion               (0.009)      (0.008)     (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.011)      (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.007)
Medicaid Expansion     -0.027**     -0.028**    -0.024**     -0.025**     -0.050**     -0.031**    -0.029*    -0.035*
                        (0.009)      (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.015)      (0.008)     (0.011)    (0.009)
Full ACA (with        -0.048*** -0.049*** -0.049*** -0.051*** -0.061*** -0.061***                 -0.060*** -0.062***
Medicaid Expansion)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.012)
Sample Size           1,079,266     1,075,533  1,071,238    1,071,238      715,800    1,071,238   1,071,238  1,071,238

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop          Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with     Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early       States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early      Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                 Expansion
ACA without Medicaid          -0.030***   -0.018***   -0.023***        -0.020**   -0.024***     -0.025***     -0.026***
Expansion                       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)         (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion               -0.023    -0.045**    -0.033**         -0.045*    -0.019*       -0.022*       -0.024**
                                (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.010)         (0.017)     (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.009)
Full ACA (with                -0.053***   -0.063***   -0.055***        -0.065**   -0.043***     -0.048***     -0.050***
Medicaid Expansion)             (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.010)         (0.020)     (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.011)
Sample Size                   1,071,238   1,071,238     994,606         605,156    916,029       976,422      1,031,483
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  60
  Appendix Table A5 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a Checkup at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                 <138%      <100%     <138% FPL
                           phic      phic and    phic and     phic and     Phone        FPL        FPL      Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family    Economic Exchange         Sample    Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                >100%      >100%       Private
                                                                                      Private    Private
ACA without Medicaid      0.021        0.021      0.024*       0.023*    0.047***      0.011      0.012       0.007
Expansion                (0.013)      (0.012)    (0.011)       (0.011)    (0.010)     (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.012)
Medicaid Expansion        0.012        0.013       0.013        0.012      -0.008     0.039*     0.035*      0.042**
                         (0.014)      (0.014)    (0.013)       (0.013)    (0.017)     (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.014)
Full ACA (with          0.033***     0.034***   0.037***      0.035***     0.039*    0.050***   0.047***    0.049***
Medicaid Expansion)      (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.009)       (0.009)    (0.015)     (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.012)
Sample Size             1,080,580 1,076,836 1,072,537 1,072,537           716,568   1,072,537 1,072,537     1,072,537

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-     Drop All        Drop          Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year     States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds          Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured               Expansion        Early      Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                               Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            0.021        0.014      0.023*        0.013**     0.021*        0.023*        0.024*
Expansion                      (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.010)        (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.010)
Medicaid Expansion              0.016       0.040*       0.013         0.018       0.012         0.008         0.016
                               (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.015)        (0.017)     (0.015)      (0.014)       (0.014)
Full ACA (with                0.037***    0.054***    0.037***         0.031     0.033**       0.032**      0.040***
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.011)        (0.016)     (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.009)
Sample Size                   1,072,537   1,072,537    995,814        605,935    917,151       977,617      1,032,729
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                 61
Appendix Table A6 – Implied Effect of ACA on BMI at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                       Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell               <138%      <100%      <138% FPL
                           phic       phic and  phic and   phic and     Phone         FPL        FPL      Medicaid,
                        Controls       Family  Economic Exchange       Sample     Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only       Controls Controls    Controls                >100%      >100%        Private
                                                                                   Private    Private
ACA without Medicaid      -0.004       -0.023    -0.009      -0.018      0.105      -0.105      0.105       -0.112
Expansion                (0.086)      (0.087)   (0.082)     (0.082)    (0.091)     (0.101)    (0.091)      (0.104)
Medicaid Expansion        -0.072       -0.032    -0.006      -0.008     -0.132       0.059     -0.132       0.054
                         (0.116)      (0.111)   (0.110)     (0.107)    (0.150)     (0.113)    (0.150)      (0.111)
Full ACA (with            -0.075       -0.055    -0.002      -0.026     -0.027      -0.046     -0.027       -0.057
Medicaid Expansion)      (0.108)      (0.105)   (0.099)     (0.094)    (0.112)     (0.108)    (0.112)      (0.113)
Sample Size            1,269,733 1,267,091 1,264,243 1,264,243         816,228    1,264,243 1,264,243     1,264,243

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            -0.046      -0.045      -0.101          -0.043      -0.059       -0.047        -0.052
Expansion                      (0.085)     (0.101)     (0.099)         (0.099)     (0.078)      (0.079)       (0.078)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.029       0.164       0.025          -0.117       0.009        0.005         0.008
                               (0.110)     (0.151)     (0.146)         (0.128)     (0.130)      (0.106)       (0.111)
Full ACA (with                  -0.075       0.118      -0.076          -0.160      -0.050       -0.042        -0.044
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.103)     (0.097)     (0.119)         (0.154)     (0.121)      (0.098)       (0.094)
Sample Size                   1,264,243   1,264,243   1,174,488        714,021   1,079,665     1,154,853     1,218,323
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  62
   Appendix Table A7 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of being as Smoker at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                 <138%       <100%     <138% FPL
                           phic      phic and    phic and     phic and      Phone        FPL        FPL      Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family    Economic Exchange          Sample    Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                >100%       >100%       Private
                                                                                       Private    Private
ACA without Medicaid      0.002        0.001      -0.002        -0.000      -0.009      0.002      0.002       0.003
Expansion                (0.010)      (0.010)    (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.006)    (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)
Medicaid Expansion        0.007        0.010       0.010         0.011     0.019*       0.011      0.010       0.010
                         (0.011)      (0.010)    (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.011)
Full ACA (with            0.010        0.011       0.008         0.011       0.010      0.013      0.013       0.014
Medicaid Expansion)      (0.009)      (0.008)    (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Sample Size             1,307,003 1,304,045 1,300,819 1,300,819           841,849    1,300,819 1,300,819     1,300,819

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All        Drop          Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion        Early      Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            0.000        0.000      -0.000          0.001       0.001        0.001         0.001
Expansion                      (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)         (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.009)
Medicaid Expansion              0.013        0.019       0.006          0.017       0.011        0.006         0.011
                               (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.009)         (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)
Full ACA (with                  0.014       0.019*       0.006          0.018       0.011        0.008         0.013
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.006)         (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.007)
Sample Size                   1,300,819   1,300,819   1,207,869        736,307   1,110,938     1,188,282     1,253,655
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  63
    Appendix Table A8 – Implied Effect of ACA on Number of Drinks per Month at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                    Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell               <138%      <100%     <138% FPL
                           phic      phic and    phic and     phic and   Phone         FPL        FPL     Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family    Economic Exchange       Sample     Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                           Only      Controls    Controls     Controls              >100%      >100%        Private
                                                                                    Private    Private
ACA without Medicaid      0.720        0.670        0.619        0.667   -0.464       0.521      0.542       0.425
Expansion                (0.456)      (0.445)     (0.423)      (0.430)  (0.779)     (0.508)    (0.509)      (0.509)
Medicaid Expansion        0.029        0.061       -0.167       -0.123    1.940      -0.983     -0.162       -0.013
                         (0.509)      (0.504)     (0.481)      (0.486)  (1.063)     (0.476)    (0.528)      (0.479)
Full ACA (with            0.749        0.732        0.452        0.544    1.476       0.422      0.379       0.413
Medicaid Expansion)      (0.496)      (0.505)     (0.545)      (0.571)  (0.752)     (0.648)    (0.677)      (0.674)
Sample Size             1,273,660 1,270,939 1,268,117 1,268,117         821,086    1,268,117 1,268,117    1,268,117

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid             0.520      0.115        0.485           0.743       0.795       0.707          0.774
Expansion                      (0.473)     (0.468)     (0.728)         (0.479)     (0.478)      (0.429)       (0.444)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.278      0.612       -0.022          -0.731      -0.187       0.132         -0.245
                               (0.546)     (0.643)     (0.787)         (1.021)     (0.587)      (0.529)       (0.489)
Full ACA (with                   0.242      0.726        0.463           0.012       0.608       0.839          0.529
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.634)     (0.557)     (0.651)         (0.982)     (0.777)      (0.623)       (0.613)
Sample Size                   1,268,117   1,268,117   1,178,584        718,539   1,082,450     1,158,646     1,221,714
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  64
     Appendix Table A9 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having Good or Better Health at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                            Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                        Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                  <138%       <100%     <138% FPL
                             phic    phic and     phic and    phic and     Phone         FPL         FPL      Medicaid,
                         Controls     Family     Economic Exchange        Sample      Medicaid, Medicaid,      >138%
                            Only     Controls     Controls    Controls                 >100%       >100%       Private
                                                                                       Private     Private
ACA without Medicaid     -0.012*       -0.010      -0.009       -0.009     -0.015      -0.009*     -0.009*      -0.007
Expansion                 (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.008)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Medicaid Expansion          0.007       0.005       0.007        0.006      0.010       0.013       0.014       0.012
                          (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.012)      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)
Full ACA (with             -0.005      -0.005      -0.004       -0.003     -0.005       0.004       0.005       0.005
Medicaid Expansion)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Sample Size             1,332,950 1,328,431 1,321,799 1,321,799           852,112     1,321,799 1,321,799     1,321,799

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            -0.005      -0.004      -0.008          -0.010      -0.007      -0.009*        -0.008
Expansion                      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.005)
Medicaid Expansion               0.010       0.010       0.005           0.008       0.006        0.002         0.004
                               (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.007)         (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.006)
Full ACA (with                   0.004       0.006      -0.003          -0.002      -0.010       -0.007        -0.004
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.007)         (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.006)       (0.006)
Sample Size                   1,321,799   1,321,799   1,226,723        745,721   1,129,381     1,206,947     1,274,025
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  65
 Appendix Table A10 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having Very Good or Better Health at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                           Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                       Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Demogra- Drop Cell                  <138%        <100%    <138% FPL
                          phic       phic and     phic and    phic and     Phone         FPL          FPL    Medicaid,
                        Controls      Family     Economic Exchange        Sample    Medicaid, Medicaid,       >138%
                          Only       Controls    Controls     Controls                >100%        >100%      Private
                                                                                      Private      Private
ACA without Medicaid     -0.003       -0.006        0.005       0.006      -0.001       0.007        0.006     0.008
Expansion               (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.009)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion       -0.005       -0.007       -0.008      -0.007      -0.001      -0.006       -0.002     -0.006
                        (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.011)      (0.011)    (0.011)
Full ACA (with           -0.008       -0.008       -0.002      -0.002      -0.001       0.001        0.004     0.002
Medicaid Expansion)     (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)    (0.011)
Sample Size            1,332,950 1,328,431 1,321,799 1,321,799           852,112    1,321,799 1,321,799      1,321,799

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid             0.008       0.008       0.010           0.003       0.006        0.006         0.005
Expansion                      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)         (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.003      -0.006      -0.009          -0.011      -0.005       -0.005        -0.009
                               (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.009)         (0.012)     (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.008)
Full ACA (with                   0.005       0.001       0.000          -0.008       0.001        0.002        -0.004
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.011         (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.010)
Sample Size                   1,321,799   1,321,799   1,226,723        745,721   1,129,381     1,206,947     1,274,025
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  66
 Appendix Table A11 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having Excellent Health at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured
                                              Rate: Robustness Checks

                              Demogra-    Demogra-    Demogra-     Demogra-      Drop Cell      <138%         <100%      <138% FPL
                                phic      phic and     phic and    phic and       Phone           FPL           FPL       Medicaid,
                              Controls     Family     Economic     Exchange       Sample       Medicaid,     Medicaid,     >138%
                                Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                     >100%         >100%        Private
                                                                                                Private       Private
ACA without Medicaid             0.004       0.005       0.008        0.008         0.009        0.006         0.005       0.006
Expansion                      (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)     (0.008)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.001      -0.004      -0.003       -0.003        -0.017        0.004         0.008       0.005
                               (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.009)
Full ACA (with                   0.002       0.002       0.004        0.005        -0.008        0.010         0.013       0.011
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.008)
Sample Size                   1,332,950   1,328,431   1,321,799    1,321,799      852,112      1,321,799     1,321,799   1,321,799

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid             0.009      0.013*      0.007           0.010        0.008       0.007          0.008
Expansion                      (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.004)         (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.005)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.002      -0.006      0.001           0.007       -0.007       0.003         -0.004
                               (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.006)         (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)
Full ACA (with                   0.007       0.007      0.008           0.017        0.001       0.010          0.004
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.005)         (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)
Sample Size                   1,321,799   1,321,799   1,226,723        745,721   1,129,381     1,206,947     1,274,025
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  67
  Appendix Table A12 – Implied Effect of ACA on the Number of Days Not in Good Physical Health at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                          Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks

                              Demogra-    Demogra-    Demogra-     Demogra-      Drop Cell      <138%         <100%      <138% FPL
                                phic      phic and     phic and    phic and       Phone            FPL           FPL      Medicaid,
                              Controls     Family     Economic     Exchange       Sample       Medicaid,     Medicaid,     >138%
                                Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                     >100%         >100%        Private
                                                                                                Private       Private
ACA without Medicaid            -0.012      -0.052      -0.131       -0.118        -0.155        -0.173        -0.173      -0.216
Expansion                      (0.135)     (0.127)     (0.113)      (0.113)       (0.110)       (0.135)       (0.135)     (0.126)
Medicaid Expansion               0.045       0.079       0.057        0.068         0.229         0.053         0.053      0.061
                               (0.118)     (0.116)     (0.107)      (0.109)       (0.260)       (0.150)       (0.152)     (0.136)
Full ACA (with                   0.033       0.027      -0.075       -0.050         0.074        -0.120        -0.120      -0.156
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.144)     (0.142)     (0.132)      (0.126)       (0.247)       (0.144)       (0.145)     (0.146)
Sample Size                   1,320,243   1,316,045   1,309,624    1,309,624      844,163      1,309,624     1,309,624   1,309,624

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            -0.142      -0.241      -0.111          -0.074      -0.171       -0.118        -0.138
Expansion                      (0.113)     (0.125)     (0.120)         (0.137)     (0.121)      (0.118)       (0.116)
Medicaid Expansion               0.045       0.114       0.164           0.030       0.127        0.036         0.009
                               (0.116)     (0.177)     (0.130)         (0.224)     (0.121)      (0.097)       (0.114)
Full ACA (with                  -0.097      -0.127       0.053          -0.044      -0.044       -0.082        -0.046
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.130)     (0.143)     (0.144)         (0.250)     (0.146)      (0.128)       (0.130)
Sample Size                   1,309,624   1,309,624   1,215,345        738,477   1,118,979     1,195,925     1,262,176
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  68
  Appendix Table A13 – Implied Effect of ACA on the Number of Days Not in Good Mental Health at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                          Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks

                              Demogra-    Demogra-    Demogra-     Demogra-      Drop Cell      <138%         <100%      <138% FPL
                                phic      phic and     phic and    phic and       Phone           FPL           FPL       Medicaid,
                              Controls     Family     Economic     Exchange       Sample       Medicaid,     Medicaid,     >138%
                                Only      Controls    Controls     Controls                     >100%         >100%        Private
                                                                                                Private       Private
ACA without Medicaid            -0.008      -0.026      -0.076       -0.008         0.030        -0.094        -0.102      -0.097
Expansion                      (0.016)     (0.146)     (0.156)      (0.155)       (0.122)       (0.213)       (0.206)     (0.212)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.115      -0.085      -0.057       -0.068        -0.149        -0.250        -0.224      -0.256
                               (0.164)     (0.162)     (0.176)      (0.178)       (0.282)       (0.226)       (0.217)     (0.212)
Full ACA (with                  -0.123      -0.111      -0.133       -0.149        -0.120       -0.344*        -0.326     -0.353*
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.120)     (0.124)     (0.120)      (0.126)       (0.259)       (0.162)       (0.169)     (0.169)
Sample Size                   1,321,277   1,317,107   1,310,641    1,310,641      844,984      1,310,641     1,310,641   1,310,641

                              Uninsured      State    Drop 19-      Drop All         Drop         Drop       Drop Late
                              Rate from    Baseline   25 Year      States with    Treated      States with   2014 and
                              2011-2013      2013      Olds           Early      States with   Full Early      2015
                                          Uninsured                Expansion         Early     Expansion     Expanders
                                             Rate                                Expansion
ACA without Medicaid            -0.157      -0.284      -0.106          -0.072      -0.050       -0.078        -0.103
Expansion                      (0.180)     (0.193)     (0.184)         (0.164)     (0.165)      (0.155)       (0.152)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.092      -0.066       0.050          -0.063       0.028       -0.043        -0.067
                               (0.183)     (0.239)     (0.200)         (0.211)     (0.191)      (0.174)       (0.183)
Full ACA (with                  -0.249      -0.350      -0.057          -0.136      -0.022       -0.121        -0.170
Medicaid Expansion)            (0.130)     (0.131)     (0.132)         (0.158)     (0.133)      (0.131)       (0.134)
Sample Size                   1,310,641   1,310,641   1,216,192        739,295   1,119,831     1,196,872     1,263,185
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  69
      Appendix Table A14 – Implied Effect of ACA on the Number of Days with Health-Related Limitations at Mean Pre-
                                     Treatment Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks

                               Demogra-    Demogra-    Demogra-        Demogra-    Drop Cell     <138%        <100%       <138%
                                 phic      phic and     phic and       phic and     Phone           FPL          FPL         FPL
                               Controls     Family     Economic        Exchange     Sample      Medicaid,    Medicaid,   Medicaid,
                                 Only      Controls    Controls        Controls                  >100%        >100%       >138%
                                                                                                 Private      Private     Private
ACA without Medicaid             -0.035      -0.052      -0.129          -0.121       0.073       -0.158       -0.159      -0.179
Expansion                       (0.132)     (0.127)     (0.143)         (0.141)     (0.101)      (0.195)      (0.192)     (0.193)
Medicaid Expansion                0.176      0.198       0.206           0.226       -0.107        0.116        0.119       0.114
                                (0.176)     (0.176)     (0.177)         (0.164)     (0.238)      (0.202)      (0.179)     (0.191)
Full ACA (with                    0.141      0.146       0.076           0.105       -0.035       -0.042       -0.040      -0.065
Medicaid Expansion)             (0.182)     (0.189)     (0.179)         (0.154)     (0.213)      (0.200)      (0.192)     (0.206)
Sample Size                    1,320,243   1,316,045   1,309,624       1,309,624    844,163     1,309,624    1,309,624   1,309,624

                               Uninsured      State    Drop 19-         Drop All       Drop        Drop      Drop Late
                               Rate from    Baseline   25 Year         States with  Treated    States with   2014 and
                               2011-2013      2013      Olds              Early    States with Full Early      2015
                                           Uninsured                   Expansion       Early   Expansion     Expanders
                                              Rate                                 Expansion
ACA without Medicaid             -0.165      -0.138      -0.059           0.027       -0.168      -0.069       -0.157
Expansion                       (0.165)     (0.207)     (0.142)          (0.186)     (0.143)     (0.148)      (0.140)
Medicaid Expansion                0.229      -0.094      0.274            0.360        0.303       0.273        0.280
                                (0.168)     (0.252)     (0.166)          (0.254)     (0.169)     (0.156)      (0.162)
Full ACA (with                    0.064      -0.232      0.121            0.386        0.136       0.204        0.121
Medicaid Expansion)             (0.165)     (0.175)     (0.165)          (0.235)     (0.180)     (0.132)      (0.161)
Sample Size                    1,309,624   1,309,624   1,215,345        738,477    1,118,979 1,201,881       1,262,176
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  70
Appendix Table A15 – Implied Effect of ACA the Health Index at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks

                               Demogra-    Demogra-    Demogra-        Demogra-    Drop Cell     <138%        <100%       <138%
                                 phic      phic and     phic and       phic and     Phone          FPL          FPL         FPL
                               Controls     Family     Economic        Exchange     Sample      Medicaid,    Medicaid,   Medicaid,
                                 Only      Controls    Controls        Controls                  >100%        >100%       >138%
                                                                                                 Private      Private     Private
ACA without Medicaid             -0.015      -0.010      0.001           -0.001       0.017       0.001        0.001       0.004
Expansion                       (0.022)     (0.019)     (0.019)         (0.019)     (0.025)      (0.026)      (0.026)     (0.025)
Medicaid Expansion               -0.004      -0.011      -0.013          -0.014      -0.013       0.007        0.005       0.005
                                (0.110)      (0.20)     (0.021)         (0.021)     (0.032)      (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.026)
Full ACA (with                   -0.019      -0.021      -0.012          -0.015       0.004       0.007        0.006       0.009
Medicaid Expansion)             (0.020)     (0.019)     (0.017)         (0.016)     (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.022)     (0.022)
Sample Size                    1,320,243   1,316,045   1,309,624       1,309,624    844,163     1,309,624    1,309,624   1,309,624

                               Uninsured      State    Drop 19-         Drop All       Drop        Drop      Drop Late
                               Rate from    Baseline   25 Year         States with  Treated    States with   2014 and
                               2011-2013      2013      Olds               Early   States with Early Full      2015
                                           Uninsured                   Expansion       Early   Expansion     Expanders
                                              Rate                                 Expansion
ACA without Medicaid              0.008      0.017       0.004            -0.008       0.001      -0.005       -0.002
Expansion                       (0.022)     (0.025)     (0.023)          (0.023)     (0.021)     (0.021)      (0.020)
Medicaid Expansion               -0.007      0.014       -0.018           -0.027      -0.018      -0.013       -0.018
                                (0.023)     (0.030)     (0.024)          (0.028)     (0.023)     (0.021)      (0.021)
Full ACA (with                    0.001      0.004       -0.013           0.035       -0.017      -0.018       -0.017
Medicaid Expansion)             (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.017)          (0.025)     (0.019)     (0.017)      (0.017)
Sample Size                    1,309,624   1,309,624   1,215,345        738,477    1,118,979 1,209,699       1,262,176
See notes for Appendix Table A2.




                                                                  71
