                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                STICKY PRICES AS
                              COORDINATION FAILURE




                                 Laurence Ball

                                  David Romer




                             Working Paper No. 2327




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1987




We are grateful for helpful comments from Ben Bernanke, Stephen Cecchetti,Andrew
Policano, and participants in the May 1987 conference on coordination failure
at the University of Iowa. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2327
                                                   July 1987



                    Sticky   Prices As Coordination Failure




                                    ABSTRACT

    This paper shows that nominal price rigidity can arise from a failure to

coordinate price changes. If a firm's desired price is increasing in others'

prices, then the gains to the firm from adjusting its price after a nominal

shock are greater if others adjust. This "strategic coniplementarity" in price

adjustment can lead to multiple equilibria in the degree of nominal rigidity.

Welfare may be much higher in the equilibria with less rigidity. In addition,

with multiple equilibrium degrees of rigidity, the economy may have several

short-run equilibria but a unique long—run equilibrium.




Laurence Ball                                     David Romer
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Graduate School of Business Administration        Princeton University
New York University                               Princeton, N.J. O85
New York, N.Y. 10006
                               I. INTRODUCTION



     Many recent attempts to provide microfoundations for Keynesian mac-

roeconomics are based on the idea that agents In a decentralized economy are

unable to coordinate their actions. Coordination problems can arise in trade

(e.g., Diamond, 1982), production (e.g., Bryant, 1983), and demand (e.g.,

Kiyotaki, 1985).1 As Cooper and John (1986) point out, the essential feature

of coordination failure models is "strategic complementarlty": a positive

dependence of an agent's optimal "effort" (for example, level of production or

time spent searching for trading partners) on the effort of others. Economies

with strategic coinpiementarities may possess multiple equilibria in the level

of effort, with high effort equilibria Pareto superior to low effort equi—

libria.   This formalizes the idea that an economy may be stuck in an

"underemployment" equilibrium even though a superior equilibrium exists.


    While recent coordination failure models capture Important Keynesian

ideas, they appear irrelevant to one central feature of Keynesian economics:

rigidities in nominal wages and prices. Current coordination failure models

contain only real variables. Indeed, many authors present such models as an

alternative to older Keynesian theories that explain underemployment with

nominal rigidities.




  See also Hart (1982), Weitzman (1982), Heller (1985), Shleifer (1986), and
the references in Cooper and John.
                                      2


    This paper shows that nominal rigidities can arise front a failure to

coordinate price changes. This failure has the essential features of coor-

dination failures involving real variables such as the level of production or

trade.   Flexibility of one firm's price increases the incentives for other

firms to make their prices flexible. This strategic complementarity implies

that there may be multiple equilibria in the degree of nominal rigidity.

Equilibria with less rigidity (more "effort" devoted to price adjustment) are

often Pareto superior to equilibria with more rigidity.


    We demonstrate these results in a "menu cost" model similar to the ones

in Mankiw (1985), Blanchard and Kiyotakl (1985), and Ball and Romer (1987a).

Section II describes the model and Section III presents our main results. In

the model, imperfectly competitive firms choose whether to pay a small cost of

adjusting prices after a nominal shock. Previous work shows that, because of

externalities from price rigidity, considerable rigidity can be an equilibrium

even If the result is large, highly inefficient fluctuations in output. This

paper shows that the model has additional equilibria with less rigidity.

Specifically, for a range of realizations of the shock, both full adjustment

of prices and complete non-adjustment are equilibria; this implies that an

economy facing a distribution of shocks possesses a continuum of equilibrium

degrees of rigidity. Thus the economic fluctuations that result from nominal

disturbances would be greatly reduced, and welfare might greatly improve, if

firms could "agree" to make their prices more flexible. The size of the con-

tinuum of equilibria is increasing in the degree of strategic complementarity
                                       3


in   price adjustment.2


      Section IV sketches two extensions of our analysis. First, we introduce

heterogeneity among price setters, which leads to equilibria in which some

prices adjust to a shock and others do not.     In this version of the model,

there may be multiple equilibria in the proportion of prices that adjust, and

hence In the size of a shock's real effects.     Second, we consider a simple

dynamic version of our model in which firms choose between adjusting prices

every period and adjusting every two periods.     There can be multiple equi-

libria in the frequency of price changes, and therefore in the speed with

which the price level adjusts to shocks. In addition, this example illustrates

a difference between our model and other coordination failure models: while

the economy may possess multiple short-run equilibria, it converges to a

unique long-run equilibrium (output equal to the natural rate).


      Section V discusses the policy implications of our results and offers

conclusions.



                                II. THE MODEL



      The model Is the same as in Ball and Romer (1987a), where we provide more

details. The economy consists of N producer-consumers, or "yeoman farmers."




  2The surveys of menu cost models by Blanchard (1987) and Rotemberg (1987)
contain other discussions of multiple equilibria in the degree of rigidity;
Rotemberg's argument is closer to ours. (Rotemberg's paper and this one were
written independently and should be viewed as complementary.) Cooper (1987)
presents a model of labor and commodity contracts in which both predetermined
nominal prices and full indexation to nominal shocks are equilibria.
                                             4


N is large.          Each farmer uses his own      labor   to produce a differentiated

product, then sells the product and purchases the products of all other

farmers. Farmers take each others prices as given.


        Farmer i's utility function is

                               c—i
    (1)         U1       C - —L11        -
                                             ZDi

where


    (2)         C1       N[
and where


     Li is farmer i's labor supply;


     C is an index of farmer l's consumption;


     Cjj is farmer l's consumption of the product of farmer j;


     z is a small positive constant (the menu cost);


     D1 is a dummy variable equal to one if' farmer I changes his nominal

price;


     c is the elasticity of substitution between any two goods (c>1);


     y measures the extent of increasing marginal disutility of labor (y>1).


    Farmer i has a linear production function:


    (3)        Yj        Li

where      is farmer i's output. A transactions technology determines the rela-

tion between aggregate consumption and real money balances:


    (4)        C =
                                              5


where


    (5)         C       —E C4;  ''
                        Nj:i

    (6)         P =        E
                                1—j1/(1—c)
                         Nj 1

C is average consumption, P1 is the price of farmer l's product, and P is the

price index corresponding to (2).


        Equations (1)-(6) determine the demand for farmer l's product:


    (7)             =



Farmer i's consumption equals his real revenues:

                         PiYi
    (8)         C
Substituting (7) and (8) into (1) yields farmer i's utility as a function of

real balances and the farmer's relative price:


    (9)         U1 =     (M)()(1•e)      —   C—1(M)Y(    1)Ic —      zD1

        Differentiation of (9) shows that farmer l's utility—maximizing price

neglecting menu costs is


    (10)                 P4M1        ,         =1 -              ,   0<<1
                                                        yc-c+1
                                *
4s Is the elasticity of P1 with respect to the aggregate price level.       (10)

Implies that, in the absence of menu costs, symmetric equilibrium occurs when

Pi:PM.

        CombinIng (9) and (10) yields farmer i's utility as a function of real

balances, the ratio of his price to the utility-maximizing level, and the menu

cost:
                                          6




    (11)      Ui        ()1[(_1                 -
                                                    rc
                                                                   - zDj

                         M
                       V(,
                                  - zDi
                             P1
In what follows, we use (11) as our expression for utility.3



                   III. COORDINATION FAILURE IN PRICE ADJUSTMENT




     In this section, we assume that the economy starts with M1 and

for all 1.    A shock occurs: H changes to 1-i-x.        Each farmer then decides

whether to pay the menu cost and change his price to the new P. Part A of

the section shows that, for a range of x, both adjustment by all farmers and

non-adjustment by all are equilibria. This implies that the economy possesses

a continuum of equilibrium degrees of nominal rigidity. Part B discusses the

importance of strategic complementarity In price setting for this result.

Part C compares welfare in the different equilibria.


    The simplifying assumption that initially all prices equal one is ad hoc.

Therefore, in an Appendix we follow Ball and Romer (1987a) in assuming that

farmers choose initial prices optimally given a distribution of shocks with




  3Our use of specific functional forms simplifies the analysis but is not im-
portant for the result below that there are multiple equilibria. Writing
farmer l's utility as a function of real money and his relative price,
W(M/P,P1/P) (see (9)), all that is needed Is -W>W1>O at a point where
W2(M/P,1)O (subscripts denote partial derivatives). WO at P1/P=1 is neces-
sary for symmetric equilibrium; W22<O is the second order condition for farmer
1; W12>O is necessary for the equilibrium to be stable; and -W22>W12 is re-
quired for strategic complenientarity.
                                        7


mean zero. Even though the mean of the ex post money supply is one, farmers

set initial prices different from one --    that   is, certainty equivalence fails

-- because utility is not quadratic. We show, however, that the results in

the text are altered only slightly.


       A. Multiple Equilibria


       We first solve for the range of shocks over which non-adjustment of all

prices is an equilibrium. This is similar to computations in previous menu

cost papers.      Then we determine the range over which full adjustment is an

equilibrium. The two ranges overlap, possibly substantia1ly.

      Non-adjustment is an equilibrium when farmer I chooses not to pay the

menu cost if no other farmer pays. If farmer I maintains a rigid price along

with the others, then D1O. P=?1, which implies MI?            M and, using (10),
                                                          1
             1/Ml. Thus the farmer's utility is V(M,

       If farmer I pays the menu cost despite others' non-adjustment, then Dj1.

Adjustment of one price does not affect the aggregate price level, so P1 and

M/?     M. Adjustment allows farmer i to set ?E', so P/P7         1. Thus farmer

l's utility Is V(M,1) —     z.

      These results imply that farmer i chooses not to pay the menu cost -— and

so rigidity is an equilibrium --   if
      (12)       GM <   Z




 4One    can showthat if both full adjustment of prices and complete non-
adjustment are equilibria, then there is a third equilibrium in which some
prices adjust and others do not. This equilibrium is unstable.
                                                   8


                       GN    -   V(M,1) —       V(M,       )




GN   is the gain to a farmer from adjusting given that others do not adjust.

(12) states that rigidity is an equilibrium If                 is less than the menu cost.


      Taking a second order approximation of GN around M:1 yields


     (13)                    _(1_4)2v2

where xM—1 and subscripts of V denote partial derivatives evaluated at (1,1)

(V22(1,1)<O). The derIvatIon of (13) uses the fact that V2(1,1):V12(1,1):O.

(13) shows that the gain from adjusting is increasing in the size of the

shock.       (12) and (13) imply that the gain is less than the menu cost, and so

rigidity is an equilibrium, if IxI<xN, where

                             t-2z
     (ill)        XN
                            V (14)2v22
      Price flexibility Is an equilibrium when farmer i chooses to pay            the   menu

cost if all others pay.           If farmer i pays along with the others, then D11.

P1=PM (the equilibrium under flexible prices), which implies M/P                     1 and

             1. Thus utility is V(1,1) —         z.

      If farmer i does not pay the menu cost even though others do, then DiO.

PM but Pj:1, which Implies MI?              1    and, using (10), Pj/P    1/M. Farmer l's

utility Is V(1, 1)


     These results show that farmer I pays the menu cost If

     (15)         GA > Z

                       GA E V(1,1) — V(1,
                                                       )
Flexibility     Is an equilibrium If GA, the gain from adjusting given that others
                                              9


adjust   as well, is greater than the menu cost. A second order approximation

yields

                             —1
      (16)        GA

Like G, GA is increasing in the size of the shock. (15) and (16) imply that

flexibility is an equilibrium if ixi>xA, where


      (17)
                  xA :/T
       Combining (11) and (17) yields our central result:


      (18)
                  —
                  XN
                        =
                              1

                  XA         1—4>


4>,   the elasticity of P with respect to F, is between zero and one. Thus

xA<xN. If lxi          is   between xA and xN, then both rigidity and flexibility are

equilibria.5


      These results can be summarized as follows. For small monetary shocks -—

I x<x        —- each farmer refuses to pay the menu cost regardless of others'

decisions, and so rigidity is the only equilibrium.             For large shocks ——

         —— each farmer pays regardless of others, and so flexibility is the
ixi>xN
only equilibrium.           But for shocks of intermediate size -- xA<ixi<xN -- a

farmer pays if and only if others do. To see why, consider a positive shock

for concreteness and recall that a farmer's utility maximizing price, P, is

P4>M14>. If others keep their prices fixed at one, then           rises to M4>. By




  5As noted above, previous analyses of menu cost models (for example,
Blanchard and Kiyotaki) derive the conditions under which nominal rigidity is
an equilibrium. Thus they focus on what we call      and ignore the existence
of multiple equilibria. An exception is Rotemberg (discussed in n. 2), who
focuses on xA and notes that there are multiple equilibria.
                                          10



itself, this does not induce the farmer to pay      the   menu cost. But if others

adjust their prices, then P rises to M and 7 rises to M>M14. That is, if

others adjust, they change their prices in the same direction as the money

supply, which pushes P7 farther from one. Since the desired increase in pj      is
larger, the incentive to adjust is larger, and so the farmer pays the menu

cost.      Since the farmer pays if and only if others do, there are two

equilibria.6


        These results concern equilibrium responses to a single shock. Now sup-

pose that farmers face a distribution of shocks and choose rules for when to

pay the menu cost, and consider the equilibrium rules. We restrict attention

to equilibria in which all farmers pay the menu cost if lxi is greater than a

cutoff, x —-    that   is, if the money supply lies outside of (1_x*,1+x*).     is

a natural measure of the degree of rigidity. Our results imply that any value

of x between xA and xN is an equilibrium --      a farmer will adopt any value in

this range as a cutoff if all others do. Thus there is a continuum of equi-

libriuni degrees of nominal rigidity.7




  6Accoiuodating monetary policy would be another source of multiple equl-
libria. Suppose the money supply rule Is changed from M1+x to M1+c(P-1)+x,
O<c<1. Since P1 if prices are rigid, xN is not affected. But if prices are
flexible, the equilibrium level of P and H is 1+[x/(1-c)] rather than 1+x. As
a result, xA = '([-2z(1-c))/V22 and xN/xA     1/E(1-4)(1-c)1. Thus accoinodat—
ing monetary policy increases the range of multiple equilibria and makes mul-
tiple equilibria possible even if 4O.        Intuitively, accomodating policy
creates an additional source of strategic coinpienientarity: when others raise
their prices, H rises, which raises


  7The economy also possesses equilibria with less natural rules for when to
change prices. For example, the set of realizations of H for which prices are
rigid can be an asymmetric range, (1-4,1+4), or even a disconnected set,
                                      11



     B. The Role of Strategic Complementarity


     As the preceding discussion makes clear, multiple equilibria are possible

because a farmer's incentive to adjust his price is greater if others adjust.

In Cooper and John's terminology, there is "strategic complementarity" in

price adjustment. Equations (12) and (15) show that this is tied to a simpler

kind of strategic complenientarity: the positive dependence of a farmer's

utility-maximizing price neglecting menu costs on the prices of others. The
                                                             *
degree to which G exceeds GN depends on , the elastIcIty of' P1 wIth respect
to P.8


     Equation (18) shows that the size of the range of shocks for which there

are two equilibria depends on the degree of strategic complementarity.        If

there is little strategic complenientarity --   that   is, if   is close to zero
-- then a farmer's desired price, and hence his incentive to pay the menu


cost, changes little when others adjust their prices. Thus xN is close to xA.

In contrast, with strong strategic coinpiementarity the range of multiple equi-

libria can be very large.    This is illustrated by the special case of' y-'l

(constant marginal utility of leisure).                       *
                                            When y÷1, 41 and Pj:P -- each

farmer desires a price equal to the aggregate price level. If others do not

change their prices, then farmer 1 has no desire to change his regardless of




  8WhIle the result that a farmer's utility—maximizing price increases with
others' prices is clearly realistic, one can find cases In which It does not
hold.  4 can be negative -- prices can be strategic substitutes --    if
                                                                      farmers
are risk averse in consumption (see Ball and Romer, 1987a) or if aggregate
demand increases more than one-for-one with real money (as in Ball, 1987). If
4 is negative, there is always a unique equilibrium In the fraction of
farmers who adjust their prices.
                                       12



the size of the shock: GO and xN* (see (13) and (1t)). But if others ad-

just, the benefits of adjusting with them are positive, and so the farmer ad-

justs if the shock Is sufficiently large.         From (16) and (17), GA

(1/2)(c—1)x2 and       V2z/(c—1i. Thus there are two equilibria for any      >

V2z/(c—1 )•9

     Finally,   note that the degree of strategic complementarity necessary for

multiple equilibria Is much weaker here than in most models of coordination

faIlures   In previous work, an agent's choice of "effort" is a continuous

variable. In this case, a necessary condition for multiple equilibria is that

over some range an agent's effort increase more than one-for-one with others'

effort: a reaction function must somewhere have slope greater than one to

cross the 15 degree line more than once. In our model, the choice of whether

to pay the menu cost is discrete. As a result, there are multiple equilibria

as long as a farmer's desired price is simply increasing in others' prices.

For some values of the shock, this weak strategic complementarity is enough

for adjustment by others to push the gain from adjusting above the menu




     also approaches one as c- -- that Is, as the product market approaches
perfect competition.  In this case, however, GN+0' and XN+O (xN/xA still ap-
proaches infinity because A approaches zero more quickly than xN).      When
markets are competitive, a farmer's desired price change is small If others'
prices are rigid, but the cost of forgoing even a small change Is large. For-
mally, GN- because V22 grows more quickly than (1_4)2 shrinks (see (13)).
                                          13


cost. 10



     C. Welfare


     Many coordination failure models possess multiple equilibria that can be

Pareto ranked.     In particular, high "effort" equilibria (for example, those

with high levels of production) are often superior to low effort equilibria.

It is natural to ask whether this is the case in the current model.          When

there are multiple equilibria in the degree of price rigidity, is less

rigidity (more effort expended on price adjustment) better?


     To study welfare, we assume as above that farmers face a distribution for

the monetary shock, x, and pay the menu cost if lxi exceeds a cutoff, x.

For a symmetric distribution with mean zero, we derive the socially optimal

value of x --     the   one that maximizes farmers' expected utility. To determine

the welfare properties of equilibrium rigidity, we compare the optimal x* to

xA and xN, the endpoints of the range of equilibria. We continue to assume

that farmers initially set their prices to one, the equilibrium value in the

absence of shocks; the Appendix studies the case in which initial prices are




  0The importance of whether choice variables are continuous or discrete
carries over to other settings.     For example, multiple equilibria in the
length of labor contracts requires that a firm's optimal contract length be
increasing at least one—for-one in the length of other contracts (see the re-
lated discussion in Section IVB). In contrast, multiple equilibria in the
fraction of firms that renegotiate contracts after a shock requires only that
the gains from renegotiating be increasing in the fraction that renegotiate.
                                                    11$




chosen optimally given the distribution of shocks.11


      Recall that a farmer's utility is V(1,1) - z if all farmers pay the menu

cost and V(M, 1/Mb) if none pays. Thus, since all pay if IxI>x*, expected

utility is


      (19)   E[U1] =          [1_(F(1+x*)_F(1_x*))][V(1,1)            —   z]

                                             1
                +
                    -        -X
                                * V(M,           )f(M)dM


where F(') is the cumulative distribution function for M and f(•) is the den-

sity function. The first order condition for the socially optimal x, denoted

XS,

                                                                1
      (20)   —2[V(1,1) —        zi    + V(1+xs,
                                                          (1+xs)14>
                                         1
                +                                    —      0
                    V(1x5,                                      ,


                                     (1-xs)4
where we use the fact that f(1+x)=f(1-x) by our assumption that f() is sym-

metric around one, A second order approximation leads to

                     I           —2z
      (21)   XS I       TI      ti
                   V      '—WI V22
      Our central welfare result follows from substituting the appropriate

derivatives of V(•) into (21) and the expressions for xN and xA:

      (22)   xA <   X3 < XN.


  We study average welfare given a distribution of shocks because the wel-
fare effect of rigidity after an individual shock depends on the sign of the
shock (Manklw, 1985; Ball and Roiner, 1987a). Non-adjustment to a fall in the
money supply reduces output and welfare. But non-adjustment to a positive
shock increases output. This raises welfare because, under imperfect competi-
tion, the no-shock level of output is too low.
                                           15



Since xS<xN, there is a range of equilibrium values of x (xS<x*<xN) with too

much rigidity -—    in   these equilibria, all farmers would be better off if the

cutoff were lowered.       Since xS>xA, there is a range of equilibria with too

much flexibility.        Finally, the social optimum (x*=x5) is always an equi-

librium.


    The reason that too much rigidity is possible is similar to the one in

Ball and Ronier (1987a). Suppose that all farmers start with an arbitrary x.

If one farmer lowers hIs cutoff whIle the others do not, the farmer's only

benefit    is that he sets
                                 *
                                     more frequently.
                                                                             *
                                                        But if' others reduce x as

well, there is an additional benefit: stabilization of real aggregate demand.

Because the incentive for an Individual to reduce x is smaller than the gain

if all do, values of x* above x5 can be equilibria.
    Values of x below xS can be equilibria -- there can be too much

flexibility -- because a farmer's gain from raising x Is also smaller If he

does so by himself than if all do. If the others do not join the farmer In

raising x, then for some shocks he does not adjust his price but others do.

Others' adjustment Increases movements in p7, which raises the farmer's loss

from non—adjustment.         (Others' adjustment still benefits the farmer by

stabilizing real aggregate demand, but this effect Is smaller.)


    While both excessive rigidity and excessive flexibility are possible, the

magnitudes of the potential losses are very different. Neglecting the menu

cost, full flexibility is always optimal; thus the net loss from too much

flexibility is bounded by the menu cost. In actual economies, menu costs ap-

pear small. In contrast, Ball and Romer (1987a) show that the loss from too
                                      16



much rigidity can be arbitrarily large, because the externality from increased

fluctuations in real aggregate demand can be large compared to the private

cost of rigidity.    Thus excessive price flexibility is not likely to be a

serious economic problem, while excessive rigidity may be.



                                IV. EXTENSIONS



     A. Heterogeneous Agents


     In the model of Section II, multiple equilibria arise when each farmer

chooses to adjust his price if and only if others do. The desire to make the

same decision as others is crucial. A natural question is whether multiple

equilibria are possible if heterogeneity leads some agents to adjust while

others do not. This section shows that models with heterogeneity can possess

multiple equilibria in the proportion of prices that adjust, and therefore in

the size of the real effects of a nominal shock. We focus on heterogeneity in

the size of menu costs, which is the simplest case. Strategic coinplementarity

is necessary for multiple equilibria; the sufficient condition depends on the

distribution of the menu cost.       We also briefly discuss the case of

heterogeneous productivity shocks.


    Assume that the menu cost, z, varies across farmers with a cumulative

distribution function H(z). After a shock, farmers with z below some critical

level adjust their prices and the others do not. Let k be the proportion that

adjust. We derive an equilibrium condition for k.


    Let PA(X,k) be the price set by those who adjust and let P(x,k) be the

aggregate price level.   Note that           =   P4(1+x)4'   and (approximating
                                                      17


(6)) P      kPA+(1-k). These relations imply


    (23)        PA(x,k)        1     +            x
                                            1-

By reasoning similar to that of Section III, the gain from adjusting is

                                    1-s-x                     1+x          1
    (214)       G(x,k)       V(              ,   1)   —            ,               )
                                   P(x,k)                    P(x,k) P(x,k)4(1+x)4)
Using (23) and (214), one can show that

                              -1 1-4) 2
    (25)        G(x,k)       —(
                              2 14k  )   2
                                        Vx
     The crucial result is

                3G(x   ,k)
    (26)
                   3k
                             >0.
The gain from adjusting is increasing in the proportion of firms that adjust.

This is a generalization of the earlier result that the gains are greater when

all adjust than when none adjusts.                    Again, adjustment by others moves the

price level in the same direction as the money supply, which increases the

deviation of P from one.


     A farmer pays his menu cost if it is less than G(x,k). Thus the propor-

tion that pay     is    H(G(x,k)), and an equilibrium k is one that satisfies
                                                                                 3H(G(x ,k))
kH(G(x,k)). A necessary condition for multiple equilibria is           >0
                                                                 3k
                       3H(G(x,k))   dH 3G
over some range. Since            = —•—— and H(') is increasing over some
                                     3k               dG3k
range, the condition reduces to (26), which holds because of strategic corn—

plementarity. The sufficient condition depends on the size of x and the shape

of H(•); it is easy to find examples both of multiple equilibria and of

unique equilibria.


    Heterogeneity in real shocks leads to similar results. Suppose that the
                                         18



production function, (3), is replaced by


    (27)


Assume that 0 varies across farmers, and that a shock to 01 occurs at the

same time as the monetary shock.       In this version of the model, a farmer

chooses to pay the menu cost if        is above an upper cutoff or below a lower

cutoff; both critical values depend on x and k. Again, one can show that mul-

tiple equilibria are possible and that strategic complementarity is a neces-

sary condition.


        B. Long-Run and Short-Run Effects of Nominal Shocks


        This section describes a difference between our model and previous work

on coordination failures.      In earlier models, which include only real vari-

ables, there is never any reason for an economy in an "underemployment" equi-

librium to leave it. For example, If each agent in the Diamond model does not

search because others do not search, this situation does not improve over

time.     In contrast, our model of nominal rigidities suggests differences be-

tween short-run and long—run equilibria.       It Is plausible to suppose that

eventually menus wear out or enough shocks accumulate to cause all firms to

adjust their prices. If this Is the case, then our model implies that there

is a unique long-run response to a shock --      prices   adjust fully and output

converges to the natural rate --     but that there may be multiple equilibrium
                                     19



transition paths.12


    To formalize this idea, we add simple dynamics to our model. Assume that

the money supply follows a random walk. A farmer sets his price for a fixed

length of time and chooses the length to maximize utility. Specifically, he

chooses between setting his price every period after observing the current

money supply and setting it for two periods at every even period. The farmer

pays a fixed menu cost for every adjustnient.3


    This version of the model can possess multiple equilibria in the

frequency of price changes. The proof is a straightforward extension of the

one for the static model. Intuitively, more frequent price adjustment implies

that the aggregate price level responds more quickly to shocks. By making the

price level more volatile, frequent adjustment by others increases the fluc-

tuations in a farmer's desired nominal price, and thus raises his incentive to

adjust frequently. For some parameter values, a farmer's incentive to change

his price every period exceeds the added menu costs if and only if others ad-

just every period.




  120f course it is not clear whether a unique long-run equilibrium for output
is a desirable feature of our model.    While many modern Keynesians believe
that output converges to a natural rate, many older Keynesians emphasize
permanent underemployment equilibria. In addition, Campbell and Mankiw (1986)
and Blanchard and Summers (1986) provide empirical evidence that shocks to
output and employment have permanent effects.


  3This is a version of the "contract length" model introduced by Gray
(1978).  Note that we assume synchronized timing of price changes —-       if
farmers set prices for two periods, they all set them in the same (even)
periods. Since the model contains only aggregate shocks, this is the equi-
librium timing (see Fethke and Policano, 198k, and Ball and Romer, 1987b).
Our results would not change if we assumed asynchronized timing.
                                      20


     Since all prices adjust eventually, money is neutral in the long run.

But there may be two possible short-run responses to a monetary shock: full

price adjustment and neutrality, or price rigidity and real effects that last

for a period.


     We believe that similar results arise in more general models, such as

continuous time models in which firms can choose any frequency of price

changes.   These models are likely to possess richer sets of equilibria (for

example, several equilibrium speeds at which output returns to the natural

rate following a shock). We suspect that, as in models with heterogeneity,

sufficient conditions for multiple equilibria depend on assumptions about

functional forlns.h't




                                V. CONCLUSION



     This paper shows that nominal price rigidity can arise from a failure of

firms to coordinate price changes.    Increases in price flexibility by dif-

ferent firms are strategic complements --   greater   flexibility of one firm's

price raises the incentives for other firms to make their prices more

flexible. Strategic coniplementarity leads to multiple equilibria in the de-

gree of nominal rigidity, and welfare may be much higher in the low rigidity

equilibria. Thus the inefficient economic fluctuations resulting from nominal




       this case, the specification of the cost of changing prices is likely
to be important. In Ball's (1987) model of labor contracts, the cost of writ-
ing a contract is fixed and the equilibrium contract length Is unique. One
can show, however, that if shorter contracts are less expensive than longer
contracts, the model may possess multiple equilibria.
                                           21



shocks might be greatly reduced if agents could "agree" to move to a superior

equilibrium.


     The essential element of our model --       strategic   complementarity leading

to multiple equilibria --    is   also central to models of coordination failure in

trade, production, and demand.        But in contrast to previous work, our model

possesses a unique long-run equilibrium despite the multiplicity of short—run

equilibria.


    Multiple equilibria that are Pareto ranked imply a role for government

policy: moving the economy to a superior equilibrium.          In actual economies,

for example, incentives for firms to sign shorter labor contracts or to adopt

greater Indexation might lead to an equilibrium with less nominal wage

rigidity. Government intervention could be temporary --          after   a policy led

firms to increase flexibility, each firm would have sufficient private incen-

tives to maintain flexibility.


    As Cooper and John point out, strategic complementarity implies that

policy has    a   multiplier.15 For example, if intervention led some firms to

shorten their labor contracts, this would increase the incentives for other

wage and price setters to reduce rigidity. Thus a policy aimed at part of the

labor market could reduce rigidity throughout the economy.




  5There is a multiplier even if the equilibrium degree of rigidity is unique
(for example, in a dynamic model). The size of the multiplier is increasing
in the degree of strategic complementarity.
                                                  22


                                          APPENDIX




    This Appendix relaxes the assumption that all prices equal one before the

monetary shock occurs. We assume instead that farmers choose initial prices

optimally and show how this affects our results. The analysis draws heavily

on Ball and Romer (1987a). As in that paper, we assume that the distribution

of the monetary shock Is symmetric around zero, single-peaked, and continuous.


     The   price that a farmer sets before observing the money supply depends on
others' initial prices and on the value                of the cutoff x. In symmetric equi-

librium,   each farmer's initial price is
                   *                Y"2   *
    (Al)       P0(x )      1   +   —o(x       )




where (x*) is the variance of M conditional on l_x*<M<l+x* (see our earlier

paper). Given our use of second order approximations, assuming initial prices

equal to P0 rather than one does not affect our results about equilibrium

rigidity: the expressions for xN and xA in the text remain valid (our earlier

paper shows this for xN). We now show, however, that the socially optimal de-

gree of rigidity changes slightly.


     If initial prices are P0 and prices are rigid, then MIP                H/P0 and

=
    P01/M         Thus when initial prices are set optimally, a farmer's ex-

pected utility, (19), becomes


    (A2)       E[Ui]      {1_(F(l+x*)_F(l_x*))][V(l,1) —           z]

                        l+x*          H
                  +
                        H=l-x
                             * V(                              )f(M)dM.
                                    P0(x*)              M14
The first order condition for xS is
                                                            23


    (A3)                —[f( lx)+f( l+XS) ][V( 1,1 )—z]




                                         1—x            [Fo(xs)]14
               +        f(lxs)V(                   ,                     )
                                        Po(xs)          (l_xs)14)

                                         l+XS           [Fo(xs)]4)
               +        f(l+xs)V(                  ,                     )
                                       Po(xs)           (l+xs)14)

               l+x                      M          [Po(xs)1'4)               -M
         +   (fM:l—x5
                  S
                              [v(              ,                    )(                )
                                      Po(xs)             M14             [Po(xs)12

                   14         [Po(xs)]'4 (l—4))[FO(xS)]4)
         +                ,                        )(                        )]f(M)dM}P        Cx )        0
               0(xS)                  M -
where PE(aPo/ax*).                 Taking a second order approximation and substituting

(Al) for P0 yields

    (A1!) _[f( lxs)+f( l+xs) ]              [V( 1,1 )—z]


     +   f(l—xs){V(l,l)           +                            +
                                      V1[—x5—(y/2)]                (l/2)V11x       +      (l/2)V22(l-4))2x}

     +   f(1+xs){V(l,l)           +   Vi[xs(y/2)] +                (l/2)V11x      +       (l/2)V22(l—4))2x}

     —                                                              0
         (y/2)V1(f(l+x5)÷f(l—x5))(x—)
Finally, using the fact that f(l+x)f(l-x), the solution for xS is

                              /             —2z
    (A5)       xS aI
                          V V11+(l—4))2V22-yv1
    Substituting the derivatives of V(•) into (A5) establishes that XS<XM and

that XS can be either greater or less than xA. The possibility of XS<XA —-

which implies that all equilibria possess too much rigidity --                                        is   the main

departure of these results from the ones in the text. The explanation is that

    the price level under rigidity, is greater than one, Its level in the
                                     2L


text. Thus real aggregate demand under rigidity is lower than in the text,

which makes it more likely that reducing rigidity would increase welfare.
                                            25


                                       REFERENCE S

Ball, Laurence. "Externalities from Contract Length." Mimeo, New York
     University Graduate School of Business Administration, April 1987.
     American Economic Review, forthcoming.

_______ and Romer, David. "Are Prices Too Sticky?" NBER Working Paper No.
        2171, February 1987. (1987a)

_______ and _______.          "The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing of Price Changes."
        Mimeo, Princeton University, May 1987. (1987b)

Blanchard, Olivier. "Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey." Miineo,
     M.I.T., January 1987.

_______ and Klyotaki, Nobuhiro. "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand
        Externalities, and Real Effects of Nominal Money." NBER Working Paper
        No. 1770, December 1985. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

_______ and Summers, Lawrence. "Hysteresis and the European Unemployment
        Problem." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1 (1986): 15-77.

Bryant, John. "A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1983): 525-529.

Campbell, John, and Mankiw, N. Gregory. "Are Output Fluctuations Transitory?"
     NBER Working Paper No. 1916, May 1986.

Cooper, Russell. "Predetermined Wages and Prices and the Impact of
        Expansionary Government Policy." Mimeo, University of Iowa, April 1987.

________ and John, Andrew. "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
     Models." Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 7245R, Yale University,
        July 1985.

Diamond, Peter. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium."
     Journal of Political Economy 90 (1982): 881-89LL

Fethke, Gary, and Policano, Andrew. "Wage Contingencies, the Pattern of
     Negotiation, and Aggregate Implications of Alternative Contract
     Structures." Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (1984): 151—171.

Gray, Jo Anna. "On Indexation and Contract Length." Journal of Political
     Economy 86 (1978): 1-18.

Hart,   Oliver.      "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features."
                                     26


    Quarterly Journal of Economies 97 (1982): 109—138.

Heller, Walter. "Coordination Failure under Complete Markets with
     Applications to Effective Demand." Miiueo, University of California at
     San Diego, 1985.

Kiyotakl, Nobuhiro. "Implications of Multiple Expectational Equilibria under
     Monopolistic Competition." Mimeo, University of Wisconsin, May 1985.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 100 (1985): 529-537.

Rotemberg, Julio J. "The New Keynesian Microfoundations." Mimeo, M.I.T.,
     April 1987.

Shlelfer, Andrel. "Implementation Cycles." Journal of Political Economy
     914   (1986):   1163—1190.

Weitzman, Martin. "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of Unemployment
     Theory." Economic Journal 92 (1982): 787-8014.
