                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           MEDIUM- AND LONG-TERM EDUCATIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF
             ALTERNATIVE CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFER DESIGNS:
                 EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA
                             Felipe Barrera-Osorio
                               Leigh L. Linden
                                 Juan Saavedra

                                       Working Paper 23275
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23275


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We are grateful to the Secretary of Education of Bogota (SED) for its cooperation in the original
experiment and financial support, as well as for providing administrative records for this study.
We are also grateful to Fedesarrollo for financial and technical assistance. Several individuals
provided research assistance at various stages of the project’s development: Luis Omar Herrera
was instrumental in assisting us with the medium-term administrative data. Camilo Dominguez,
Megan Thomas and Ricki Sears Dolan also assisted with the data analysis. Richard Murnane and
Katja Vinha provided valuable comments. Linden acknowledges financial support from the
National Science Foundation’s Award SES-1157691 and Saavedra from the National Institute of
Health RCMAR Grant P30AG043073. This field trial is registered with the American Economic
Association’s RCT Registry Number AEARCTR-0001930, http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/
trials/1930. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Leigh L. Linden, and Juan Saavedra. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medium- and Long-Term Educational Consequences of Alternative Conditional Cash Transfer
Designs: Experimental Evidence from Colombia
Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Leigh L. Linden, and Juan Saavedra
NBER Working Paper No. 23275
March 2017
JEL No. C93,I21,I38

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that three Colombian conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs for secondary schools
improve educational outcomes eight and 12 years after random assignment relative to a control
group. Forcing families to save a portion of the transfers until they make enrollment decisions for
the next academic year increases on-time enrollment in secondary school, reduces dropout rates,
and promotes tertiary enrollment and completion in the long-term. Traditionally structured
bimonthly transfers improve on-time enrollment and high school exit exam completion rates in
the medium term, but do not affect long-term tertiary outcomes. A delayed transfer that directly
incentivizes tertiary enrollment promotes secondary school on-time enrollment and enrollment—
only in lower-quality tertiary institutions—in the medium term but not the long term.


Felipe Barrera-Osorio                          Juan Saavedra
Assistant Professor                            Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
Graduate School of Education                   University of Southern California
Harvard University                             635 Downey Way
456 Gutman                                     Los Angeles, CA 90089
6 Appian Street                                and NBER
Cambridge, MA                                  juansaav@usc.edu
felipe_barrera-osorio@gse.harvard.edu

Leigh L. Linden
Department of Economics
The University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, Texas 78712
and NBER
leigh.linden@austin.utexas.edu




Supplementary materials available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23275:
  - randomized controlled trials registry entry
Introduction

        Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) are one of the most prevalent and fastest-

growing social assistance programs in the developing world. The number of countries

operating CCTs worldwide doubled between 2008 and 2016 (Garcia & Saavedra 2016).

Much of the research on CCTs has documented short-term educational impacts on

outcomes such as enrollment, attendance and dropout rates (for reviews see Baird et al.

2014; Garcia & Saavedra 2016; Fiszbein & Schady 2009). This paper provides

experimental estimates of medium- and long-term effects – between eight and 12 years

after initial receipt – relative to a pure experimental control group that throughout the

period does not receive transfers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to

document experimentally the effects on tertiary enrollment and how these medium- and

long-term impacts may vary with program design.1

        In 2005, the government of Bogota, Colombia, in collaboration with a subset of

co-authors and practitioners, randomized three types of CCT payment structures targeted

at aiding socioeconomically disadvantaged students—ages 14 to 16 at baseline—attend

and complete secondary schooling (Barrera et al., 2011).

        In one experiment, we compare two payment structures relative to a control group

that receives no transfer. In the first payment structure, families are forced to save one-

third of a bimonthly conditional transfer until the following academic year (the “savings”

treatment). The second payment structure is a standard CCT payment scheme providing a



1
 There is very limited evidence on the long-term educational effects of CCTs. Filmer and Schady (2014)
employed an RD design to estimate effect of a three-year CCT offer to secondary school students in
Cambodia to show increases in grade attainment (no impacts on test-scores, employment or earnings). Baez
& Camacho (2011) and Behrman et al. (2010) employed non-experimental research designs for Colombia’s
Familias en Accion and Mexico’s Oportunidades. Barham et al. (2013) used the randomized phase-in of
Nicaragua’s Red de Proteccion Social program.

                                                   2
bimonthly transfer conditional on enrollment and attendance (the “basic” treatment). In

another experiment we evaluate, relative to a different control group, another variant of

the payment structure in which students receive a conditional bimonthly transfer and a

monetary incentive for secondary graduation and tertiary enrollment (the “tertiary”

treatment).

        We combine randomization data with various sources of national administrative

data on secondary and tertiary education enrollment and completion, eight and 12 years

after randomization—when students are between 26 and 28 years old. We document that

the “savings” treatment affects more and longer-term educational outcomes—particularly

tertiary enrollment—than the “basic” treatment. The “tertiary treatment,” on the other

hand, promotes tertiary enrollment only in lower-quality tertiary institutions—a

potentially unintended consequence of the “tertiary” treatment’s high-powered

incentives to comply with the transfer’s conditions.

        Across upper and lower secondary students, the savings treatment increases the

probability of on-time secondary school enrollment by 3.5 percentage points (base is 51

percent), due mostly to a 3.2 percentage point reduction in the probability that students

drop out (base is 38 percent). For upper secondary students (grades nine through 11), the

savings treatment increases tertiary enrollment in universities in the medium term (eight

years after randomization) by 3.6 percentage points (base is 31 percent), and in the long

term (12 years after randomization) by 2.8 percentage points (base of 40 percent). 2

Tertiary enrollment effects of the “savings” treatment concentrate on university

enrollment.

2
 These findings are consistent with those of Karlan and Linden (2014), who show educational outcomes
can be improved by weaker savings commitments not requiring families to spend money on specific types
of goods.

                                                  3
       The “basic” treatment increases on-time enrollment in secondary school and the

probability of taking the secondary graduation exam by 2.2 percentage points (base is 68

percent). The “basic” treatment does not affect students’ likelihood of enrolling in tertiary

education in the medium or long term. We strongly reject equality of long-run effects

between the basic and savings treatments.

       The tertiary treatment has effects similar to the savings treatment in the medium

term. It improves on-time enrollment in secondary school by 2.2 percentage points (base

is 72 percent) by reducing dropout rates by 3.6 percentage points (base of 23 percent).

Secondary graduation is not affected, but enrollment only in lower-quality tertiary

institutions improves by 5.8 percentage points (base of 31 percent) eight years after

enrolling in the program.

       The “tertiary” treatment’s tertiary enrollment effects are entirely consistent with

the incentives induced by the transfer conditions. The “savings” treatment’s effects on

tertiary enrollment—particularly among upper secondary students—are not the result of

the transfer’s conditionality.    First, unlike the “tertiary” treatment, the “savings”

treatment does not incentivize tertiary enrollment. Second, a dynamic model of

educational decisions would predict that the transfer’s conditionality has small (or even

negative) effects of the program on student effort for upper secondary students, for whom

the prospect of future transfers is negligible—as is the case in the “savings” treatment.

       Tertiary education effects among upper secondary students in the “savings”

treatment are also not likely the result of cohort composition or relaxation of liquidity

constraints. Instead, we conjecture that by targeting upper secondary students and

potentially waiting until ability is better revealed, the program may be operating through



                                             4
a “scholarship” model – rewarding students who successfully transition from lower to

upper secondary and may be more inclined to pursue tertiary education. With only one

experiment, however, we cannot make a definitive statement about the mechanisms at

play.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the

background and experimental intervention; in Section III, we explain the research design

and data sources; we discuss the internal validity of the experiment in Section IV; present

results in Section V; and conclude in Section VI.



I.      Program Background, Experimental Design and Prior Evidence on Short

        Term Impacts

        In 2005, Colombia’s capital city Bogota established the Conditional Subsidies for

School Attendance (Subsidios Condicionados a la Asistencia Escolar) pilot program to

increase student retention, reduce dropout rates and ameliorate child labor among low-

income secondary school students. The Secretary of Education of the City (Secretaria de

Educacion del Distrito, SED) implemented the program in San Cristobal and Suba, two

of the poorest localities out of the 20 in Bogotá.

        The program is a variant of traditional CCTs – such as Mexico’s

PROGRESA/Oportunidades – focusing only on educational investments among

secondary school students. As such, it does not include the health or nutritional

components typically accompanying CCTs targeting younger children. 3 Unlike many

other conditional cash transfer programs, the SED intended this pilot to be a policy


3
 Reviews of these programs are Baird et al. (2013), Garcia & Saavedra (2016) and Fiszbein & Schady
(2009).

                                                  5
experiment in which it would test three alternatives. In all treatments, students are

required to attend at least 80 percent of school days during each payment period. 4

Students are removed from the program if they twice failed to matriculate to the

following grade, fail to reach the attendance target in two successive payment periods or

are expelled from school.

        Eligibility is based on several criteria. Applicants must have finished the fifth

(San Cristobal) or eighth (Suba) grade (last grade of primary) and they must be enrolled

in a secondary school. The applicant’s family must demonstrate they had been designated

as impoverished based on the national poverty assessment tool, SISBEN. 5 Applicants

also must present a valid national identification card (which almost all students in Bogota

have) to validate their poverty status at the time of registration. Finally, to prevent

families from moving to obtain eligibility, eligible to participate are only families

classified by the SISBEN system as living in San Cristobal or Suba prior to 2004.

        In San Cristobal, eligible secondary school students entering upper and lower

secondary school (grades six through eleven) randomly are assigned to the basic

treatment, the savings treatment or a control group. In the basic treatment, similar to

Mexico’s PROGRESA/Oportunidades program, participants are paid about $30 every

two months via a dedicated debit card from one of Colombia’s major banks as long as

they comply with the program’s conditions. Conditional on full compliance with the

attendance requirements, the total annual value of the transfer amounts to $150 – slightly

more than the average $125 that families report spending each year on educational

expenses (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011).

4
  Payments were made on a bimonthly basis. As a result, student had to achieve 80 percent attendance over
a two-month period to receive payment.
5
  Families had to present their SISBEN card and be ranked in the lowest two categories of the system’s six.

                                                    6
        The savings treatment is designed to be a revenue-neutral experimental variant of

the basic treatment. 6 Compared to the basic treatment, the payment structure in the

savings treatment differs. In the savings treatment, instead of receiving $30 for reaching

the attendance target over two months, students are paid $20, with the remaining $10 held

in a bank account. The accumulated funds – up to $50 per school year for students in full

compliance – are made available to families during the period in which students prepared

to enroll for the next academic year. This savings treatment differs from the basic

intervention in that it can potentially provide a means of bypassing short-term liquidity

constraints when paying enrollment expenses.

        In Suba, eligible secondary school students entering upper secondary school

(grades nine through 11) randomly are assigned to a “tertiary” treatment group or a

control group. As in the savings treatment, participants in the tertiary treatment are paid a

basic transfer of $20 every two months but they also are eligible for incentives through

secondary school graduation and tertiary enrollment. Students successfully graduating

from secondary school are eligible for a lump-sum transfer of $300. Students receive the

funds immediately upon documenting enrollment in a tertiary education institution.7 If

students fail to enroll in higher education, they still receive the transfers but only after a

year’s wait. Therefore, the (dis-)incentive in the “tertiary” treatment is only the delay of

payment, not whether the payment was made. While cost-equivalent to the basic

treatment for students going through six years of secondary education, the tertiary

treatment is more generous than the basic treatment because in practice – due to an


6
  Both treatments are exactly revenue-neutral in the absence of inflation. In practice, inflation during the
2000-06 period was 5.6 percent (World Bank, 2014c).
7
  The transfer for post-secondary enrollment represents about 70 percent of the average first-year cost in a
technical post-secondary institution (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011).

                                                     7
administrative decision from part of the SED – it was offered only to students that were,

at baseline, three years or less from graduation.8

         Assignment in both localities was contingent on oversubscription. To ensure

oversubscription, the SED advertised the program through posters, newspapers ads, radio

clips, loudspeakers in cars, churches and community leaders, including school principals

and priests.9 Interested applicants had to register during a 15-day window in February-

March 2005. Program registration took place in various schools at the two localities.

         The SED guaranteed, in 2005, funding for 7,984 students in total: 6,851 in the

basic-savings experiment in San Cristobal and 1,133 in the tertiary experiment in Suba.

In total, 13,433 eligible applicants registered in the two localities: 10,907 in San Cristobal

and 2,526 in Suba. Barrera-Osorio et al. (2008, 2011) created a stratified randomization

algorithm that SED implemented in public lotteries in each locality on April 4, 2005. The

algorithm stratified by locality (San Cristobal or Suba), school type (public or private),

grade (6th through 11th) and gender. A team of economists from Universidad Nacional in

Bogota verified the validity of the algorithm prior to its implementation as well as

compliance with the (random) assignment results during the lotteries.

         Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011) documented that one year after randomization of

students into treatments, all treatments significantly increased school attendance relative

to control conditions. In addition, the savings and tertiary treatments increased grade re-

enrollment in secondary education relative to control – unlike the basic treatment, which


8
  Applicants in grades six through eight in Suba were assigned to either a control group or the basic
treatment. As in Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011), we omit the results for this subsample. However, they are
similar to the treatment effects of the basic treatment for grades six through eight in San Cristobal in Tables
3-6, except the effect on dropout rates is statistically significant. These results are available upon request.
9
  The transfers were advertised as incentives to participate in school, with an annual value equal to at least
the annual value of the basic treatment, so that families were not aware at the time of registration of the
existence of different treatments.

                                                      8
had no effect. Similarly, the savings and tertiary treatments increased tertiary enrollment

after one year of treatment for students who were enrolled in grade 11 at baseline.

          The Secretary of Education preserved the integrity of random assignment. This

implies that control students did not receive any treatment throughout their secondary

school enrollment. It also implies that school grade at baseline maps directly into years of

exposure to the various treatments. Under perfect compliance with program conditions,

treated individuals in grade 11 at baseline received one year of treatment whereas

individuals in grade 6 at baseline received up to 6 years of treatment. Hence, impact

estimates broken down by grade at baseline represent impacts of different years of

exposure to treatment as well as potential treatment effecting heterogeneity by grade or

age.


II.       Data and Estimation Methods

A. Data

          Instead of generating a new follow-up survey, we combine administrative data

sources with the original experimental sample to track medium-term educational

outcomes:10

     1. Program registration data: This dataset contains identification numbers for the

        13,433 eligible applicants in the two experiments, which we used to match with the

        other data sets described below. It also includes information on the school and

        grade in which students were enrolled at the time of the lottery.

     2. SISBEN: At baseline, we matched applicant records to Colombia’s 2003-04

        Sistema de Identificación y Clasificación de Potenciales Beneficiarios para

10
  We attempted a follow-up survey of lottery applicants in 2012 and, during pilot phase, obtained
responses from less than a third of the sample. For this reason, we did not pursue this strategy any further.

                                                      9
        Programas Sociales (SISBEN), also known as the census survey of the poor. We

        use the data as baseline socio-demographic controls because it was collected prior

        to the randomization.

     3. Secondary school enrollment records: To measure secondary school enrollment, we

        used annual administrative data from SED.11 The data are similar to those used in

        Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011) but includes information from 2006-08.12 These data

        includes an indicator for whether a student was enrolled as well as information on

        the students’ grade level, allowing us to measure grade repetition. As shown in

        Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011), the match rate with the program registration data is

        high—over 90 percent—and there is no difference in the probability of matching

        records between research groups.13

     4. ICFES: We use administrative data from Colombia’s centralized secondary school

        exit examinations, ICFES (Instituto Colombiano para la Evaluacion de la

        Educacion). ICFES registration is a good proxy for secondary school graduation

        because more than 95 percent of all secondary school students take the exam

        (Bettinger et al. 2016; Angrist et al. 2006). Given the timing of the original lottery

        and data availability only through 2012, we match applicant records to the universe

        of test-takers from 2005-12, a maximum of eight years after the beginning of the

        treatment.

11
   The data includes enrollment information for all public schools and most private schools in the city. The
few non-participating private schools are not an issue for our study. Although we are unable to distinguish
between schools who did not report and schools who reported but did not have any enrolled students in our
sample, only 55 students (0.4 percent of the sample) attended schools in this group in 2006.
12
   The data for 2006 is an alternate version of the data used to measure 2006 enrollment in Barrera-Osorio
(2011). The earlier data set had been cleaned more thoroughly by the SED but was only available for 2006.
The treatment effect estimates are very similar to those from the earlier data set, as we note below. The data
used to match the two versions of the enrollment data to the program registration data is the same.
13
   We also demonstrate in Appendix A that the main results for the ICFES and SPADIES data sets are
robust to limiting our sample to just those students for which enrollment data is available.

                                                     10
     5. SPADIES: To track tertiary enrollment, we use data from the Colombian Ministry

        of Education’s Sistema de Prevención y Análisis de la Deserción en Instituciones de

        Educación Superior (SPADIES). SPADIES is an individual-level panel dataset that

        since 1998 has tracked students from their first year of college enrollment until their

        degree receipt. SPADIES, similar to the National Student Clearinghouse in the

        United States, covers 95 percent of the post-secondary population in Colombia.

        SPADIES contains information on the timing and university of students’ initial

        enrollments and the types of institution. Higher-quality institutions are classified as

        either universities or vocational schools, while lower-quality institutions remain

        unclassified.14 We use two cuts of the SPADIES data: one that covers collegiate

        pathways from 2005-12 – up to eight years after the start of the program, or

        “medium-term;” and one that covers collegiate pathways up to 2016 – up to 12

        years after the start of the program, or “long-term.” The long-term SPADIES

        dataset is particularly useful to track collegiate outcomes for students who began

        the program in early secondary grades (i.e., grades 6-8 in 2005).

          To match registration records to ICFES and SPADIES data, we follow a four-step

algorithm:

     1. Exact match on student ID number, name and date of birth;

     2. For those not matched in (i), exact match on ID and date of birth;

     3. For those not matched in (i) or (ii), exact match on ID and name;

     4. For those not matched in (i), (ii) or (iii), match on name and date of birth.

14
   The data also include information that will allow us to follow students through to graduation. However,
this will be a topic for future work when data is available beyond 2012. Since our youngest students were
in grade six in 2005, they would not graduate form a university until 2014 at the earliest. And of course, it
will likely will take a few years longer given that many of them have already been held back at least once
in secondary school.

                                                    11
     Table 1 displays the match rates among the enrollment, ICFES and SPADIES data.

Enrollment match rates in 2006 are very similar to those in Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011).

Without grade repetition and dropping out, we would expect that a sixth of the sample

(approximately 17 percent) graduates each year. The actual reduction in matches in 2007-

08 is consistent with the expected repetition and dropout rates (Panel A of

Table 1).

       Match rates to ICFES and SPADIES data across all students are similar to those

among comparable individuals in Bogota (Panel A of Table 1). Based on representative

survey data from Colombia’s 2010 Encuesta de Calidad de Vida (ECV), we calculate that

among low-income 18- to 25-year olds in Bogota who completed primary school, 72

percent report having completed secondary school. This is very similar to the 69 percent

rate we find among applicants for taking the ICFES test in the San Cristobal (basic and

savings) experiment. Similarly, among these individuals in the ECV, 21 percent

completed some college, which is exactly the SPADIES match rate in the San Cristobal

(basic and savings) experiment. The rates also align to those reported in Bettinger et al.

(2016). The match rates for the tertiary experiment are higher for both ICFES (0.84) and

SPADIES, medium term (0.37) and long term (0.45, Panel A, Column 3, Table 1).



B. Estimation Strategy

       Given random assignment, we estimate causal treatment effects by comparing

average outcome levels across treatment groups. To maximize precision, we do this in a

regression framework that also controls for pre-treatment applicant characteristics:

                      Yij=b0 + bt’Treatmenti + bt’Xi + eij                             (1)



                                            12
where Yij is an outcome variable for applicant i in school j, and Treatmenti is a vector of

indicator variables for the treatment group to which the applicant was assigned. We

initially estimate Equation (1) separately for each experiment, so the vector Treatmenti in

the San Cristobal sample includes indicators for the basic and savings treatment and in

the Suba sample it includes an indicator for the tertiary treatment.

        The vector Xi contains the set of demographic characteristics. It includes four

asset/wealth indexes (possessions, access to utilities, ownership of durable goods and the

physical infrastructure of the child's home), age, gender, years of education at

registration, grade indicators and a range of household characteristics (whether the head

of the household is single, household head's age, household head's years of education,

number of people in the household, number of children in the household, socioeconomic

stratum classification, SISBEN score and monthly income). In our preferred

specification, we also include school-fixed effects, so that only variation within schools

in treatment assignment identifies the parameters of interest. We cluster all standard

errors at the school level.

        In some specifications we pool estimates from the San Cristobal and Suba

samples. To do this, and given that the Suba experiment only covers grades nine through

11, we restrict the sample to applicants in grades nine through 11 at baseline and include

a district-fixed effect to account for mean level differences, such as disparities in the

probability of treatment assignment between samples. Recall, however, that the San

Cristobal and Suba experiments are independent of each other. Hence, just as we can only

experimentally estimate the causal effect of the tertiary treatment of Suba’s experiment,

we can only identify its relative effect compared to the basic and savings treatments (in



                                             13
San Cristobal) using a rich set of socio-demographic controls and school-fixed effects

rather than purely random variation. Pooling the San Cristobal and Suba samples for

grades nine through 11 is empirically justified given the similarities in baseline

characteristics across the two groups of students (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2008 presents a

detailed comparison).



III.   Internal Validity

       The potential threats to internal validity are limited. First, Barrera et al. (2011)

validate compliance with the randomization protocol by showing that the applicants

assigned to each treatment group were comparable at baseline. Second, the centralized

administrative records obviate concerns of low response rates or differential attrition

because they include the universe of students.

       Potential sample selection issues stemming from differential data quality across

treatment and control groups are unlikely for many reasons. First, in all our matches we

employ the original identification data reported at baseline. As we show next, there are no

differences across groups in the availability of identifying information at baseline.

Second, the research team put in place strict protocols for data entry, cleaning and coding

of the experimental sample dataset. Third, enrollment data is centralized at SED and, to

our knowledge, there is no differential treatment in student records across experimental

groups or localities. Specifically, information for individuals in each treatment group is

not differentially updated. Fourth, the Ministry of Education centrally manages the

ICFES high school graduation and SPADIES college enrollment databases, and the

Ministry does not have access to the individual information of the original sample of the



                                            14
experiment.

        Nevertheless, differential availability of identifying information needed to match

records to the administrative data could pose a problem for internal validity. To assess

this threat, we analyze the availability of the four variables used to match the data from

the original experiment in Barrera et al. (2011) to the administrative data described

above: students’ last names, first names, national ID numbers and birthdays. First, we

find that very little information is missing. The data include birthdays and first names for

all students, and national ID numbers and complete last names for, respectively, 99.4 and

97.8 percent of them. For variables in which information is missing, we show in Table 2

(using Equation (1)) that the availability of this information is evenly distributed across

research groups. Finally, in Appendix B, we show that the characteristics of students for

whom we have information are balanced across the treatment groups. These results

suggest a high level of internal validity.



IV.     Results

A. Secondary Enrollment and Graduation

        We start by documenting effects on students’ secondary school enrollment (Table

3). We use grade information to create an indicator variable for whether students are

enrolled “on time” in each academic year 2006, 2007 and 2008.15 For each student, the

indicator variable for on-time enrollment is set to one if the student has not dropped out




15
   In Colombian public schools and non-elite private schools, the academic year runs from February
through December.

                                               15
and has not been held back.16

        In the basic and savings experiment we find that the basic treatment increases on-

time enrollment by 2.4 percentage points (base of 51 percent). This difference is

statistically significant at the 10 percent level with full controls (column three of Table

3). Relative to the control group, the savings treatment increases students’ on-time

enrollment by 3.5 percentage points, a difference that is statistically significant at the 1

percent level (column three). The estimate on the tertiary treatment also is positive (2.2

percentage points) and statistically significant at the 10 percent level (column six). All

estimates are robust to the alternative specifications presented in columns one, two, four

and five.

        To compare across the experiments, we restrict the sample to students in upper

secondary school and pool the samples (column seven, Table 3). For these older students,

the effect of the basic treatment falls while the effect of the savings treatment remains

unchanged. The result is a statistically significant difference in treatment effects (p-value

is 0.06). We cannot, however, reject equality between either of these treatments and the

tertiary treatment. Finally, in column eight, we present the results for lower secondary

students, and find treatment effects for the basic treatment that are on par with those of

the savings treatment.

        To understand the drivers of the on-time enrollment results, we estimate effects

for the basic and savings experiment (Panel A) and the tertiary experiment (Panel B) on

other aspects of enrollment in Table 4. First, we estimate the effects for each year of data

on whether students are enrolled, regardless of being held back, in columns one through

16
  Specifically, we consider a student as enrolled on time if the student is enrolled and (analysis year –
2005) = (grade in analysis year – grade at baseline). For example, a student in grade six in 2005 would be
expected to be in grade seven in 2006, grade eight in 2007 and grade nine in 2008.

                                                   16
three.17,18 By this measure, the savings treatment significantly increases enrollment. The

basic treatment and the tertiary treatment have uniformly positive effects, but these are

not consistently statistically significant. The results are similar for the on-time enrollment

by year outcome (columns four through six). With on-time enrollment, the standard

errors on the treatment effect for the savings treatment are small enough in 2007 and

2008 for the effects to be statistically significant.

          In columns seven and eight, we disaggregate the overall on-time enrollment

effect, by separately measuring whether students were held back or dropped out. The on-

grade enrollment effect is largely explained by a reduction in dropouts. Dropout rates fall

by 3.2 percentage points in the savings treatment and 3.6 percentage points in the tertiary

treatment. None of the treatments affect the likelihood of being held back in secondary

school.

          Next, we assess the treatment effects on the probability that students took the

ICFES secondary school exit exam (Table 5). Overall, only the basic treatment increases

exam-taking by 2.2 percentage points for all students (column three), and the results

again are consistent across specifications. The basic and savings treatments have

comparable effects among students in upper secondary at baseline, and the effect for the

savings treatment is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Despite the small

estimate for the tertiary treatment, we cannot reject equality between either the basic or

savings and the tertiary treatment effects. For lower secondary students, the basic



17
   For these estimates, we exclude students who would have graduated had they not been held back. So, for
example, the estimates for 2006 excluded students enrolled in grade 11 at registration in 2005.
18
   The estimates for 2006 also provides the opportunity to compare the results using the new data set to the
results obtained from the previous data. The estimated treatment effects are similar to those found in
Barrera et al. (2011): 0.009 for the basic treatment and 0.034 for the savings treatment, with standard errors
of 0.010 and 0.011, respectively.

                                                     17
treatment estimate is larger than the estimate for the savings treatment although neither

effect is statistically significant.

        To test for heterogeneity by baseline characteristics, we estimate Equation (1)

with interactions between the treatment variables and two baseline characteristics

(student gender and income of the household) for two outcomes (on-time enrollment and

the probability of a student taking the ICFES). We do not find evidence of heterogeneous

effects by gender or baseline income (results not shown, available upon request).



B. Medium-term Tertiary Enrollment

        In this section, we document the treatment effects on students’ tertiary education

enrollment (Table 6) using SPADIES medium-term data (up to 2012). This dataset

captures with higher probability college pathways for individuals who were in upper

grades at the beginning of the experiment.

        The savings treatment increases the probability of ever enrolling in a tertiary

institution by 1.5 percentage points (base rate of 21 percent), statistically significant at

the 10 percent level. The effect of the basic treatment is positive but small, not

statistically significant but indistinguishable from the savings treatment effect (columns

1-3). The tertiary treatment estimate – in the specification with full controls – is 5.7

percentage points (base rate of 35 percent).

        Among students who were in grades nine through 11 at registration, the treatment

effect for the savings treatment is 3.6 percentage points (column seven). In this sample,

the difference between the savings and basic treatment is statistically significant at the 1

percent level. We also can reject the null hypothesis of equality of tertiary enrollment



                                               18
effects between tertiary and basic treatments, but not between savings and tertiary

treatments.19, 20

         Students in the savings and tertiary treatments enroll in different types of tertiary

education institutions (Table 7). For upper secondary students, the savings treatment

encourages enrollment in universities (rather than vocational schools or the lower-quality

unclassified schools). The tertiary treatment, on the other hand, solely encourages

enrollment in unclassified tertiary institutions. It may be that the high-powered incentives

encourage students to enroll more indiscriminately.

         Basic and savings treatments do not increase tertiary enrollment in the medium

term for lower secondary students. The difference in tertiary enrollment effects is not

due to differences in cohort composition across lower and upper secondary grades. Point

estimates (not shown, available upon request) are unchanged when we limit our sample to

only include students in San Cristobal who were either in grade 9 or greater at baseline or

who successfully reached grade 9 thereafter.



C. Long-Term Tertiary Enrollment and Completion

         To estimate long-term effects, we use the SPADIES dataset up to the year 2016.

To the extent the students are college-bound, this long-term dataset enable us to observe
19
   When estimating the model used in column three of Table 6, interacting the treatment effects with grade
level at registration, we obtain an estimate of the coefficient on the interaction term of 1.3 percentage points
per grade level for the savings treatment (p-value of 0.012) and on the main treatment coefficient of -9.1
(p-value of 0.031). This suggests that the savings treatment effect for students in grade six at registration is
small and negative (-1.3 percentage points), while for those in grade 11 at registration it is large and
positive (5.2 percentage points). For the basic treatment, the interaction and main effect estimates are 0.001
and statistically insignificant. We do not find a similar pattern for taking the ICFES exam. The interactions
effects are small and insignificant. For on-time enrollment, the treatment effect for the savings treatment is
constant across grades while the basic treatment declines for older students.
20
   For the tertiary treatment, we have significantly fewer grade levels to exploit. However, we do find the
treatment effect on tertiary enrollment increases by 4.7 percentage points per grade (p-value of 0.036) over
a base treatment effect of -0.402 (p-value of 0.063). The effects for on-time enrollment and the exit exam
do not vary with grade.

                                                      19
collegiate pathways for students from all grades at the time of randomization.

       Table 8 presents the effects of the various treatments on long-term tertiary

enrollment rates. Overall, effects of the basic and savings treatments are positive but

small in magnitude and never statistically significant. For the tertiary treatment, effects

are comparatively large although also insignificant. When we restrict the sample to upper

secondary grades, the effect of the savings treatment is 2.8 percentage points, significant

at the 10 percent level (Column 7, Table 8).

       Given that the long-term SPADIES dataset allows enough time for potential

enrollment and graduation of students from all grades at the beginning of the experiment,

we focus on two additional outcomes: on-time tertiary enrollment (Table 9) and

graduation (Table 10). We calculate these outcomes unconditional on tertiary enrollment;

e.g., a person who did not enroll in tertiary has a value of zero for on-time enrollment and

for graduation.

       Focusing on all grade levels, the basic and savings treatments do not increase on-

time tertiary enrollment in the long term (Columns 1-3, Table 9). The tertiary treatment,

by contrast, increases on-time long-term tertiary enrollment by 3.1 percentage points

(base is 24 percent, Columns 4-6, Table 9). When restricting the sample to focus on upper

secondary students, both the savings and the tertiary treatment increase on-time tertiary

enrollment in the long term by 3.9 and 3.2 percentage points, respectively (Column 7,

Table 9). On-time tertiary enrollment effects are close to zero or negative, and always

insignificant for lower secondary students. The absence of tertiary enrollment effects for

lower secondary students suggests that the treatments—particularly savings and

tertiary—interact with students’ grade progression through secondary school. We explore



                                            20
potential reasons for why might be the case below in subsection E below.

       None of the three treatments affect tertiary graduation in the full sample (Columns

1-6, Table 10). When focusing on upper secondary grades, we find positive effects on

tertiary graduation that are marginally statistically significant for the basic and for

savings treatments (Column 7, Table 10). These effects are about 1.6-1.9 percentage

points (base of 10 percent). We find no effects of the various treatments on tertiary

graduation among lower secondary students (Column 8, Table 10).

       One potential mechanism for observed effects operates through relaxation of

liquidity constraints. Both savings and tertiary treatments may be able to relax liquidity

constraints for relatively poor households when they make tertiary education enrollment

decisions. If this were the mechanism at play we would expect to see stronger effects

among the poorest participants. We find no evidence of an interaction effect between any

of the treatments and two alternative definitions of income. Estimates of the interaction

term are precisely estimated zeros (results not shown, available upon request).



D. Joint Hypothesis Tests

       The purely experimental results, thus far, suggest that the savings treatment has

larger effects than the basic treatment on upper secondary grade enrollment and tertiary

education enrollment. Similarly, results are consistent with the tertiary treatment

producing larger effects on tertiary enrollment than the basic treatment. Given the

number of outcomes we analyze, we conduct a joint hypothesis test of the treatment

effect for each treatment and the difference between the basic and savings. In the medium

term, we focus on on-time enrollment in secondary school, taking the secondary school



                                            21
exit exam and tertiary enrollment. In the long term, we focus on on-time enrollment in

secondary school, taking the secondary school exit exam, long-term tertiary enrollment,

on-time tertiary enrollment and tertiary graduation. All estimations are performed using

Equation (1) with a Seemingly Unrelated Regressions model. The results are presented in

Table 11.

            In the medium term, overall effects of all treatments are statistically significant

(Column 1, Table 11). The p-values on the savings and tertiary treatments are less than 1

percent. The savings treatment also is statistically significant at the 10 percent level with

a p-value of 0.078.

            To test for differences between the savings and basic treatments, we use the same

model but allow for differential effects by secondary school level. Specifically, we

include an indicator variable for students having been enrolled in upper secondary at the

time of registration.21 Overall, we reject the equality of treatment effects with a p-value of

0.019. Upper secondary students drive this result – consistent with documented

differences in previous sections. We reject equality with a p-value of 0.057 for upper

secondary students – but for lower secondary students, the p-value is 0.312.

            In the long term, we find that the savings treatment is the only treatment for which

we consistently reject the null hypothesis of zero effects on all educational outcomes (p-

value of 0.001, Column 2, Table 11). Furthermore, as in the medium-term test, we reject

the hypothesis of equality of effects from basic versus savings treatment (p-value 0.029).

When we separate the test for lower and upper grades, lower grades drive the difference

in results between basic and savings treatments (p-value of 0.047). The respective test for

upper secondary grades has a p-value of 0.147.
21
     The p-value on a joint test of the significance of the interaction term is 0.0634.

                                                         22
       Demotivation effects – control students responding negatively to treatment –

could potentially explain effects between students assigned to treatment and control.

However, demotivation effects are inconsistent with the differential effects we find across

treatments. In the short-term evaluation of the program, Barrera-Osorio et al. (2008)

found positive peer effects on attendance rates on the network of (untreated) friends. A

more recent estimate of peer effects of the program in the short run (Dieye et al., 2015)

found small positive net effect of treatment on non-treated friends for the attendance

outcome. If anything, these peer effect results work against our findings.



V.     Conclusion

       This paper contributes new evidence to the small literature on long-term effects of

CCT programs on students’ educational outcomes. Building on the original design of

Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011), which experimentally manipulated the transfer payment

structure, and combining additional administrative data sources, we find students are

induced to enroll in tertiary education through a revenue-neutral modification that

commits families to save a portion of transfers. This contrasts with the standard CCT

payment structure, which only promotes educational investments derived from

compliance with transfer conditions. A third payment structure that incentivizes tertiary

enrollment is effective at encouraging students to enroll in tertiary institutions, but the

increase is due to enrollment at lower-quality schools, which is a potentially unintended

consequence of the high-powered incentives to comply with conditions.

       The savings treatment, on the other hand, does not condition transfers on tertiary

enrollment and students make tertiary enrollment decisions after they stop receiving



                                            23
transfers, suggesting that impact estimates on tertiary enrollment among this group

cannot be explained by compliance with conditions. Furthermore, the concentration of

tertiary enrollment effects among upper secondary students in the savings treatment is

inconsistent with predictions on the role of conditions in dynamic models of educational

decisions. These models (e.g. Dubois, de Janvry & Sadoulet 2012) suggest that transfer

conditions generate minimal incentives for students in upper secondary school to exert

effort—particularly beyond the period of conditionality—since the prospect of future

transfers is negligible.

           The differential secondary graduation and tertiary enrollment effects between the

savings and basic treatments among upper secondary school students may be consistent

with a “scholarship model” of transfers. By targeting upper secondary students and

potentially waiting until ability is better revealed, the program may be rewarding students

who successfully transition from lower to upper secondary and may be more inclined to

pursue tertiary education. However, with only one experiment we cannot make definitive

statements and future research may be able to shed more precise light on the mechanisms

at play.

           For instance, standard CCTs could potentially induce educational investments

beyond the period of conditionality by revealing ability and returns to effort through

persistent school enrollment. It seems, however, that while some of these mechanisms

may encourage enrollment in lower grades (see, for example, Benhassine et al., 2013), at

least in the case of Bogota’s CCT program, they may be insufficient for helping families

bridge the gap to tertiary enrollment.




                                              24
25
References

Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., & Kremer, M. (2006). Long-term educational consequences of
   secondary school vouchers: Evidence from administrative records in Colombia. The
   American Economic Review, 847-862.

Baez, J. E., & Camacho, A. (2011). Assessing the long-term effects of conditional cash
   transfers on human capital: Evidence from Colombia. Discussion Paper Series, IZA
   DP No. 5751

Baird, S., Ferreira, F. H., Özler, B., & Woolcock, M. (2014). Conditional, unconditional
   and everything in between: a systematic review of the effects of cash transfer
   programmes on schooling outcomes. Journal of Development Effectiveness, 6(1), 1-
   43.

Baird, S., McIntosh, C., & Özler, B. (2011). Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash
   transfer experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 1709–53

Barber, S. L., & Gertler, P. J. (2009). Empowering women to obtain high quality care:
   evidence from an evaluation of Mexico's conditional cash transfer programme. Health
   Policy and Planning, 24(1), 18-25.

Barham, T., Macours, K., & Maluccio, J. A. (2013). More schooling and more learning?
   Effects of a 3-Year Conditional Cash Transfer Program in Nicaragua after 10 years.
   IDB Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP-432

Barrera-Osorio, F., Bertrand, M., Linden, L. L., & Perez-Calle, F. (2008). Conditional
   cash transfers in education: Design Features, Peer and Sibling Effects: Evidence from
   a Randomized Experiment in Colombia. NBER Working Paper No 13890

Barrera-Osorio, F., Bertrand, M., Linden, L. L., & Perez-Calle, F. (2011). Improving the
   design of conditional transfer programs: Evidence from a randomized education
   experiment in Colombia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 167-195.

Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., & Todd, P. E. (2011). Do conditional cash transfers for
   schooling     generate   lasting   benefits?    A    five-year    follow-up      of
   PROGRESA/Oportunidades. Journal of Human Resources, 46(1), 93-122.

Benhassine, N., Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Pouliquen, V. (2015). Turning a
   shove into a nudge? a ‘labeled cash transfer’ for education. American Economic
   Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3), 86-125.

Bettinger, E., Kremer, M., Kugler, M., Medina, C., Posso, C. & Saavedra, J.E. (2016).
   Can Educational Voucher Programs Pay for Themselves? Unpublished manuscript.




                                          26
Chaudhury, N., & Parajuli, D. (2010). Conditional cash transfers and female schooling:
   the impact of the female school stipend programme on public school enrolments in
   Punjab, Pakistan. Applied Economics, 42(28), 3565-3583.

Das, J., Do, Q. T., & Özler, B. (2005). Reassessing conditional cash transfer programs.
   The World Bank Research Observer, 20(1), 57-80.

De Brauw, A., & Hoddinott, J. (2011). Must conditional cash transfer programs be
   conditioned to be effective? The impact of conditioning transfers on school
   enrollment in Mexico. Journal of Development Economics, 96(2), 359-370.

Dieye, R., Djebbari, H. & Barrera-Osorio, F. (2015) Accounting for peer effects in
   treatment response, unpublished manuscript.

Dubois, P., de Janvry, A. & Sadoulet, E. (2012). Effects on school enrollment and
   performance of a conditional cash transfer program in Mexico. Journal of Labor
   Economics, 30(3), 555-589.

Fernald, L. C., Gertler, P. J., & Neufeld, L. M. (2008). Role of cash in conditional cash
   transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of
   Mexico's Oportunidades. The Lancet, 371(9615), 828-837.

Filmer, D., & Schady, N. (2008). Getting girls into school: evidence from a scholarship
    program in Cambodia. Economic development and cultural change, 56(3), 581-617.

Filmer, D., & Schady, N. (2014). The medium-term effects of scholarships in a low-
    income country. Journal of Human Resources, 49(3), 663-694.

Fiszbein, A., & Schady, N. R. (2009). Conditional cash transfers: reducing present and
    future poverty. World Bank, Washington DC.

Garcia, S., & Saavedra, J. E. (2016). Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs on
   Educational Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Meta-analysis. Mimeo.

Karlan, D., & Linden, L. L. (2014). Loose knots: Strong versus weak commitments to
   save for education in Uganda. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper No. w19863

Levy, S., & Schady, N. (2013). Latin America's social policy challenge: Education, social
   insurance, redistribution. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(2), 193-218.

Murakami, Y., & Blom, A. (2008). Accessibility and affordability of tertiary education in
  Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Peru within a global context. Policy Research Working
  Paper 4517, World Bank




                                           27
Montenegro, C. E., and Patrinos, H. A. (2014). Comparable estimates of returns to
  schooling around the world. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7020).

Rawlings, L. B., & Rubio, G. M. (2005). Evaluating the impact of conditional cash
   transfer programs. The World Bank Research Observer, 20(1), 29-55.

World     Bank.    (2014a)      The      State     of     Social      Safety      Nets,
  http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/safetynets/publication/the-state-of-social-safety-
  nets-2014 (Accessed December 5, 2014).

World Bank. (2014b) World Development Indicators: Participation in Education,
  http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/2.11 (Accessed November 7, 2014).

World    Bank.     (2014c).   Data:    Inflation, GDP  Deflator          (annual    %)
  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.DEFL.KD.ZG?page=1
  (Accessed December 17, 2014).




                                          28
Table 1: Match Rates for ICFES and SPADIES Data Sets
                                               Experiments
                                    Both    Basic and Savings                                  Tertiary
                                     (1)            (2)                                          (3)

Panel A: All Students
 Secondary Enrollment
  2006                                            0.624                   0.64                  0.559
  2007                                            0.482                  0.524                  0.304
  2008                                            0.311                  0.376                  0.033

 ICFES Exit Exam                                  0.716                  0.688                  0.836
 Tertiary Enrollment (SPADIES)
    Medium Term (up until 2012)                   0.243                  0.213                  0.373
    Long Term (up until 2016)                     0.345                  0.322                  0.445

Panel B: Upper Secondary (Grades 9-11)
 ICFES Exit Exam                     0.81                                0.795                  0.836
 Tertiary Enrollment (SPADIES)
    Medium Term (up until 2012)      0.32                                 0.29                  0.373
    Long Term (up until 2016)       0.405                                0.382                  0.445

Panel C: Lower Secondary (Grades 6-8)
 ICFES Exit Exam                   0.617                                 0.617
 Tertiary Enrollment (SPADIES)
    Medium Term (up until 2012)    0.163                                 0.163
    Long Term (up until 2016)      0.283                                 0.283
Notes: This table displays the match rates between the original registration data and the three
administrative data sets used to analyze educational outcomes. The administrative secondary enrollment
data covers the period of 2006 through 2008. For the ICFES exit exam data and the SPADIES data we
restrict analyses to the years 2005-2012. To match registration records to ICFES and SPADIES data we
followed a four-step algorithm: i) Exact match on student ID number, name, and date of birth; ii) For those
not matched in (i), exact match on ID and date of birth; iii) For those not matched in (i) or (ii), exact match
on ID and names; iii) For those not matched in (i), (ii), or (iii), match on name and date of birth.




                                                      29
Table 2: Differences in the Probability of Available Matching
Information
                                                   Any ID     Last
                                                   Number     Name
                                                     (1)       (2)

Panel A: Basic and Savings Treatment
  Basic Treatment                                                 0.002         -0.004
                                                                 (0.001)       (0.004)
   Savings Treatment                                             0.002*       -0.008**
                                                                 (0.001)       (0.004)

   N                                                             10,947         10,947
     2
   R                                                             < 0.01         < 0.01
   Control Mean                                                   0.99           0.98

   H0: Basics vs. Savings
     F-Stat                                                        2.09          0.99
     p-value                                                       0.15          0.32

Panel B: Tertiary Treatment
  Tertiary Treatment                                             < 0.001        0.003
                                                                (< 0.001)      (0.006)

   N                                                              2,544         2,544
   R2                                                            < 0.01         < 0.01
   Control Mean                                                   1.00           0.98
Notes: This table presents estimates of the differences in the probability that the
indicated information is available for matching using Equation (1) with no control
variables. Birthdate and first names are not included because the information is
available for all students. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical
significance at the one, five and ten percent level is indicated by ***, ** and *
respectively.




                                           30
Table 3: On-Time Enrollment
                                                                                                                              Upper     Lower
                                        Basic and Savings Treatment                      Tertiary Treatment                 Secondary Secondary
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                   (4)         (5)        (6)                (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                       0.028** 0.028**   0.024*                                                                0.004   0.035**
                                      (0.013)  (0.012)  (0.013)                                                              (0.017)  (0.015)
Savings Treatment                    0.044*** 0.041*** 0.035***                                                             0.035*** 0.034***
                                      (0.010)  (0.010)  (0.009)                                                              (0.013)  (0.012)
Tertiary Treatment                                                                0.026*        0.025**       0.022*         0.022*
                                                                                  (0.016)       (0.012)       (0.013)        (0.012)

N                                       9,937         9,937         9,937          2,345         2,345         2,345           6,320         5,962
 2
R                                      < 0.01          0.14          0.19          < 0.01         0.14          0.24           0.22          0.14
Control Mean                            0.51           0.51          0.51           0.72          0.72          0.72           0.68          0.42
Socio-Demographic Controls               No            Yes           Yes             No           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                    No              No           Yes             No            No           Yes            Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                   All            All           All            All           All           All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics = Savings
 F-Stat                                  1.56          1.02          0.94                                                      3.52          0.01
 p-value                                 0.21          0.31          0.33                                                      0.06          0.94
H0 : Basic = Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                        0.68
 p-value                                                                                                                       0.41
H0 : Savings = Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                        0.49
 p-value                                                                                                                       0.48
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on on-time enrollment. Students are considered to be enrolled "on-time" if they have
not dropped out and have not been held back. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                         31
Table 4: Enrollment Outcomes
                                       Enrollment in Any Grade                          On-Time Enrollment
                                    2006        2007        2008                   2006       2007       2008                  Held back       Dropout
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)                    (4)        (5)         (6)                    (7)            (8)

Panel A: Basic and Savings Treatment
 Basic Treatment           0.012     0.016   0.014                                0.019   0.023**  0.018*                       -0.009         -0.018
                          (0.011)  (0.013)  (0.016)                              (0.012)  (0.010)  (0.010)                      (0.008)        (0.012)
 Savings Treatment       0.031*** 0.033*** 0.034***                             0.038*** 0.036*** 0.028***                      -0.007       -0.032***
                          (0.010)  (0.012)  (0.012)                              (0.010)  (0.010)  (0.009)                      (0.007)        (0.010)

 N                                  9,010         7,601          5,962            9,937          9,937          9,937            9,937          9,937
   2
 R                                  0.15           0.16           0.18             0.24           0.34           0.38             0.06           0.20
 Control Mean                       0.68           0.65           0.57             0.54           0.43           0.30             0.13           0.38
 H0 : Basics vs. Savings
  F-Stat                            2.46           1.07           2.63             1.87           0.98           1.20             0.05           1.49
  p-value                           0.12           0.30           0.11             0.17           0.32           0.28             0.82           0.22

Panel B: Tertiary Treatment
 Tertiary Treatment      0.040**                  0.044                          0.027**        0.019*                           0.005       -0.036***
                          -0.019                  -0.028                          -0.013        -0.011                           -0.009        -0.014

 N                                  1,747           930                           2,345          2,345                           2,345          2,345
   2
 R                                  0.23           0.24                            0.47           0.59                            0.11           0.25
 Control Mean                       0.72           0.69                            0.50           0.25                            0.05           0.23
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on the indicated enrollment measures. "Enrollment in Any Grade" indicates enrollment
regardless of whether or not a student was held back. These estimates exclude students who should have graduated had they not been held back.
(For example, the estimates for 2006 exclude all students enrolled in grade eleven at registration in 2005.) "On-Time Enrollment" indicates that a
student is enrolled and has not been held back as of the indicated year. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control
variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and
* respectively.




                                                                           32
Table 5: Taking the ICFES Exam
                                                                                                                         Upper     Lower
                                       Basic and Savings Treatment                    Tertiary Treatment               Secondary Secondary
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)         (5)        (6)              (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                      0.020*       0.023**       0.022**                                                   0.021          0.02
                                     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)                                                  (0.016)       (0.014)
Savings Treatment                     0.011        0.012          0.01                                                   0.028*         0.001
                                     (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.011)                                                  (0.017)       (0.013)
Tertiary Treatment                                                              0.011         0.01          0.007         0.005
                                                                               (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.014)

N                                     10,947       10,947        10,947         2,544         2,544        2,544          6,905         6,586
 2
R                                     < 0.01         0.10         0.12          < 0.01         0.04         0.10           0.09          0.11
Control Mean                           0.68          0.68         0.68           0.83          0.83         0.83           0.80          0.61
Socio-Demographic Controls              No           Yes          Yes             No           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                   No             No          Yes             No            No          Yes            Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                  All           All          All            All           All          All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                1.50          2.12         2.48                                                     0.28          2.68
 p-value                               0.22          0.15         0.12                                                     0.59          0.10
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                    0.44
 p-value                                                                                                                   0.51
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                    0.91
 p-value                                                                                                                   0.34
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student took the ICFES exit exam. All
coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical
significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                      33
Table 6: Tertiary Enrollment
                                                                                                                         Upper     Lower
                                       Basic and Savings Treatment                    Tertiary Treatment               Secondary Secondary
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)         (5)        (6)              (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                       0.009         0.01           0.01                                                   0.007         0.012
                                     (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)                                                 (0.016)       (0.013)
Savings Treatment                    0.016*        0.017*        0.015*                                                  0.036**        0.006
                                     (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)                                                 (0.014)       (0.013)
Tertiary Treatment                                                            0.058*** 0.059*** 0.057***                0.058***
                                                                               (0.020)  (0.019)  (0.021)                 (0.021)

N                                     10,947       10,947        10,947         2,544         2,544        2,544          6,905         6,586
 2
R                                     < 0.01         0.06         0.08          < 0.01         0.05         0.10           0.09          0.06
Control Mean                           0.21          0.21         0.21           0.35          0.35         0.35           0.31          0.16
Socio-Demographic Controls              No           Yes          Yes             No           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                   No             No          Yes             No            No          Yes            Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                  All           All          All            All           All          All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                1.06          0.97         0.55                                                     6.43          0.56
 p-value                               0.31          0.33         0.46                                                     0.01          0.46
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                    3.23
 p-value                                                                                                                   0.07
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                    0.72
 p-value                                                                                                                   0.40
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student enrolled in a tertiary institution. All
coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical
significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                      34
Table 7: Effects of Treatments on Tertiary Enrollment by Institution Type
                                        Basic and Savings                                                                  Tertiary
                            Any       University Vocational Unclassified                               Any          University Vocational Unclassified
                            (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)                                 (5)             (6)          (7)       (8)

Panel A: Grades 9-11
 Basic Treatment                   0.009            0.014          -0.004          -0.001
                                  (0.015)          (0.013)         (0.009)         (0.006)
 Savings Treatment                0.034**          0.025*           0.007           0.001
                                  (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.008)         (0.008)
 Tertiary Treatment                                                                                 0.057***         -0.002           0.019         0.040***
                                                                                                     (0.021)         (0.016)         (0.013)         (0.010)

 N                                  4,361           4,361           4,361           4,361             2,544           2,544           2,544           2,544
   2
 R                                   0.09            0.07            0.04            0.04              0.10            0.08            0.08            0.08
 Control Mean                        0.28            0.15            0.10            0.03              0.35            0.21            0.10            0.04

 H0 : Basics vs. Savings
  F-Stat                             4.89            0.84            1.09            0.20
  p-value                            0.03            0.36            0.30            0.66

Panel B: Grades 6-8
 Basic Treatment                    0.012          -0.005           0.012           0.005
                                   (0.013)         (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.004)
 Saving Treatment                   0.006           0.001           0.004           0.001
                                   (0.013)         (0.009)         (0.006)         (0.003)

 N                                  6,586           6,586           6,586           6,586
   2
 R                                   0.06            0.05            0.05            0.02
 Control Mean                        0.16            0.10            0.04            0.02

 H0 : Basics vs. Savings
  F-Stat                             0.56            0.90            1.68            0.92
  p-value                            0.46            0.34            0.20            0.34
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student enrolled the indicated types of tertiary institutions.
Higher quality institutions are classified as either universities or vocational training programs, while lower quality programs remain unclassified. All
coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at
the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                              35
Table 8: Tertiary Enrollment: Long Term (SPADIES 2016)
                                                                                                                            Upper     Lower
                                        Basic and Savings Treatment                     Tertiary Treatment                Secondary Secondary
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                  (4)         (5)        (6)               (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                        0.004         0.007         0.006                                                     0.007       0.00632
                                      (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)                                                   (0.018)      (0.013)
Savings Treatment                      0.002         0.004         0.002                                                    0.028*        -0.012
                                      (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.009)                                                   (0.016)      (0.010)
Tertiary Treatment                                                                0.034         0.034         0.026          0.027
                                                                                 (0.022)       (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.022)

N                                     10,947        10,947        10,947          2,544         2,544         2,544          6,905         6,586
 2
R                                       0.00          0.05          0.08           0.00          0.05          0.10          0.09          0.08
Control Mean                            0.32          0.32          0.32           0.43          0.43          0.43          0.40          0.29
Socio-Demographic Controls               No           Yes           Yes             No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                     No            No           Yes             No            No           Yes           Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                   All           All           All            All           All           All          9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                 0.06          0.10          0.18                                                      1.85         2.15
 p-value                                0.81          0.75          0.67                                                      0.17         0.14
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.50
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.48
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.00
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.99
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student enrolled in a tertiary institution, cut up
to 2016. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                        36
Table 9: On time enrollment, tertiary education (SPADIES 2016)
                                                                                                                             Upper     Lower
                                        Basic and Savings Treatment                     Tertiary Treatment                 Secondary Secondary
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                  (4)         (5)        (6)                (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                        0.003        0.00538       0.00461                                                     0.01          0.001
                                      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)                                                   (0.015)        (0.011)
Savings Treatment                      0.008        0.00946       0.00762                                                  0.039***         -0.01
                                      (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.009)                                                   (0.014)        (0.011)
Tertiary Treatment                                                               0.034**       0.036**       0.031*         0.032*
                                                                                 (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.018)        (0.018)

N                                      10,947        10,947        10,947          2,544        2,544         2,544           6,905         6,586
 2
R                                       0.00          0.03          0.05           0.00          0.04          0.09           0.08          0.06
Control Mean                            0.18          0.18          0.18           0.24          0.24          0.24           0.21          0.18
Socio-Demographic Controls               No           Yes           Yes             No           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                     No            No           Yes             No            No           Yes            Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                   All           All           All            All           All           All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                 0.45          0.34          0.18                                                      4.27          2.09
 p-value                                0.50          0.56          0.67                                                      0.04          0.15
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.71
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.40
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.11
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.75
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student enrolled on time in a tertiary institution.
It is constructed using a 2 year window (after graduation) and it is not conditional on enrollment. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1)
with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent
level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                        37
Table 10: Teritary Graduation (SPADIES 2016)
                                                                                                                            Upper     Lower
                                        Basic and Savings Treatment                     Tertiary Treatment                Secondary Secondary
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                  (4)         (5)        (6)               (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                        0.004         0.005       0.00586                                                   0.0162*       0.00106
                                      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)                                                   (0.010)       (0.006)
Savings Treatment                      0.009          0.01        0.0104                                                    0.019*       0.00553
                                      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)                                                   (0.011)       (0.007)
Tertiary Treatment                                                                0.012         0.012         0.011          0.011
                                                                                 (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)

N                                     10,947        10,947        10,947          2,544         2,544         2,544          6,586         6,586
 2
R                                       0.00          0.02          0.04           0.00          0.03          0.09          0.06          0.03
Control Mean                            0.06          0.06          0.06           0.11          0.11          0.11          0.10          0.05
Socio-Demographic Controls               No           Yes           Yes             No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
School Fixed Effects                     No            No           Yes             No            No           Yes           Yes           Yes
Grades at Registration                   All           All           All            All           All           All          9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                 0.87          0.78          0.60                                                      0.08         0.38
 p-value                                0.35          0.38          0.44                                                      0.77         0.54
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.09
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.77
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                       0.22
 p-value                                                                                                                      0.64
Notes: This table presents estimates of the treatment effects on an indicator for whether or not a student graduated from a tertiary institution (not
conditional on tertiary enrollment). All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with the indicated control variables. Standard errors are
clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                        38
Table 11: Joint Hypothesis Tests
                                                                 Medium Term                    Long Term
Hypothesis                                                           (1)                           (2)

H0 : Basic = 0
   Chi2                                                               6.811                                 8.253
   p-value                                                            0.078                                 0.143

H0 : Savings = 0
       2
   Chi                                                               21.703                               21.683
   p-value                                                           < 0.001                               0.001

H0 : Tertiary = 0
   Chi2                                                              15.581                                 7.311
   p-value                                                            0.001                                 0.198

H0 : Basic = Savings
 All Students
  Chi2                                                               15.185                               20.057
  p-value                                                             0.019                                0.029
 Upper Secondary (Grades 9-11)
  Chi2                                                                7.513                                  8.18
  p-value                                                             0.057                                 0.147
 Lower Secondary (Grades 6-8)
   Chi2                                                               3.566                               11.209
   p-value                                                            0.312                                0.047
Notes: This table presents the results of joint hypothesis tests for treatment effects on different outcomes,
depending on the temporal horizont. For the middle term effects, the three primary outcome variables are on-time
secondary enrollment, taking the ICFES exit exam from high school, and enrollment in a tertiary institution in the
medium term (Column 1). For the long term effects, the outcomes are on-time secondary enrollment, taking the
ICFES exit exam from high school, long term enrollment in a tertiary institution, on-time tertiary enrollment and
tertiary graduation (Column 2). All coefficients for the tests are estimated using Equation (1) in a Seemingly
Unrelated Regressions model. The equations used to estimate the coefficients for the tests of equality between the
basic and savings treatments also include indicator variables for secondary school level (i.e. whether students
were enrolled in upper secondary at registration). Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical
significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.




                                                   39
Appendix A: Subjects Missing Enrollment Data

As noted in Section III, the information required to match the enrollment data to our

original registration data was not available for all students. As a result, the sample of

students used to estimate the treatment effects for enrollment outcomes is slightly smaller

than the full sample used to estimate the treatment effects for the other outcomes.

Excluding those students, however, does not significantly change the estimates. In Tables

A1 and A2, we replicate Tables 5 and 6 using only those students for whom information

was available for the enrollment match. The estimated treatment effects are consistent

with those estimated using the entire sample.


Table A1: Taking the ICFES Exam, Excluding Students Missing Enrollment Matching Information
                                                                                           Upper     Lower
                             Basic and Savings Treatment         Tertiary Treatment      Secondary Secondary
                              (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                        0.023**       0.024**       0.024**                                                      0.025          0.019
                                       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)                                                     (0.019)        (0.014)
Savings Treatment                       0.016         0.015         0.013                                                       0.027          0.005
                                       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)                                                     (0.017)        (0.013)
Tertiary Treatment                                                                  0.018          0.016         0.015          0.013
                                                                                   (0.015)        (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.013)

N                                       9,937          9,937         9,937          2,345          2,345         2,345          6,320          5,962
 2
R                                       < 0.01         0.17           0.19          < 0.01         0.06           0.13           0.11          0.20
Control Mean                             0.68          0.68           0.68           0.84          0.84           0.84           0.81          0.61
Grades at Registration                    All           All            All            All           All            All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                  0.62          1.18           1.6                                                        0.01          1.87
 p-value                                 0.43          0.28           0.21                                                       0.92          0.17
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                          0.24
 p-value                                                                                                                         0.62
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                          0.35
 p-value                                                                                                                         0.56
Notes: This table presents estimates of the coefficients presented in Table 5, while omitting subjects without sufficient information to match to
the enrollment data. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by
***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                          40
Table A2: Studying at any Tertiary Institution, Excluding Students Missing Enrollment Matching Information
                                                                                               Upper      Lower
                               Basic and Savings Treatment            Tertiary Treatment     Secondary Secondary
                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)

Basic Treatment                         0.014         0.013          0.014                                                      0.012          0.015
                                       (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.009)                                                    (0.016)        (0.014)
Savings Treatment                      0.018*        0.018**        0.016*                                                    0.038***         0.005
                                       (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.009)                                                    (0.013)        (0.013)
Tertiary Treatment                                                                0.066*** 0.068*** 0.066***                  0.065***
                                                                                   (0.021)  (0.020)  (0.021)                   (0.021)

N                                       9,937          9,937         9,937          2,345          2,345         2,345          6,320          5,962
R2                                      < 0.01         0.07           0.09          < 0.01         0.07           0.12           0.12          0.07
Control Mean                             0.21          0.21           0.21           0.35          0.35           0.35           0.31          0.16
Grades at Registration                    All           All            All            All           All            All           9-11          6-8

H0 : Basics vs. Savings
 F-Stat                                  0.27          0.27           0.08                                                       3.55          0.96
 p-value                                 0.60          0.61           0.78                                                       0.06          0.33
H0 : Basic vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                          3.56
 p-value                                                                                                                         0.06
H0 : Savings vs. Tertiary
 F-Stat                                                                                                                          1.24
 p-value                                                                                                                         0.27
Notes: This table presents estimates of the coefficients presented in Table 6, while omitting subjects without sufficient information to match to
the enrollment data. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by
***, ** and * respectively.




                                                                          41
Appendix B: Internal Validity

Despite the small differences between groups and the high rates at which the information

is available, we assess whether or not information is differentially available for particular

types of students. Tables B1 and B2 conduct the analysis for students with valid ID

information and full last name, respectively. For each, we use the control variables to

compare the average composition of subjects for which the respective information is

available in each research group. All of the differences in these tables are practically very

small, and none are statistically significant. These results are consistent with the low

levels of missing information and the individual, student-level randomization.




                                             42
Table B1: Comparison of Students with Valid ID's
                                    Basic-Savings            Tertiary
                          Control Basic- Savings- Basic- Control Tertiary-
Demographic Variable     Average Control Control Savings Average Control

Panel A: Indexes of Household Assets
  Possessions              1.896     0.066                 0.033       0.033        1.941     -0.044
                          (1.099) (0.020)                 (0.023)    (0.024)      (1.019)    (0.043)
  Utilities                4.654 -0.017                    0.062      -0.079        4.848      0.049
                          (1.418) (0.030)                 (0.031)    (0.034)      (1.315)    (0.041)
  Durable Goods            1.373 -0.027                    0.006      -0.032        1.635      0.015
                          (0.896) (0.019)                 (0.021)    (0.022)      (0.858)    (0.034)
  Physical Infrastructure 11.657 -0.052                    0.041      -0.094       12.142     -0.053
                          (1.756) (0.035)                 (0.029)    (0.040)      (1.486)    (0.064)

Panel B: Individual Characteristics
  Age                      14.374               0.092      -0.064      0.156       15.666     -0.066
                          (5.293)             (0.106)     (0.143)    (0.170)      (4.230)    (0.194)
  Gender                    0.495               0.005      -0.005      0.010        0.454     -0.009
                          (0.500)             (0.012)     (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.498)    (0.018)
  Years of Education        5.612              -0.025      -0.004     -0.021        7.428     -0.051
                          (1.855)             (0.038)     (0.050)    (0.041)      (1.344)    (0.052)
  Grade                     8.084              -0.004      -0.002     -0.002        9.849     -0.002
                          (1.626)             (0.035)     (0.048)    (0.042)      (0.792)    (0.028)

Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Single Head              0.297                0.017       0.010      0.006        0.271      0.008
                         (0.457)              (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.012)      (0.445)    (0.016)
  Age of Head             45.917               -0.081       0.136     -0.217       46.211      0.252
                        (10.271)              (0.176)     (0.228)    (0.212)      (8.591)    (0.286)
  Years of Ed, Head        5.654               -0.103      -0.170      0.068        5.940     -0.124
                         (2.940)              (0.078)     (0.066)    (0.066)      (2.936)    (0.096)
  People in Household      5.416               -0.042      -0.020     -0.022        5.158     -0.006
                         (2.005)              (0.046)     (0.050)    (0.040)      (1.775)    (0.068)
  Member under 18          2.569                0.029       0.015      0.015        2.310      0.045
                         (1.354)              (0.032)     (0.026)    (0.028)      (1.199)    (0.055)

Panel D: Poverty Measures
  Strata                    1.445              -0.010 0.022 -0.032      1.632                 -0.002
                          (0.828)             (0.017) (0.019) (0.018) (0.767)                (0.028)
  SISBEN Score             11.771              -0.121 -0.027 -0.094 13.450                     0.041
                          (4.647)             (0.085) (0.115) (0.096) (4.333)                (0.176)
  Household Income        366.398              -4.474 0.368 -4.842 399.592                     4.131
  (1,000 Pesos)          (240.865)            (5.642) (5.912) (6.214) (236.795)              (7.924)
Note: This table presents a comparison of students in each of the listed research groups for whom a
valid ID is available for matching. Columns one and five contain the average characteristics of the
respective control students while columns two, three, four, and six contain the average difference
between the respective control students and treatment students. Panel A contains indices of
household assets (positive values indicate wealthier families). Panel B contains individual student
characteristics, and Panel C contains characteristics of the students' families. Panel D contains
poverty measures available in the SISBEN data set. This includes the "strata" number which is a
geographic measure of poverty as well as the SISBEN score which is a continuous score used to
classify households for various social programs. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with
no control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the
one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.



                                                 43
Table B2: Comparison of Students with Valid Last Names
                                    Basic-Savings            Tertiary
                          Control Basic- Savings- Basic- Control Tertiary-
Demographic Variable     Average Control Control Savings Average Control

Panel A: Indexes of Household Assets
  Possessions              1.896     0.066                 0.033       0.033        1.941     -0.044
                          (1.099) (0.020)                 (0.023)    (0.024)      (1.019)    (0.043)
  Utilities                4.654 -0.017                    0.062      -0.079        4.848      0.049
                          (1.418) (0.030)                 (0.031)    (0.034)      (1.315)    (0.041)
  Durable Goods            1.373 -0.027                    0.006      -0.032        1.635      0.015
                          (0.896) (0.019)                 (0.021)    (0.022)      (0.858)    (0.034)
  Physical Infrastructure 11.657 -0.052                    0.041      -0.094       12.142     -0.053
                          (1.756) (0.035)                 (0.029)    (0.040)      (1.486)    (0.064)

Panel B: Individual Characteristics
  Age                      14.374               0.092      -0.064      0.156       15.666     -0.066
                          (5.293)             (0.106)     (0.143)    (0.170)      (4.230)    (0.194)
  Gender                    0.495               0.005      -0.005      0.010        0.454     -0.009
                          (0.500)             (0.012)     (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.498)    (0.018)
  Years of Education        5.612              -0.025      -0.004     -0.021        7.428     -0.051
                          (1.855)             (0.038)     (0.050)    (0.041)      (1.344)    (0.052)
  Grade                     8.084              -0.004      -0.002     -0.002        9.849     -0.002
                          (1.626)             (0.035)     (0.048)    (0.042)      (0.792)    (0.028)

Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Single Head              0.297                0.017       0.010      0.006        0.271      0.008
                         (0.457)              (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.012)      (0.445)    (0.016)
  Age of Head             45.917               -0.081       0.136     -0.217       46.211      0.252
                        (10.271)              (0.176)     (0.228)    (0.212)      (8.591)    (0.286)
  Years of Ed, Head        5.654               -0.103      -0.170      0.068        5.940     -0.124
                         (2.940)              (0.078)     (0.066)    (0.066)      (2.936)    (0.096)
  People in Household      5.416               -0.042      -0.020     -0.022        5.158     -0.006
                         (2.005)              (0.046)     (0.050)    (0.040)      (1.775)    (0.068)
  Member under 18          2.569                0.029       0.015      0.015        2.310      0.045
                         (1.354)              (0.032)     (0.026)    (0.028)      (1.199)    (0.055)

Panel D: Poverty Measures
  Strata                    1.445              -0.010 0.022 -0.032      1.632                 -0.002
                          (0.828)             (0.017) (0.019) (0.018) (0.767)                (0.028)
  SISBEN Score             11.771              -0.121 -0.027 -0.094 13.450                     0.041
                          (4.647)             (0.085) (0.115) (0.096) (4.333)                (0.176)
  Household Income        366.398              -4.474 0.368 -4.842 399.592                     4.131
  (1,000 Pesos)          (240.865)            (5.642) (5.912) (6.214) (236.795)              (7.924)
Note: This table presents a comparison of students in each of the listed research groups for whom a
valid last name is available for matching. Columns one and five contain the average characteristics of
the respective control students while columns two, three, four, and six contain the average difference
between the respective control students and treatment students. Panel A contains indices of
household assets (positive values indicate wealthier families). Panel B contains individual student
characteristics, and Panel C contains characteristics of the students' families. Panel D contains
poverty measures available in the SISBEN data set. This includes the "strata" number which is a
geographic measure of poverty as well as the SISBEN score which is a continuous score used to
classify households for various social programs. All coefficients are estimated using Equation (1) with
no control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Statistical significance at the
one-, five- and ten-percent level is indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.

                                                 44
