                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL NUDGES PERSIST? THEORY AND EVIDENCE
                   FROM 38 NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                        Alec Brandon
                                        Paul J. Ferraro
                                          John A. List
                                      Robert D. Metcalfe
                                       Michael K. Price
                                     Florian Rundhammer

                                      Working Paper 23277
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23277


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




We thank Arhan Gunel and Nancy Hersch for sharing the data. Hunt Allcott, Michael
Greenstone, Jim Kapsis, Marc Laitin, David Novgorodsky, Steve Puller, and David Rapson
offered helpful comments. We would also like to thank participants of the American Economic
Association annual conference, the Muenster Energy Conference, the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists annual conference, Camp Resources XXII, the
University of Chicago, and Georgia State University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alec Brandon, Paul J. Ferraro, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K. Price,
and Florian Rundhammer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Do The Effects of Social Nudges Persist? Theory and Evidence from 38 Natural Field Experiments
Alec Brandon, Paul J. Ferraro, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K. Price, and Florian
Rundhammer
NBER Working Paper No. 23277
March 2017
JEL No. C93,D01,D03,Q4

                                          ABSTRACT

This study examines the mechanisms underlying long-run reductions in energy consumption caused
by a widely studied social nudge. Our investigation considers two channels: physical capital in the
home and habit formation in the household. Using data from 38 natural field experiments, we
isolate the role of physical capital by comparing treatment and control homes after the original
household moves, which ends treatment. We find 35 to 55 percent of the reductions persist once
treatment ends and show this is consonant with the physical capital channel. Methodologically, our
findings have important implications for the design and assessment of behavioral interventions.


Alec Brandon                                    Robert D. Metcalfe
Department of Economics                         University of Chicago
University of Chicago                           Saieh Hall for Economics
5757 S. University Ave.                         5757 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                               Chicago IL, 60637
alec.brandon@gmail.com                          rdmetc@gmail.com

Paul J. Ferraro                                 Michael K. Price
Bloomberg School of Public Health               Experimental Economics Center
Carey School of Business                        Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Whiting School of Engineering                   Georgia State University
Johns Hopkins University                        P.O. Box 3992
100 International Dr.                           Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
Baltimore, MD 21202                             and NBER
pferraro@jhu.edu                                mprice25@gsu.edu

John A. List                                    Florian Rundhammer
Department of Economics                         The Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
1126 East 59th                                  Georgia State University
Chicago, IL 60637                               PO Box 3992
and NBER                                        Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
jlist@uchicago.edu                              florian.rundhammer@gmail.com
I.      Introduction

The textbook approach to dynamic decision making assumes away any direct dependence
between choices made over time. Instead, past decisions interact with future choices
through state variables, such as the stock of physical capital (Ramsey, 1928) or natural
resources (Hotelling, 1931). The tractability of this framework has led to remarkable
progress in our understanding of dynamics ranging from inflation and unemployment
(Lucas, 1972) to energy policy and climate change (Nordhaus, 1994). Yet, there are many
economic settings where the utility an agent experiences may not prove separable from
one time period to the next. Prime examples include choices motivated by addiction,
habit, or tradition.
        Dating back to Pollak (1970), researchers have modeled these motivations by
reimagining state variables as stocks of addiction, habit, or tradition capital. Broadly
deemed habit formation, this modeling framework has proven invaluable for explaining a
wide range of behaviors that are outside a parsimonious neoclassical formulation of
behavior. Examples include consumption of tobacco products (Becker et al., 1994),
behavior in financial markets (Constantinides, 1990 and Campbell and Cochrane, 1999),
and the dynamics of economic growth and the business cycle (Carrol et al., 2000 and
Boldrin et al., 2001).
        But in spite of the explanatory power of habit formation models, it has proven
remarkably difficult to design programs that successfully induce habitual behavior. For
example, social programs that targeted habits in the 1960s and 1970s were notoriously
unsuccessful (see, e.g., Rossi, 1987). More recent work has, by and large, rediscovered
this fact via field experiments designed to test the theoretical predictions of habitual
behavior derived in Becker and Murphy (1988). Generally, these studies go as follows. A
financial incentive is introduced to motivate behavioral change. Under a habit formation
model, the change in behavior spurred by the incentive will lead to an increase in habitual
capital for the behavior. The incentive is then removed and the extent to which the
behavioral change persists is observed.




                                                2
         Figure 1 presents a summary of this work by plotting the proportion of the
incentive effect that persists after the incentive is removed.1,2 Across domains ranging
from charitable giving (Meier, 2007 and Landry et al., 2010), education (Levitt et al.,
2016), exercise (Charness and Gneezy, 2009; Milkman et al., 2014; Royer et al., 2015;
and Acland and Levy, 2015), smoking cessation (Volpp et al., 2006 and Volpp et al.,
2009), and weight loss (Volpp et al., 2008), two stark patterns emerge. First, treatment
effects rarely persist. Only four of the ten studies find behavior consistent with habit
formation. Second, when effects do persist, they decay rapidly. Only two of the ten
studies find more than 25 percent of the initial effect persisting after a month, and only
one study finds any persistence after six months.
         One remarkable exception to this trend is a program called the Home Energy
Report (HER), a social nudge that promotes energy conservation through periodic mailers
comparing a household’s energy use to that of similar neighbors. 3 Using data from a
series of natural field experiments, Allcott and Rogers (2014), AR henceforth, consider
the lifecycle of the behavioral response to the HER. Perhaps the most provocative finding
AR report is the persistence of the conservation behavior induced by the HER. As Figure
1 illustrates, the HER offers an unparalleled dividend years after the program has ended.
         To understand the mechanisms underlying the long-run impacts, AR consider the
extent to which the HER’s persistence is driven by changes in habit capital or physical
capital, such as increasing investments in energy efficient technology. To do so, they
assess the effect of the HER on participation in utility-run energy efficient technology
programs. They find that the HER induces no appreciable increase in participation in
these programs, which suggests that the persistence of the HER is driven by changes in
habits as opposed to changes in capital stock within the home. AR are careful to note,


1
  Studies were limited to field experiments that observe behavior during and after a financial incentive is
used to promote behavioral change. If more than one incentive was used then the largest is reported. The
time dimension reflects the end of the time period of the reported estimate. Nulls are reported if effects are
not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. Studies that utilize commitment devices are excluded, as their
predictions are outside of a strict habit formation model. See Online Appendix Table 1 for estimates.
2
  There is also a nascent literature on the persistence of interventions that target margins outside of the
Becker and Murphy (1988) model. We point the interested reader to Rogers and Frey (2015) and the
citations therein.
3
  The HER is a product offered by the company Opower. Opower is the world leader in software-based
solutions for utilities. Due to implementation as natural field experiments, HERs have been studied
extensively, including Allcott (2011; 2015), Ayres et al. (2013), and Costa and Kahn (2013).


                                                           3
however, that unobserved adoption of energy efficient technology outside of these
programs may play a role in their estimates of persistence. Hence the channels through
which persistence arises—changes in habits or changes in capital stock—remains an open
question.
        Yet, if even a small fraction of the persistence were driven by a change in habit
capital, AR would represent the most compelling existent evidence of a program spurring
habit formation. From a positive perspective, these results would point to a strong
complementarity in social norms and the formation of habit capital. Importantly, such
complementarity would validate the predictions of models that have previously
considered such (see, e.g., Becker and Murphy, 2000, pp. 18-20, 152-156) and would
offer a potential explanation for the past failure of programs designed to affect habits
using only financial incentives. From a normative perspective, these results highlight the
value of programs that change habits because they provide a long-lived stream of benefits
at little to no direct or indirect costs, which significantly enhances the cost effectiveness
and gains to welfare.4
        We complement AR by taking a new approach to identifying the mechanisms
driving the HER’s persistence. We start by detailing a wrinkle in Opower’s
administration of the HER that allows us to isolate the role of technology adoption on
long-run patterns of energy use: upon the sale of a home, Opower ceases all messaging
for both the incoming and outgoing households but continues to observe energy
consumption.
        We then develop a multi-period model of household energy consumption and
capital investment behavior that captures this wrinkle. Our model assumes that receipt of
the HER changes the shadow price of energy consumption and that investments in
physical capital are immobile. Through the lens of the model, we learn that distinguishing
between the household and the home points to an empirical strategy for estimating
unobserved adoption of energy efficient technology using only observations of energy


4
  For example, AR show that accounting for persistence more than doubles the cost effectiveness of the
HER. Although AR discuss welfare consequences of the social costs of responding to the HER, it’s unclear
if there is actually a gap between choices and welfare in the case of Opower, as households are free to opt-
out of the mailer (DellaVigna et al., 2012). For a broader discussion of the welfare effects of the HER see
Allcott and Kessler (2015).


                                                         4
consumption.5 Intuitively, our strategy identifies capital investments induced by the HER
via a comparison of the HER’s effect before and after the home changes hands, with any
persistence attributed to capital investments inherited from the initial residents.
        We then link our economic model to an empirical model of energy consumption
and estimate the model using more than 9 million observations of monthly electricity
consumption. These observations come from more than 250,000 homes that see a change
in ownership over 38 natural field experiments implemented by Opower to test the HER.
We find that homes that change ownership react to the HER in the same way as the full
sample of all homes exposed to the HER: they reduce their electricity consumption by 2.4
percent, on average. Interestingly, approximately 35 to 55 percent of that effect persists in
the home after the household moves and HER delivery ends. We further show that this
estimated persistence in the home is robust to a battery of empirical specifications, data
inclusion rules, and approaches to incorporating heterogeneity. Additionally, we show
that our estimates of persistence in the home conform to higher order predictions of our
theoretical model and we find no evidence to support alternative models of behavior that
stress the role of sorting. Taken jointly, we interpret these findings as suggesting that the
HER serves to induce changes in capital stock and that such changes are important
drivers of persistence.
        Relating our findings to AR, we test whether our estimates of persistence in the
home due to physical capital differ from AR’s estimates of persistence in the household
due to habits and physical capital. We find only weak evidence that our estimates are
statistically different from the estimates in AR; in fact, for the subsample most similar in
spirit to AR, initial residents that were exposed to treatment for at least two years, we find
persistence indistinguishable from AR. We interpret this evidence as supporting an
important role for physical capital in driving persistence and casting uncertainty over the
complementarity between social nudges and habit formation. Finally, from a policy
perspective, we consider the importance of incorporating both direct and indirect costs
into estimates of cost-effectiveness. We find that previous estimates of the HER’s cost



5
 To the best of our knowledge, the only studies to previously consider an identification strategy like this
are Costa and Kahn (2010) and Bernedo et al. (2014).


                                                         5
per kWh saved are more than doubled when the costs of physical capital induced by the
HER are incorporated.
        The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. In Section II we review the
administration of the HER by Opower and detail the sample underlying our investigation.
Section III then considers our theoretical framework, which motivates the empirical
strategy for identifying unobserved investments in physical capital. Section IV presents
our empirical results, considers robustness, and assesses alternative explanations. Section
V discusses the implications of our findings and Section VI concludes.


II.     Data and Summary Statistics

Our empirical analysis is based on a collection of 38 natural field experiments, henceforth
waves, implemented by Opower across 21 utilities between 2008 and 2014. Each wave
utilizes the same experimental design. Households with at least twelve billing months of
energy service are randomly assigned to a Treatment or Control group.6 Households in
the Control group are left untouched, while households assigned to the Treatment group
receive a periodic mailer from Opower called the Home Energy Report (HER).7 Figure 2
presents an example of the HER, which utilizes a comparison of household and
neighborhood energy usage, energy conservation tips, and information on energy-
efficient technologies to motivate energy conservation.
        For each wave, we observe four pieces of administrative data via a data sharing
agreement with Opower. First, we observe monthly electricity consumption in kilowatt
hours (kWh) for each home. Second, we observe Opower’s assignment of each household
to the Treatment or Control group. Third, we observe the timing of the intervention in
each wave, which allows us to partition home-month observations of electricity
consumption into a Pre-Treatment or Treatment time period. Fourth, we observe the
timing (if any) of a household’s deactivation of their energy service. Importantly, after

6
  Opower shared with us a total of 41 waves. We exclude one wave where there are no movers assigned to
the Control group. We also exclude two waves that fail a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality in the
distribution of average pre-treatment usage at the five percent level. Online Appendix Tables 2-4 provide
more details and summary statistics. Excluding waves based on a threshold of ten percent leads to three
waves being excluded and does not change the results qualitatively.
7
  Across the 38 waves, the HER is received monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly. Previous work suggests that
frequency does not substantially affect the effectiveness of the intervention (Allcott, 2011) and we adopt
the approach of AR to pool across different frequencies.


                                                        6
deactivation Opower still observed monthly electricity consumption in the home but
immediately ceased transmission of the HER and excluded the home and household from
subsequent waves of the HER. We deem the subsample of homes with an account that is
deactivated movers and further partition time for these homes with a Post-Move time
period.8
         Table 1 provides summary statistics for the full sample, the non-movers
subsample, and the movers subsample. Comparing across the columns in Table 1, we see
that slightly more than 10 percent of the homes in the full sample change hands, about
two-thirds of the homes are assigned to the Treatment group regardless of the subsample,
and monthly electricity usage is comparable but lower for the movers subsample relative
to the non-movers subsample. Moving down the summary statistics on the movers
subsample, we also see the average number of monthly electricity consumption
observations per home across the Pre-Treatment, the Treatment and Pre-Move, and Post-
Move time periods. In particular, there is an average of about 12 observations per home
and time period, with more variation in this number of observations in the Treatment and
Pre-Move and Post-Move time periods relative to the Pre-Treatment time period, which
reflects the heterogeneity in time of move.

III.     Conceptual Framework

To motivate our empirical strategy, we present a model of household energy
consumption, investment in energy efficient technology, and moral suasion for
households in our sample. Our goal in presenting this model is to link the parameters
identified by the reduced form empirical model estimated in Section IV with a richer
economic model of behavior. This allows us to be precise about the identifying
assumptions of our empirical model and provides a foundation for assessing alternative
interpretations of the data.

8
  Based on discussions with Opower’s staff, we determined that some account deactivations did not
constitute a move due to one of four reasons: i) accounts become inactive because of changes to the name
or marital status of the account holder, e.g. marriage or divorce; ii) the deactivation date falls before the
date of the first HER; iii) the deactivation date falls after the last usage observation for a given home,
effectively making the household a non-mover account; and iv) the deactivation occurred because the
household switched energy service providers. We exclude these households from the movers subsample.
See Online Appendix Table 5 for results that include these households in the movers sample. Results are
qualitatively unchanged.


                                                          7
IIIA: Setup

         The setup of our models goes as follows. We imagine a household in time period
    allocating a financial endowment,         , between a numeraire consumption good,                 , and
inputs for household production of a final consumption good,                  .9 We assume household
production is described by an increasing and concave function,                    , with energy,       , and
a stock of technology,        , as the inputs. That is,                     . Furthermore, we assume
households purchase energy at a fixed per-unit price,               , and vary their technology stock
by investing in new technology, , at a fixed per-unit price,               , with the technology stock
evolving according to                        .10 In the spirit of the findings in Allcott (2011) and
others we assume that energy consumption behavior partly reflects pro-social
motivations, with households paying a moral suasion cost,                  , for their consumption of
energy. We assume this moral suasion cost varies with receipt of the HER via                          , with
the relationship between messaging and moral suasion costs described by                                    ,
where      is a metapreference parameter in the vein of Becker and Murphy (1993), with
       increasing in its arguments.11, 12 With this setup established, we next consider the
optimization problem that households face during the Pre-Treatment, Treatment and Pre-
Move, and Post-Move time periods.

IIIB: Pre-Treatment and Treatment and Pre-Move Time Periods

         Consider a household in time period                              with additively separable
preferences in utility from the numeraire,               , and household production,              :




9
  A specific example of relevant to our analysis would be comfortable ambient temperatures. For a more
general treatment of household input decisions see Becker (1965), which focuses on time as an input.
10
     can be thought of as investments net of depreciation.
11
   We focus on a model with increasing in for all households. This precludes so-called boomerang
effects. This choice is supported by the data, see Allcott (2011), Ferraro and Price (2013), and Ferraro and
Miranda (2013) for a discussion, but this assumption is not restrictive in the sense that if we observe
treatment prompting energy increases, our model would still describe how to relate that to technology
investments.
12
   As has been studied in Herberich et al. (2011) and Allcott and Taubinsky (2015), households could also
receive utility from green technology purchases. Our framework ignores this motivation, although
inclusion would only strengthen the predicted dynamics.


                                                         8
where        given. With utility linear in the numeraire and increasing and concave in                    ,
the solution to (1) is given by the following first-order conditions:




which tells us that households choose           and       to balance the marginal benefits and costs
of   . Importantly, the marginal cost of energy includes                          , which acts like a
shadow price on energy consumption. Varying                   is then akin to varying the price of
energy (perhaps non-linearly) and because households consume                   , not     or    , (2) tells
us they will respond to a price change by varying both inputs,              and    .
        The dynamics of energy consumption, pro-social incentives, and technology
investment become clearer with a flexible parameterization of                              and       . In
particular, we assume isoelastic utility in           ,                                   with         ,13
a linear moral suasion cost function,                            , and a Cobb-Douglas production
function of     ,                 with             .14 Under this parameterization (2) yields the
following demand functions for energy and technology investments in period                            :




13
   The law of demand imposes            on the typical isoelastic utility function. Following the bulk of
research on in-home production that uses energy inputs we assume that implied demand for is inelastic,
giving us       . See, e.g., Small and Van Dender (2007), Davis (2008), Hughes et al. (2008), and Davis
and Kilian (2011) for estimates.
14
   The Cobb-Douglas production function is meant to capture an unrestrictive parameterization of the
household’s production function in the sense that it’s a first-order approximation of a general production
function. See Syverson (2011) for a discussion.


                                                          9
        The demand functions in (3) demonstrate two important dynamics. First, there is
an unambiguous energy demand response from an increase in the moral suasion cost ( ),
with              . Second, investment and moral suasion ( ) are positively related for
       . That is, if preferences imply inelastic demand for   then           . While this
first prediction has been extensively tested there is very little evidence on the
responsiveness of technology investment to changes in moral suasion. The best estimates
use data on participation in energy efficiency programs run by electric utilities and find
              (see AR and citation therein). However, as electric utility programs often
focus on a limited subset of all available technologies these estimates could be severely
attenuated.
        To summarize, Figure 3 plots a time series of energy consumption. During         ,
the Pre-Treatment time period, all households consume the same amount of energy,
       . Then once treatment starts in        , the Treatment and Pre-Move time period,
households are randomly assigned to                      , where                   . Then
                                   is a reduced form measurement of the effect of
treatment (i.e., a reduction) on energy use through behavioral and technological
adjustments.

IIIC: Post-Move Time Period

        Now consider the decision problem in the Post-Move time period,             . We
assume that new residents inherit the capital and investments of the past homeowner, i.e.,
                             , but face a new meta-preference parameter,       , and treat




                                                10
capital as fixed in the Marshallian sense of the short-run.15,16 This leads to the following
decision problem in the Post-Move time period:




Then given the same parameterization as above, solving (4) yields the following energy
demand function for new residents:




This demand function illustrates how technology investments induced by                            in period
        can persist in the energy consumption decision of a new resident in period                         .
To see this, first recall that             investments are increasing in           , i.e.,                 .
Furthermore (5) shows us that                       . Combining we get                        .
         Figure 3 illustrates these predictions in the context of a time series of energy
consumption choices. Moving from                       to        , a home assigned to the Control
group       does       not       see      their      energy        consumption          change,        i.e.,
                                       , but homes assigned to Treatment see an increase, i.e.,
                                       because all new residents faces the same shadow price on
energy consumption. Nonetheless, the Treatment home’s energy consumption remains
below control because of the inherited technology investments, with
                                                            measuring the       extent of treatment


15
   Here we assume         is orthogonal to . This assumption seems justified, as the HER only causes
about $25 of savings per year in energy costs. Nonetheless, in Section IVD we consider the consequences
of relaxing this assumption.
16
   While our short-run assumption is a strong one, it only attenuates the effect of the HER in the post-move
period.


                                                         11
persisting through those investments. Importantly                      gives us a measure of moral
suasion’s effect on household technology investment that does not suffer from the
attenuation bias of earlier estimations because it indirectly observes all investments
instead of using direct observation of a small subset of possible investments.17

IV.     Empirical Results

We start our investigation by considering an event study of the homes in the movers
sample. Figure 4 plots the difference in average energy consumption between homes
assigned to Treatment and Control in the Pre-Treatment, Treatment and Pre-Move, and
Post-Move time periods normalized to the Pre-Treatment time period. 18 The figure
highlights two important results. First, the HER reduces energy consumption in our
sample of movers. Second, nearly half of the reduction caused by the HER persists in the
home after the initial household moves.
        The remainder of this section considers the robustness of these findings. We start
by analyzing the full movers sample in a difference-in-differences framework. This
allows us to control for characteristics of the time series and cross-section that differ
across waves and to assess the sensitivity of our results to different definitions of the
Post-Move time period. We then follow Allcott (2015) and utilize an empirical strategy
that treats each of the 38 waves as a separate experiment. This framework proves
valuable both for establishing robustness and assessing predictions derived in Section III.
Finally, we test alternative interpretations of the results in Figure 4.

IVA. General Results
        Consider a simple empirical model of energy demand:19




17
   Utilities also often utilize rebate programs directly at a retailer. In other words, utilities subsidize
appliances and other technology purchased at a retailer without being able to attribute purchases to a
particular home. Furthermore, buyers from surrounding municipalities can also take advantage of these
offers, further complicating attribution to the utility’s customer stock.
18
   See Online Appendix Table 4 for levels of consumption over these event study time periods.
19
   Note that here we have changed the meaning of the time index from event time periods to months
because in (6) the indicator functions act to divide the sample into the three event time periods.


                                                        12
where        is energy use in month for home in experiment wave ,                      is an indicator for
the home’s treatment status,              is an indicator denoting the time period in which
treatment households receive HERs,                 denotes the post-move event period for each
home,       is an indicator for the experimental waves,                 is an indicator for month of
sample across all waves, and               is a home/wave/month varying unobservable that is
orthogonal via randomization. The parameters of interest,                                    , correspond
to the quantities described in Section III and summarized in Figure 3 with                      measuring
the effect of treatment on the original resident and                    capturing the extent to which
the treatment persists in the home with a new resident.
         To estimate the parameters of interest, , we run ordinary least squares on (6) and
conduct inference via standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary
autocorrelations within clustering unit . Table 2 reports estimates with (6) presented in
Column 1. We reject the null for , finding that receipt of HERs reduces energy use with
           (consonant with, e.g., Allcott 2011, 2015). A point estimate of -25 kWh
represents average reductions of about 2.4 percent relative to the baseline, somewhat in
the upper range of ATEs in previous work. 20 Importantly, we find that a significant
portion of the treatment effect persists in the home with                           . Previously treated
homes use approximately 11 kWh less than control homes after initial occupants have
moved out. Calculated with the same counterfactual usage as above, this corresponds to
about a one percent reduction. 21 To place these estimates into perspective,                               is
equivalent to turning off two traditional incandescent lightbulbs for eight hours every day
or not using a high-end AC window unit (1500W) for 16 hours.                               is slightly less
than half of these changes. In terms of technology investments, 11 kWh are the savings
associated with substituting one incandescent with a CFL lightbulb for a 220 hour
timespan.22


20
   Our sample mainly consists of the earlier Opower interventions in Allcott (2015). Consequently, we
would expect future interventions to lead to smaller reductions because most promising sites were selected
first. This argument follows through to persistence.
21
   The careful reader will notice a very large (absolute)  . We treat this potential problem in the following
subsection.
22
   These numbers are extracted from www.energyusecalculator.com. We want to stress that we do not take
a stance on whether such reductions are sizable in terms of the environmental impacts – we simply want to
provide novel evidence of technology adoption. Unfortunately, the nature of average treatment effects and


                                                         13
        Other columns in Table 2 augment the specification by including additional
control variables that could affect energy consumption. In Column 2, we use the average
pre-treatment usage, i.e.           when             and            , to control for general usage
patterns of a given property influenced by factors like property size. Column 3 directly
controls for climate conditions by including monthly cooling and heating degree days
(CDD, HDD) from the nearest weather station. 23 Columns 4 to 6 utilize measures
describing the local housing market and environmental sentiment of the local population.
For the former, we add the vacancy rate, i.e. percent of empty housing units, at the ZIP
level. For the latter, we draw from the League of Conservation Voters’ environmental
scorecard for congressional representatives (Kahn and Morris, 2009). This index
aggregates representative’s law making decisions with respect to bills related to the
environment on a scale from zero to 100.24 Furthermore, we compile publicly available
data on donations to Green Party committees from 2008 to 2015 (Kahn, 2007; Kahn and
Vaughn, 2009; Wang and Xu, 2016).25 From these data, we calculate the proportion of
households in every ZIP code that donated at least once to any Green Party campaign.
Lastly, Column 7 controls for the full set of additional covariates. Across all
specifications, we find point estimates and inference to be extraordinarily robust.
        These estimates are also economically meaningful, suggesting that households are
forward looking in their response to variation in moral suasion, adjusting their marginal
use of energy as well as their durable technology investments. To see this, consider a
measure of the proportion of the treatment effect that persists after the original resident
moves out,                       . Estimates of     from Table 2 range from 0.43 to 0.55 and our
interpretation of these estimates is that 43 to 55 percent of the treatment effect induced by
Opower’s HER remain through the physical capital of the home after the original owner

the lack of direct household-level data do not allow us to speak to what types of adoptions were undertaken
by households in the sample. Furthermore, we cannot identify whether few households adopted a wide
range of technologies or many households made small changes. However, the effect sizes typically found in
such RCTs can easily be explained by relatively small changes in the capital stock by the average
household.
23
   We map the geographic center of a home’s ZIP code to the closest weather station in terms of geometric
distance. Some weather stations have missing observations of climate variables.
24
   These data are extracted from http://scorecard.lcv.org/. The motives for using these measures are
explained in more detail in Section VD.
25
   The Federal Election Commission (FEC) publishes individual contributions of at least $200 in every year
(see http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftpdet.shtml). We aggregate these data over time and restrict
them to donations to any committee affiliated with the Green Party.


                                                        14
moved out.26 AR find a similar trend when looking at a different sample of households in
Opower’s data. In particular, they find that if Opower’s messaging is discontinued, 60 to
70 percent of the treatment effect persists for households that do not move.27 In relative
terms, such an effect corresponds to about a two percent reduction in usage after
treatment cessation in their sample.
         Using utility energy efficiency program participation data, AR attribute this
persistence to habit formation as opposed to technology investments. Yet our indirect
approach to observing technology investments suggests an important role for changes in
the capital stock of the home. That said, our results do not rule out a role for habit
formation as we do not observe the behavior of treated households after they move.
Rather, they complement existing findings and provide first evidence that at least part of
the story can be explained by rational capital investment. We conduct a more nuanced
comparison of persistence estimates across the two studies in Section V.


IVB. Robustness to Exclusion of Low-Usage Months
         Estimates in Table 2 also suggest substantial reductions in energy consumption
across all homes after move (a large absolute post-move indicators,                         ). Despite the
seemingly unrealistic magnitude of the coefficient, this finding can be explained by
taking into account that some homes remain vacant for extended periods of time before
being sold.28 Indeed, a look at the raw data reveals that many homes exhibit a dip in
usage right after move, including multiple months with zero or very low usage.
Generally, such trends do not pose problems for our identification strategy as long as they
are constant (or parallel) across treatment and control homes. However, if we worry
about a correlation between treatment status and the distribution of unoccupied months,
our estimates can be biased.

26
   Please note that this is only one way of defining persistence. AR, for example, mainly contrast the
persistent treatment effect of households no longer receiving HERs to the counterfactual of continued
receipt of HERs – such a group does not naturally arise in our setting.
27
   AR also estimate a decay parameter to investigate how persistence develops over time. Online Appendix
Table 6 for results from a similar approach in our setting. In particular, we interact the post-move treatment
indicators with a measure of time-since-move. Unfortunately, due to the non-experimental nature of our
data and large variation in time-of-move, our estimates are imprecise and do not allow strong conclusions
about potential decay.
28
   This is even more important in our time frame, which includes the Great Recession and its housing
market collapse for many waves.


                                                          15
       To mitigate concerns, we test if results are sensitive to different rules of
eliminating observations where the home was unoccupied. Unfortunately, we only
observe the date of account deactivation but not a new resident’s account opening date.
Consequently, we rely on (potentially imperfect) assumptions about what constitutes
unoccupied homes. Because these measures are crude, we do not directly compare the
time on the housing market but rather attempt to show robustness across subsamples of
the data. Online Appendix Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of observations
with low usage before and after move-out. We find that both treatment and control
households experience a significant spike in low-usage and zero-usage observations right
around move. The proportion of these observations declines quickly but continues to be
relatively pronounced for up to six months after move. Consequently, we provide a range
of more or less conservative exclusion rules and re-estimate (6) on the restricted samples
without low-usage observations as defined below. In doing so, we hope to provide
evidence that our persistence findings are not an artifact of data limitations.
       The four exclusion rules are: i) exclusion of all observations with                   in
the first six months after deactivation of the account and exclusion of homes for which
the average energy usage in the post-move period is smaller than the pre-move average
minus two standard deviations (i.e.                            ), ii) exclusion of the first six
months after account closure regardless of usage, iii) exclusion of all observations after
account closure that are smaller than the smallest pre-move energy consumption minus
20 percent (i.e.                             ), and finally iv) exclusion of all post-move
observations with              .
       Table 3 presents results from these rules and various combinations. Column 1
depicts the baseline case, which applies (6) to the full sample with no exclusion rule
applied. A few observations stand out. First, different sample sizes reflect the varying
degrees of stringency across rules. Second, every rule reduces        significantly compared
to the baseline case. In Column 6, for example, the point estimate of             is no longer
distinguishable from zero. Other rules reduce          by between 50 and 85 percent. Third,
and most importantly, the coefficients of interest are remarkably stable across the
different samples. We find negative and statistically significant                  even after
artificially pushing    to zero. While some point estimates decrease in magnitude, we


                                                  16
still estimate   to be between 22 and 40 percent. We conclude that results are not driven
by differential patterns of home occupancy after move.


IVC. Considering Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects
        In Sections IVA and IVB, we estimated an empirical model that assumed
homogeneous treatment and post-move effects. This made identifying the proportion of
persistence, , easy because we could simply take the ratio of                    and       . However,
if there is heterogeneity (as Allcott, 2015, clearly shows), this approach could lead to a
biased estimate of . In this section we present a two-stage procedure to estimate                  that
incorporates heterogeneity both in the time series and cross section.
        In the first stage we estimate an augmented version of (6):




where we allow for heterogeneity in each wave of the experiment, , and each cohort of
movers, , with      capturing the number of months between reception of the first HER and
move-out. 29 Conceptually, (7) is just a DD model for each of the wave-cohort
combinations in the data. We estimate (7) via ordinary least squares for each wave
separately and conduct the following second stage empirical model with all first stage
estimates:




where     measures the average proportion of the treatment effect that persists in the post-
move period across the waves and cohorts in the data. We estimate                 via weighted least
squares according to the inverse variance of                          and conduct inference with
standard errors clustered within each wave, . (8) is then akin to a meta-analysis of the
DD estimates found in (7).


29
     is the number of months that a household assigned to the treatment group would have received
Opower’s reports. Please note that this is a measure of length of exposure rather than intensity because
frequency of moral suasion messaging varies across waves and utilities (monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly).


                                                       17
        Figure 5 plots the parameters of interest from our first-stage regression, (7), in
                space.30 To convey the variation in the length of the different cohorts each
point in Figure 3 is shaded according to the number of years a household was in the
treatment time period before moving (the median time of treatment exposure is slightly
over one year). Furthermore, the size of each point reflects the number of homes in a
wave-cohort with many including well over hundred homes (the median wave-cohort is
330). Figure 5 also illustrates how (8) estimates              by plotting the best-fit line. Table 4
presents that estimate in Column 1. The estimate of                   suggests that about 35 percent
of the treatment effect persists in the post-move period, rejecting                         of zero at
                                                     31
conventional levels of statistical significance.
        Table 4 also considers the relationship between persistence and the timing of the
moving decision. If a household assigned to treatment enters the treatment period with
plans to move soon, they are more likely to behave like a short-run household that holds
technology fixed.32 By a simple envelope argument our model in Section IIIB predicts
              to be increasing in the magnitude of . That is, households that received
HERs for a short period of time should see smaller (in magnitude) per-month energy
usage reductions from treatment than households that received HERs for longer periods
of time. Furthermore, homes exposed to only few HERs should see a smaller proportion
of the treatment effect persisting after the original resident moves relative to households
receiving treatment for an extended period.
        We test this prediction in Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 by estimating




where        denotes the indicator function for households exposed to treatment for a short
or long period of time, respectively. We define the cut-off in two ways: i) one year, the

30
   For cosmetic reasons we limit the figure to                and             .
31
   See Online Appendix Table 7 for estimates that consider robustness over the different exclusion rules
discussed above.
32
   Some have suggested that households may make investments right before moving to increase the value of
their home. When we look at the energy efficiency program participation data used in AR one can see a
steep decline in participation starting 19 months before a resident moves. This evidence is available upon
request from the authors.


                                                          18
mean length of exposure in our data, in Column 2 and ii) two years of HER exposure,
mirroring the time frame in AR, in Column 3. We estimate this model without a constant
and statistically test the difference between                        and          . Across the two

specifications we find that                    is indeed increasing in the length of exposure.33
In fact, persistence in homes with initial residents who were exposed to HERs for a
substantial time is approximately twice the persistence in short-term properties. These
differences between the short-run and the long-run effect are significant at high levels of
confidence and coefficients are precisely estimated.


IVD. Alternative Interpretations
        In Section III we assumed that new residents do not sort into homes based on
investment differences caused by treatment. To assess the validity of this assumption, we
sketch out a partial equilibrium sorting model in the post-move time period (                           ),
derive predictions, and then test those predictions using proxy variables of housing
market conditions. Across all proxies we reject the predictions of the sorting model.
        Consider an agent looking to purchase a home in housing market                    at the start of
event time period           . We assume the agent faces a market where there is a continuum
of identical homes that vary only according to their technology stock, which we represent
with     just as we did in previous sections. The price of a home in market                        varies
according to the extent of its technology stock,                   , with price increasing in       . We
also assume the agent solves a two-period decision problem. In the first time period
(      ) the technology stock of the home they purchase is fixed but in the second period
(      ) they can make investments to vary their new home’s technology stock. The
maximization problem is:




33
 We also estimate a simple model with a linear time trend in cohort, i.e. length of exposure to treatment.
We find that persistence significantly increases in length of exposure (at the five percent level). Online
Appendix Table 8 reports results.


                                                        19
where     is the agent’s discount rate,         is the interest rate they face, and               is the
agent’s exogenous pro-social meta-preference parameter that is constant over the relevant
decision period. Imposing the same assumptions from Section III on (10) and assuming
linearity in the price of existing technology we see the following by combining first-order
conditions:




(11) tells us that the agent solving (10) will choose existing technology versus new
technology according to their relative prices. Put differently, (11) shows that agents will
sort into houses with more existing capital when the price of capital is low relative to the
price of investments. If the price of investing is stable across housing markets, then we
have a simple way of testing (10): Compare                   in housing markets with high             to
the same parameter in markets with low               , with the sorting model predicting               is
decreasing in        and the model in Section III predicting a null effect to changes in               .
        While we do not directly observe                 we assume that it varies with housing
market conditions. Firstly, we consider a scenario where demand for                       is fixed and
supply-side conditions vary according to the housing vacancy rate in each zip code (our
proxy for ) with demand fixed. If high vacancy levels correspond to supply shifts of
then       will be decreasing in the extent of housing vacancies.34 Secondly, we consider a
scenario where supply of          is fixed and demand-side conditions vary according to the
environmental sentiments in a housing market.


34
 Alternatively, vacancies could weaken the bargaining power of the home seller causing the buyer to pass
more of the cost of ,     , onto the seller when vacancy levels are high.


                                                       20
         We proxy for environmental sentiments by linking a home to their Congressman’s
National Environmental Scorecard rating which is published annually by the League of
Conservation Voter. Additionally, we utilize the Federal Election Commission’s
individual contributions data to compile a county and district measure of giving to any
Green Party committee between 2008 and 2015. These data include all individual
donations of at least $200 and we calculate the proportion of households in a given ZIP or
county who gave at least once during our sample period. If high environmental sentiment
markets correspond to demand shifts for            then       will be increasing in these proxies.
         Table 5 presents estimates of our coefficients of interest from (6) and their
interaction with proxies of supply and demand conditions. The results in Row 1 indicate
that        is increasing in vacancy rates, one of our proxies for               . An increase in the
vacancy rate of one percentage point is associated with a reduction in persistence of about
one kWh. This rejects the sorting model, which predicts the opposite relationship. Rows
2 to 5 of Table 5 present specifications where the coefficients of interest are interacted
with our four definitions of environmental sentiments. Across all specifications, we
cannot reject the null hypothesis of no additional impact of green sentiment. Again, this
does not match the predictions of the sorting model.35
         The evidence presented in this section indicates that sorting consonant with a
simple price-based model is not supported by the data. While this does not formally rule
out sorting, three additional factors speak against an important impact of sorting. Firstly,
homes with extensive capital investments plausibly attract residents with high baseline
use because large savings can be realized. If such people were sorting into treatment
homes,           is likely to be a lower bound on persistence. Secondly, more efficient
technology can lead to a rebound effect because household production of energy-related
goods becomes cheaper. Again, such an effect would strengthen our results. Thirdly, for
sorting to be an issue, there has to be technology adoption in the first place. Otherwise,
no signal of efficient capital could be observed by home buyers. In other words, if sorting
of a form not captured by our proxies is a common occurrence, it can only be due to prior
capital investment by initial residents. The only difference then lies in interpretation: the

35
 Table 5 is based on DD specifications with interaction terms. The full regression tables are provided in
Online Appendix Table 9.


                                                       21
persistent effect estimated by us would capture a combination of technology and
crowding in of green residents. Together, these observations suggest that our estimates
pick up direct effects of technology investment.


V.      Implications

In this section, we relate our estimates of persistence due to capital investment to the
estimates of persistence in AR. While our study and AR both assess the long-run effects
of the HER, the samples have no overlap, making a direct comparison of behavior
impossible. Instead, we conduct the following exercise. First, we obtain the preferred
estimates of persistence in AR across each of their three sites. 36 Second, we test the
hypothesis that our estimates of persistence, which we attribute to capital investments in
the home, are equal to the estimates of persistence in AR, which are attributed to a
combination of investments in the home and habits. In doing so, we hope to formally
assess the extent to which accumulation of habit capital is responsible for the estimates of
persistence in AR.
        Panel A of Table 6 presents results. In Column 1, we see that the persistence from
technology observed over our entire sample is significantly lower than the persistence
estimated across the three sites in AR. However, when we focus on just the subsample of
homes in our sample that are most comparable to AR—households in AR receive the
HER for two years—in Columns 2 and 3, we see that estimates across the two studies
become quite similar. While future work is clearly needed to decompose the mechanisms
that lead to long-run effects in response to the HER, our estimates suggest that a
significant portion (or nearly all) of the persistence observed in AR is due to unobserved
investments in energy efficient technology rather than habit formation.
        This finding also has important implications for the normative assessment of the
HER. Economists have long emphasized the importance of incorporating both direct and
indirect costs when assessing program performance (see, e.g., Heckman and Smith,

36
  In particular, we use point estimates from Table 4 of Allcott and Rogers (2014, pp. 3024) that compare
the proportion of the HER effect that persists for households that have the HER discontinued versus
households that do not have the HER discontinued. We choose these estimates because they correspond
most closely to the discussion of persistence in AR, “The point estimates…suggest that continuing the
intervention increases the treatment effects in the post-drop period by a remarkable 50 to 60 percent”
(Allcott and Rogers, 2014, pp. 3024). Please note that the data used by AR are not part of our sample.


                                                       22
1998). If the HER induces adoption of costly capital, earlier estimates of its cost-
effectiveness may be unduly optimistic due to the omission of these adoption costs. To
estimate the extent to which cost-effectiveness is influenced by the costly capital
investment, we revisit earlier estimates of the HER’s cost-effectiveness in light of our
findings.
         Panel B of Table 6 presents the results of this exercise for the treatment and pre-
move period. Consistent with AR, we start by assuming the direct cost of administering
the HER to one household is $1 per report. Following the standard approach in the
literature, we simply compare this direct cost to savings achieved by the HER as
estimated in Column 1 of Table 2 (-24.98 kWh) (No Technology). To also account for the
indirect costs of the HER, we use a lower-bound estimate of the cost of capital per kWh
of electricity saved in Allcott and Greenstone (2012, pp. 17).37 With this cost estimate,
we convert savings achieved by capital investment—as a proportion of total savings
using our estimates of persistence in the first row—into dollars. 38 Applying this
conversion, we see that the HER induces an indirect cost that ranges from $0.74 to $1.15
per report and household. The resulting cost-effectiveness is reported in the last row for
all three subsamples (Technology).
         Comparing the two approaches to estimating cost-effectiveness in Panel B of
Table 6, we see that incorporating the indirect cost of investments in capital more than
doubles the cost per kWh in two out of three cases. From this perspective, after
accounting for direct and indirect costs of technology adoption, alternative programs to




37
   Allcott and Greenstone (2012) estimate a cost of energy efficient technology per kWh saved of 8.5¢.
They reach this conclusion by reviewing the literature on demand-side management programs, which uses
subsidies and other economic incentives to encourage uptake of energy-efficient technology. Assuming a
discount rate of 5 percent and installation and purchase costs of 70 percent, they conclude that the cost of
energy efficient technology per kWh is about 8.5¢. An alternative approach would use the marginal cost of
a kWh of electricity as an upper bound on the cost of technology. The national average for residential users
since 2010 is about 12¢. Consequently, using this strategy would only strengthen our point.
38
   Allcott and Greenstone (2012) provide a detailed discussion of other indirect costs, e.g. households could
experience utility losses due to a less comfortable ambient temperature, warm glow from contributing to a
public good, etc. Consonant with previous work on cost-effectiveness of Opower’s programs, we ignore
these costs and benefits. Furthermore, we do not include estimates of discounted long-term benefits
exceeding the sample period or capital depreciation over time. Allcott and Kessler (2015) find supporting
evidence for effects driven by moral utility.


                                                         23
the HER discussed in Allcott and Mullainathan (2010) and Allcott and Greenstone (2012)
appear much more attractive.39


VI.      Conclusion

Policies motivated by behavioral insights have increased in popularity across many
different environments, based in part on experimental evidence of their effectiveness.
Yet, relatively little is understood about the underlying mechanisms – the how and why of
the average treatment effects observed. In particular, we know little about whether such
policies change habits in ways that persist when the behavioral intervention ends. Our
lack of understanding is caused by a lack of rigorous theories of nudges (an area that is
improving quickly) and by missing household-level data that would permit the analyst to
draw conclusions about actual steps taken by the people who are nudged. Importantly,
depending on the underlying mechanisms, conclusions about short- and long-term costs
and benefits can change significantly.
         This paper develops a simple short- and long-run theoretical model of household
production in the Beckerian tradition. In our model, households produce consumption
good in their home using energy and capital that varies in its energy efficiency. Moral
suasion from an intervention like Opower’s standard Home Energy Reports is
represented by a shadow price on energy use. Moral suasion thus induces relative price
changes that lead rational agents to adjust their behavior – a phenomenon widely
documented in the literature – and to invest in energy efficient capital. We then utilize
data from 38 natural field experiments and employ a novel identification strategy to show
that a significant proportion of the initial treatment effect persists after treated households
move out of their homes. This effect is robust across different specifications and
alternative models of behavior that emphasize sorting are rejected by the data.
         Although we do not invalidate or rule out behavioral adjustments, our findings
suggest a previously understated role of capital investments in response to social nudges.
This channel is widely missing from existing calculations of cost-effectiveness and cost-
39
  Interestingly, Allcott and Kessler (2015) find that household willingness to pay for continued receipt of
the HER is less than estimates of the HER’s cost-effectiveness that assumes no investments in physical
technology. The authors attribute this gap to moral utility. Clearly more work is needed to parse the costs of
motivating conservation via moral utility from the costs of energy efficient technology upgrades.


                                                          24
benefit analyses. As such, our findings have clear policy relevance and highlight the
importance of theory and creative empirical strategies to identify parameters of interest.
Unfortunately, current technology and data availability do not allow us to speak to the
open question of what types of technologies are adopted. With the ascent of smart
technology solutions and better ways to monitor energy usage, we are optimistic that
future work will be able to provide answers.
       Earlier research on habit formation presents a pessimistic perspective on the
ability of policies and programs to induce persistent changes in habits. Our study does
little to overturn this view. Despite our findings, we believe that there is still much that
we do not understand about habit formation and ways to induce changes in such. Recent
research suggests that one particularly promising dimension is to focus investments on
programs that target habitual behavior at early ages (see, e.g., Almlund et al., 2011). We
would encourage future work to explore such programs and whether habits are easier to
form at a young age.
       Finally, in the context of energy policy goals, our research does point to a
promising alternative to habit formation, such as the dissemination of energy efficient
technologies (see, e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2012). Our research suggests that while social
nudges may have little impact on the formation of new habits, they do appear to provide
an effective way to induce the adoption of technologies that obviate the need for changes
in habits. We imagine a useful exercise for future work is to leverage the identification
strategy developed in this study to parse the role of habits induced by different policy
changes from changes in other state variables, such as physical capital.




                                                25
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous. 2012. "The
     Environment and Directed Technical Change," American Economic Review,
     102(1): 131-166.

Acland, Dan, and Matthew R. Levy. 2015. "Naiveté, Projection Bias, and Habit
      Formation in Gym Attendance," Management Science, 61(1): 146-160.

Allcott, Hunt, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. "Behavior and Energy Policy," Science,
        327(5970): 1204-1205.

Allcott, Hunt. 2011. "Social Norms and Energy Conservation," Journal of Public
        Economics, 95(9): 1082-1095.

Allcott, Hunt. 2015. "Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation," Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 130(3): 1117-1165.

Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. "Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?"
        Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 3-28.

Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. "The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of
        Behavioral Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation,"
        American Economic Review, 104(10): 3003-037.

Allcott, Hunt, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. "Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy:
        Experimental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market," American Economic Review,
        105(8): 2501-2538.

Allcott, Hunt, and Judd B. Kessler. 2015. "The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study
        of Energy Use Social Comparisons," NBER Working Paper No. 21671.

Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Tim D. Kautz. 2011.
      "Personality Psychology and Economics," Handbook of the Economics of
      Education, 4: 1–181.

Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2013. "Evidence from Two Large Field
       Experiments that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy
       Usage." Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 29(5): 992-1022.

Becker, Gary S. 1965. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,
       75(299): 493-517.

Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin M. Murphy. 1994. "An Empirical
       Analysis of Cigarette Addiction," American Economic Review, 84(3): 396-418.




                                             26
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. "A Theory of Rational Addiction,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 96(4): 675-700.

Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1993. "A Simple Theory of Advertising as a
       Good or Bad," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(4): 941-964.

Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 2000. Social Economics, Harvard University
       Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bernedo, Maria, Paul J. Ferraro, and Michael K. Price. 2014. "The Persistent Impacts of
      Norm-Based Messaging and Their Implications for Water Conservation," Journal
      of Consumer Policy, 37(3): 437-452.

Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas D. M. Fisher. 2001. "Habit
       Persistence, Asset Returns, and the Business Cycle," American Economic Review,
       91(1): 149-166.

Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. "Incentives to Exercise," Econometrica, 77(3):
      909-931.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
     Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior," Journal of Political
     Economy, 107(2): 202-251.

Carroll, Christopher D., Jody Overland, and David N. Weil. 2000. "Savings and Growth
        with Habit Formation," American Economic Review, 90(3): 341-355.

Constantinides, George M. 1990. "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium
      Puzzle," Journal of Political Economy, 98(3): 519-543.

Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. "Why Has California's Residential
       Electricity Consumption Been So Flat since the 1980s? A Microeconometric
       Approach," NBER Working Paper No. 15978.

Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2013. "Energy Conservation "Nudges" and
       Environmentalist Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity
       Field Experiment," Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(3): 680-
       702.

Davis, Lucas W. 2008. "Durable goods and residential demand for energy and water:
       evidence from a field trial," RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2): 530-546.

Davis, Lucas W., and Lutz Kilian. 2011. "The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the
       U.S. Residential Market for Natural Gas," Journal of Political Economy, 119(2):
       212-241.




                                              27
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. "Testing for Altruism
      and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      127(1): 1-56.

Ferraro, Paul J., and Juan Jose Miranda. 2013. "Heterogeneous treatment effects and
       mechanisms in information-based environmental policies: Evidence from a large-
       scale field experiment," Resource and Energy Economics, 35(3): 356-379.

Ferraro, Paul J., and Michael K. Price. 2013. "Using Nonpecuniary Strategies to
       Influence Behavior: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment," Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 95(1): 64-73.

Ferraro, Paul J., Juan Jose Miranda, and Michael K. Price. 2011. "The Persistence of
       Treatment Effects with Norm-Based Policy Instruments: Evidence from a
       Randomized Environmental Policy Experiment," American Economic Review,
       101(3): 318-322.

Heckman, James J., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 1998. "Evaluating the Welfare State,"
     Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frisch
     Centennial, Strom, Steiner, ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998,
     pp. 241-318.

Herberich, David H., John A. List, and Michael K. Price. 2011. "How Many Economists
       does it take to Change a Light Bulb? A Natural Field Experiment on Technology
       Adoption," University of Chicago Working Paper.

Hotelling, Harold. 1931. "The Economics of Exhaustible Resources," Journal of Political
       Economy, 39(2): 137-175.

Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. 2008. "Evidence of a
      Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand," Energy Journal,
      29(1): 113-134.

Kahn, Matthew E. 2007. "Do greens drive Hummers or hybrids? Environmental ideology
      as a determinant of consumer choice," Journal of Environmental Economics and
      Management, 54(2): 129-145.

Kahn, Matthew E., and Eric A. Morris. 2009. "Walking the Walk: The Association
      Between Community Environmentalism and Green Travel Behavior," Journal of
      the American Planning Association, 75(4): 389-405.

Kahn, Matthew E., and Ryan K. Vaughn. 2009."Green Market Geography: The Spatial
      Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles and LEED Registered Buildings," B.E. Journal of
      Economic Analysis & Policy, 9(2): 1-24.




                                              28
Landry, Craig E., Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, Nicholas G. Rupp.
      2010. "Is a Donor in Hand Better Than Two in the Bush? Evidence from a
      Natural Field Experiment," American Economic Review, 100(3): 958-983.

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, and Sally Sadoff. 2016. "The Effect of Performance-
        Based Incentives on Educational Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized
        Experiment," NBER Working Paper No. 22107.

Lucas, Robert E. 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
       Theory, 4(2): 103-124.

Meier, Stephan. 2007. "Do Subsidies Increase Charitable Giving in the Long Run?
       Matching Donations in a Field Experiment," Journal of the European Economic
       Association, 5(6): 1203-1222.

Milkman, Katherine L., Julia A. Minson, and Kevin G. M. Volpp. 2014. "Holding the
      Hunger Games Hostage at the Gym: An Evaluation of Temptation Bundling,"
      Management Science, 60(2): 283-299.

Nordhaus, William D. 1994. Managing the Global Commons, MIT Press, Cambridge,
      MA.

Pollak, Robert A. 1970. "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions," Journal of
        Political Economy, 78(4): 745-763.

Small, Kenneth A., and Kurt Van Dender. 2007. "Long Run Trends in Transport
       Demand, Fuel Price Elasticities and Implications of the Oil Outlook for Transport
       Policy." OECD/ITF Joint Transport Research Centre Discussion Papers, No.
       2007/16.

Syverson, Chad. 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic
       Literature, 49(2): 326-365.

Ramsey, Frank P. 1928. "A Mathematical Theory of Saving," Economic Journal,
      38(152): 543-559.

Rogers, Todd, and Erin Frey. 2015. “Changing Behavior Beyond the Here and Now,”
       The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making, John Wiley &
       Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK.

Rossi, Peter H. 1987. "The Iron Law of Evaluation and Other Metallic Rules," Research
       in Social Problems and Public Policy, 4: 3-20.




                                              29
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. "Incentives, Commitments, and
       Habit Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at
       a Fortune-500 Company," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3):
       51-84.

Wang, Zhongmin, and Cheng Xu. 2016. "Using Donations to the Green Party to Measure
      Community Environmentalism," RFF Discussion Paper 16-25.

Volpp, Kevin G., Andrea Gurmankin Levy, David A. Asch, Jesse A. Berlin, John J.
       Murphy, Angela Gomez, Harold Sox, Jingsan Zhu and Caryn Lerman. 2006. "A
       Randomized Controlled Trial of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation,"
       Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers, & Prevention, 15(1): 12-18

Volpp, Kevin G., Andrea B. Troxel, Mark V. Pauly, Henry A. Glick, Andrea Puig, David
       A. Asch, Robert Galvin, Jingsan Zhu, Fei Wan, Jill DeGuzman, Elizabeth Corbet,
       Janet Weiner, and Janet Audrain-McGovern. 2009. “A Randomized, Controlled
       Trial of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation,” New England Journal of
       Medicine, 360 (7): 699–709.

Volpp, Kevin G., Leslie K. John, Andrea B. Troxel, Laurie Norton, Jennifer Fassbender,
       and George Loewenstein. 2008. "Financial Incentive-Based Approaches for
       Weight Loss: A Randomized Trial," Journal of the American Medical
       Association, 300(22): 2631-2637




                                             30
                                                                                    F ig u r e 1 : P e r s is t e n c e in H a b it F o r m a t io n L it e r a t u r e

                                                                    1 .0 0
                                                                                                  A . C h a r it a b le G iv in g                                                                B . E d u c a t io n

                                                                    0 .7 5


                                                                    0 .5 0


                                                                    0 .2 5               M e ie r 2 0 0 7                  L a n d r y e t a l. 2 0 1 0                                                          L e v it t e t a l. 2 0 1 6


                                                                    0 .0 0
                                                                     1 .0 0
                                                                                                            C . E x e r c is e                                                          D . S m o k in g C e s s a t io n
            P r o p o r t i o n o f E ffe c t P e r s i s t i n g




                                                                    0 .7 5
                                                                                         C h a rn e ss a n d G n e e z y 2 0 0 9                                                    V o lp p e t a l. 2 0 0 9

                                                                    0 .5 0
                                                                                   M ilk m a n e t a l. 2 0 1 4
                                                                                                       A c la n d a n d L e v y 2 0 1 5
                                                                    0 .2 5                                                           R o y e r e t a l. 2 0 1 5                  V o lp p e t a l. 2 0 0 6


                                                                    0 .0 0
                                                                     1 .0 0                                                                                                                                           A llc o t t a n d R o g e r s 2 0 1 4
                                                                                                       E . W e ig h t L o s s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S it e 2

                                                                    0 .7 5

                                                                                                                                                                                    A llc o t t a n d R o g e r s 2 0 1 4
                                                                    0 .5 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S it e 1           A llc o t t a n d R o g e r s 2 0 1 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S it e 3
                                                                    0 .2 5               V o lp p e t a l. 2 0 0 8


                                                                    0 .0 0
                                                                               0                     5 0                          1 0 0                   1 5 0    0                       5 0                         1 0 0                       1 5 0
                                                                                                                                          W e e k s S in c e E n d o f In t e r v e n t io n

Notes: E a c h p                                                               o in t r e    p re se         n t    s th        e p r o p o r t io n              o f t h e i n i t i a l t r e a t m e n t e ffe c t t h a t p e r s i s t s
fo r a g iv e n a m                                                              o u n t o     f t im          e      s in c     e th e e n d o f                  a g iv e n in t e r v e n t io n . A ll o b s e r v a t io n s a r e
b a s e d o n p o in                                                          t e s t im      a te s          p r      e se n      t e d in t h e c o               r r e s p o n d i n g s t u d i e s w i t h i n s i g n i fi c a n c e a t
 t h e fi v e p e r c e n                                                       t le v e l      c o n s     t it     u t in       g p e r s is t e n c e             o f z e ro .
                                             F ig u r e 2 : O p o w e r ’s H o m e E n e r g y R e p o r t




                                    (a ) F ro n t                                                            (b ) B a c k

Notes:         T h e        fi g u r e p r e s e n t s t h e f r o n t a n d b a c k o f a t y p i c a l H o m e E n e r g y R e p o r t ( H E R ) .
T re a tm     e n t       h o u s e h o ld s r e c e iv e r e p o r t s r e g u la r ly ( m o n t h ly , b i-m o n t h ly , o r q u a r t e r ly ) b e -
 fo re m o      v e -o     u t . T h e e x a m p le d e p ic t s a h o u s e h o ld b e lo w t h e 2 0 t h p e r c e n t ile o f u s a g e in a
 g iv e n m      o n t   h .
                                                      F ig u r e 3 : S u m m a r y o f T h e o r e t ic a l a n d E m p ir ic a l M o d e l



                                                                           e0 ( a0 )                                        e1 ( actrl
                                                                                                                                  1 )                     e2 ( anew
                                                                                                                                                                2   , k1 ( actrl
                                                                                                                                                                            1 ) )


                                                                                                                                          ” move
           E n e rg y C o n su m e d




                                                                                              ” trt
                                                                                                                                                          e2 ( anew
                                                                                                                                                                2   , k1 ( atrt
                                                                                                                                                                            1 ) )




                                                                                                                            e1 ( atrt
                                                                                                                                  1 )




                                                                    P re -T re a tm e n t                        T re a tm e n t &   P re -M o v e               P o st-M o v e

                                          t=      0                                                   t=    1                                        t=    2
                                                                     1. k≠1 , a0 given                          1. Assigned a1 œ {actrl    , atrt              1.      New resident moves in
                                                                                                                                       1      1 }
                                                                     2 . Choose e0 , I0                          2 . Choose e1 , I1                            2 .     Faces anew
                                                                                                                                                                               2     ‹ a1
                                                                                                                3 . Original resident moves out                 3 .    Tech fixed at k1 (a1 ) in short-run
                                                                                                                                                                 4 .   Choose e2

 Notes: D e                            m a n d f        o r        e n e rg y       is p lo t t e   d d u r in g t h e t h r e e e v e n t t im e         p e r io d s a        c c o r d in g t o t h e
 s o lu t io n s d                        e r iv e d        in      S e c t io n      III fo r (    ‡, –, k≠1 , a0 , atrt    1 , a2 , pI , pe )
                                                                                                                                      new                  = ( 5 , 0 .5        , .1 , 0 , 1 , 0 , 1 , 1 ) .
Im p lie d r e                           g r e s s io    n       c o e ffic i e     n t s o f in     t e r e s t fo r c o r r e s p o n d in g e m p       ir ic a l m o         d e l a r e p lo t t e d
n e x t to c u                          r ly b r a         c k    e ts. T h        e x- a x i s       p lo t s t h e o r d e r o f e v e n t s d u r      in g e a c h         t im e p e r io d .
                                                                                                                                                   F ig u r e 4 : E v e n t S t u d y

                  N o r m a l i z e d D i ffe r e n c e o f E l e c t r i c i t y C o n s u m p t i o n      0
                         in T r e a t m e n t a n d C o n t r o l H o m e s in k W h




                                                                                                            -5




                                                                                                          -1 0




                                                                                                            P re -T re a tm e n t                             T re a tm e n t &   P re -M o v e                     P o st-M o v e
                                                                                                                                                                     T im e P e r io d




Notes:          F ig u r e                                                                                  p lo t s t h e          d i ffe   r e n c e b e tw e e n a v e r a g e e le c t r ic ity c o n s u m p t io n h o m e s a s -
s ig n e d    to T re a                                                                                    tm e n t a n d             C o n     t r o l in t h e P r e -T r e a t m e n t , T r e a t m e n t a n d P r e -M o v e , a n d
 P o st-M     o v e t im                                                                                   e p e r io d s n          o rm      a l i z e d t o d i ffe r e n c e s i n t h e P r e - T r e a t m e n t t i m e p e r i o d . S e e
  O n lin e    A p p e n                                                                                  d ix T a b le 4              fo r     le v e ls .
                                                                                       F i g u r e 5 : S c a t t e r p l o t o f T r e a t m e n t E ffe c t b y W a v e - C o h o r t


                                                                                                               T re a tm e n t &   P r e - M o v e T im e P e r io d < 1 Y e a r



                                                               2 0 0




                                                               1 0 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                 “ˆ total
                                                                                                                                                                                                    prst



                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  “ˆ <1Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                     prst
                                                                                                                                                                                                          r
        ( P o s t - M o v e E ffe c t o f H E R i n k W h )




                                                              -1 0 0




                                                              -2 0 0



                                                                                                               T re a tm e n t &   P r e - M o v e T im e P e r io d Ø 1 Y e a r



                                                               2 0 0
   move




                                                               1 0 0
”ˆ jc




                                                                        0
                                                                            “ˆ total
                                                                               prst




                                                              -1 0 0                 “ˆ Ø1Y
                                                                                        prst
                                                                                                                                                                                             N o . o f
                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                              H o m e s
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          5 0 0
                                                              -2 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 0 0 0


                                                                            -1 5 0                  -1 0 0                -5 0                  0                    5 0                 1 0 0                      1 5 0
                                                                                                  ”ˆ jc
                                                                                                     trt
                                                                                                         (T re a tm e n t &        P r e - M o v e E ffe c t o f H E R i n k W h )

           Notes: The figure plots the effect of the HER for each wave-cohort in the Post-Move time period as a function of the effect of the
           HER in the Treatment and Pre-Move time period; i.e., the parameters of interest from our first stage regression in (7), ”     ˆ trt and
                                                                                                                                           jc
           ˆ move . The top panel plots wave-cohorts that receive the HER in the Treatment and Pre-Move time period for less than 1 year
           ” jc
           and the bottom panel plots wave-cohorts that receive the HER in the Treatment and Pre-Move time period for more than 1 year.
           The size of each point reflects the number of unique homes in that wave-cohort. The best-fit line illustrates how (8) estimates
                      prst         prst
           “ prst , “      , and “      . The figure excludes wave-cohorts with |”jc
                                                                                  move
                                                                                       | > 2 5 0 and |”jc
                                                                                                       trt
                                                                                                           | > 15 0 in the figure but the best-fit
                                                                short                 long
           lines are from regression estimates on the full-sample.
                                Table 1: Overview of Sample

                                                                  Sample
                                                       Full      Non-Movers   Movers
         Utilities                                        21         21           21
         Waves                                            38         38           38
         Households                                  2,516,089   2,258,185    253,383
         Treatment Indicator                             0.67       0.67         0.65
                                                       (0.47)      (0.47)      (0.48)
         Pre-Treatment Usage (kWh)                    1,198.82    1,212.08    1,084.51
                                                        (652)    (655.44)     (609.48)
         Pre-Treatment Observations (mos.)                                      13.47
                                                                               (1.26)
         Treatment and Pre-Move Observation (mos.)                              11.67
                                                                               (9.62)
         Post-Move Observation (mos.)                                           12.17
                                                                               (9.44)

Notes: Summary statistics for the full sample, the subsample of households that remain
in the same home throughout (Non-Movers), and houses that change hands (Movers).
Treatment Indicator is a binary measure of assignment to reception of Home Energy
Reports (HERs). Pre-Treatment Usage describes the average monthly usage in kWh in
months prior to the first HER. Pre-Treatment Observations show the number of usage
reads before the treatment event period begins (i.e. the first full month after the first
HER), Treatment and Pre-Move Observations represents the length of exposure to HERs,
and Post-Move Observations occur after initial residents deactivate their account. The
small disparity between the difference of the full sample and the non-movers sample and
the number of unique households in the final movers sample is due to additional data
cleaning as described in-text.
                         Table 2: Estimates of Treatment Effect: Pooled Difference in Difference Model

                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                —ˆT                        6.50        7.01        8.34        6.35        6.70        6.50         7.01
                                          (2.05)      (0.48)      (2.37)      (2.05)      (2.09)      (2.05)      (0.62)
                —ˆH                       -53.71      -58.45      -54.36      -53.83      -54.16      -53.72      -57.93
                                          (1.72)      (1.45)      (2.04)      (1.73)      (1.77)      (1.72)      (1.73)
                ”ˆtrt                     -24.98      -22.69      -25.63      -24.93      -24.48      -24.97      -22.64
                                          (2.05)      (1.50)      (2.45)      (2.06)      (2.10)      (2.05)      (1.84)
                —ˆM                      -148.30     -131.10     -154.40     -149.14     -149.13     -148.30     -136.24
                                          (2.73)      (2.51)      (3.24)      (2.74)      (2.79)      (2.73)      (3.03)
                ”ˆmove                    -11.35      -12.73      -11.18      -11.25      -11.41      -11.35      -13.14
                                          (2.64)      (2.57)      (3.13)      (2.65)      (2.69)      (2.64)      (3.09)
                Pre-Exp. Usage                         0.80                                                         0.80
                                                      (0.00)                                                      (0.00)
                CDD                                               0.88                                              0.89
                                                                 (0.01)                                           (0.01)
                HDD                                               0.14                                              0.15
                                                                 (0.00)                                           (0.00)
                Vacancy Rate                                                  -1.07                                -1.08
                                                                             (0.16)                               (0.11)
                Env. Index                                                                -0.28                     0.05
                                                                                         (0.03)                   (0.02)
                Green Party Donations                                                                 -0.05         0.21
                                                                                                     (0.03)       (0.09)
                R2                        0.216       0.444       0.232       0.216       0.217       0.216       0.453
                N                       9,350,745   9,350,725   6,127,816   9,247,833   8,921,649   9,350,642   5,821,922

Notes: Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of observation is household-month. All models
include wave-of-treatment (RCT) and month-of-sample fixed effects. Coefficients superscripted by T, M, and H denote the
Pre-Treatment, Treatment and Pre-Move, and Post-Move time period, respectively. Additional controls include (2) pre-
experiment average monthly usage, (3) cooling and heating degree days (CDD and HDD), (4) vacancy rate in percent at
the ZIP level, (5) environmental concern index (lifetime) of congressional representatives at the ZIP level (0-100), (6) the
percentage of households giving at least $200 to any Green Party committee from 2008 to 2015 on the county level, and (7)
a combination of (2)-(6). Sample sizes differ because we do not observe all covariates for every ZIP code (county). Robust
standard errors are clustered at the property level for all specifications.
               Table 3: Estimates of Treatment Effect: Robustness of Pooled Difference in Difference Model

                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                 —ˆT          6.50       6.45         5.31       6.01         5.52        5.83        5.48        6.25
                             (2.05)     (2.13)      (2.05)      (2.13)      (2.05)      (2.13)      (2.05)      (2.13)
                 —ˆH         -53.71     -45.70      -36.96      -44.45      -38.98      -41.32      -39.26      -45.70
                             (1.72)     (1.79)      (1.74)      (1.83)      (1.71)      (1.78)      (1.71)      (1.79)
                 ”ˆtrt       -24.98     -25.71      -25.69      -25.49      -27.71      -27.36      -26.57      -26.37
                             (2.05)     (2.18)      (2.05)      (2.18)      (2.05)      (2.18)      (2.05)      (2.18)
                 —ˆM        -148.30     -56.93      -81.38      -48.06      -38.59       -0.67      -44.72      -22.02
                             (2.73)     (2.82)      (3.46)      (3.59)      (2.78)      (2.86)      (2.75)      (2.84)
                 ”ˆmove      -11.35     -10.40       -8.20      -10.23       -6.20       -7.01       -7.64       -9.03
                             (2.64)     (2.67)      (3.32)      (3.38)      (2.64)      (2.67)      (2.65)      (2.68)
                 Rule(s)                  1           2         1&2           3         1&3           4         1&4
                     2
                 R           0.216       0.218       0.227       0.228       0.225       0.225       0.217       0.219
                 N         9,350,745   8,455,824   8,020,384   7,339,044   8,963,045   8,257,039   9,019,435   8,317,631

Notes: Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of observation is household-month. All models include
wave-of-treatment (RCT) and month-of-sample fixed effects. Coefficients superscripted by T, M, and H denote the Pre-
Treatment, Treatment and Pre-move, and Post-Move time period, respectively. Column (1) is the baseline model utilizing
the full sample. Exclusion Rules: Rule 1 excludes observations with eijt < 150 in any or all of the first six months after
move and homes for which ēijt=move < (ēijt=pre≠move ≠ 2 · SD(eijt=pre≠move )). Rule 2 excludes the first six months after
move regardless of use. Rule 3 disregards post-move observations that are below the smallest pre-move observation minus
20 percent (i.e. min eijt=pre≠move · 0.8). Rule 4 excludes all post-move observations with eijt < 200, regardless of when they
occur. No additional controls are included. Robust standard errors are clustered at the property level for all specifications.
Table 4: Estimates of Persistence: Meta-Analysis of Wave-Cohort Difference in Differ-
ence Model

                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)
                  “ˆtotal
                    prst
                                                 0.3468
                                                (0.0495)
                  “ˆ<1Y
                    prst
                         r                                  0.2632
                                                           (0.0640)
                  “ˆØ1Y
                    prst
                         r                                  0.5295
                                                           (0.0614)
                  “ˆ<2Y
                    prst
                         r                                             0.3300
                                                                      (0.0513)
                  “ˆØ2Y
                    prst
                         r                                             0.5449
                                                                      (0.0693)
                  Null Hypothesis (H0 )
                    “ˆ<t
                      prst
                           = “ˆØt
                               prst
                                    , p-value               <0.01      0.02
                  R2                             0.000      0.162      0.147
                  N                               654        654        654
Notes: Coefficients in the table represent the average proportion of initial treatment
effects (i.e., during the Treatment and Pre-Move time period) that persist in the Post-
Move period, “. For example, a coefficient of 0.3 means that 30% of the initial treatment
persist after move. The first column presents an estimate of “ prst based on (8) for the full
sample. Robust standard errors are clustered at the wave level for all specifications. We
excludes wave-cohorts with less than 10 unique households. We estimate “ via weighted
least squares according to the inverse variance of ”ˆjc    ˆtrt . Columns 2 and 3 present
                                                     move /”
                                                             jc
estimates of “   prst for two strata: movers who are exposed to one year (two years) of
treatment or less and those who are exposed to more than one year (two years) for
Columns 2 and 3, respectively. Robust standard errors are clustered at the wave level
for all specifications.
                     Table 5: Testing Predictions of a Sorting Model

                                       Sorting                   Estimates
   Sort Variable (0-100)              Prediction    ”ˆtrt   ” · Sort ”ˆmove
                                                            ˆtrt
                                                                               ”ˆmove · Sort
                                                   -27.86     0.39    -21.50       1.16
   Vacancy Rate                          [≠]
                                                   (3.46)    (0.33)   (4.78)      (0.47)
                                                   -34.51     0.20    -11.68       0.03
   Environmental Index (Annual)          [+]
                                                   (3.97)    (0.07)   (4.69)      (0.08)
                                                   -35.63     0.23    -13.21       0.07
   Environmental Index (Lifetime)        [+]
                                                   (3.94)    (0.07)   (4.83)      (0.08)
                                                   -33.36     3.86    -16.51       2.32
   Green Party Donations (District)      [+]
                                                   (4.89)    (2.05)   (6.21)      (2.59)
                                                   -25.68     0.16    -11.88       0.13
   Green Party Donations (County)        [+]
                                                   (2.08)    (0.08)   (2.68)      (0.10)

Notes: Brackets indicate the sign on the interaction coefficient (”ˆmove · Sort) predicted
by the sorting model. Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of
observation is household-month. We utilize the following measures as proxies of home
vacancies and environmental sentiment: i) vacancy rate in percent at the ZIP level, ii)
annual environmental concern index of congressional representatives for each district,
iii) lifetime index of representatives, iv) percentage of households giving at least $200
to any Green Party committee from 2008 to 2015 on the congressional district level,
and v) giving to Green Party on the ZIP code level. See Online Appendix Table A4 for
all model estimates. Robust standard errors are clustered at the property level for all
specifications and we report coefficients using wave and month-of-sample fixed effects.
                             Table 6: Implications of Findings


                                                        “ˆtot
                                                          prst
                                                                 “ˆØ1Y
                                                                   prst
                                                                        r   “ˆØ2Y
                                                                              prst
                                                                                   r

           Panel A: Comparison of Persistence Estimates to AR
           Estimate                                     0.347    0.529      0.545
           Standard Error                               0.049    0.061      0.069
           Null Hypothesis (H0 )
             “ˆiprst = 0.635 [Site 1], p-value          0.000    0.093      0.200
             “ˆiprst = 0.671 [Site 2], p-value          0.000    0.027      0.077
             “ˆiprst = 0.623 [Site 3], p-value          0.000    0.138      0.270
           Panel B: Cost-Effectiveness in Treatment and Pre-Move Period
           Direct Program Costs ($/household-month)       1        1          1
           Indirect Program Costs ($/household-month)    0.74     1.12       1.16
           Savings (kWh/household-month)                24.98    24.98      24.98
           Cost-Effectiveness (¢/kWh)
              No Technology                              4.00     4.00       4.00
              Technology                                 6.95     8.50       8.64


Notes: Panel A provides a direct comparison of our estimates of persistence due to
capital investment and persistence in AR due to technology and habit formation. We
relate our estimates from Table 4 to all three sites in AR (Table 7, p. 3031). In par-
ticular, persistence in AR is defined as the proportion of the treatment effect of the
dropped group in the post-drop period relative to the treatment effect of the continued
group in the same time period. The comparison is based on a simple one-sample T -Test
and table entries represent the corresponding p-values. Panel B reproduces a typical
cost-effectiveness calculation for two cases in the treatment and pre-move period: (No
Technology) assumes that reductions are solely caused by behavioral adjustments; (Tech-
nology) instead considers that a proportion of the overall treatment effect may be due
to capital investment, based on our estimates of persistence. The difference between the
two scenarios is the inclusion of indirect costs associated with capital investment. We
follow Allcott and Greenstone (2012) and use their preferred estimate of 8.5¢ per kWh
saved due to capital investment (p. 17). For both cases, we assume a cost of $1 per
report and use the preferred estimate from Table 4 to determine monthly savings (-24.98
kWh).
                                  Online Appendix Figure 1: Time Series of Low-Usage Observations
                  .025
     Proportion of Observations
    .005     .01  0 .015    .02




                                  −24     −18     −12      −6       0       6         12       18   24
                                                            Month from Move

                                                        Control                 Treatment
                                                        1(e < p1(e))            1(e < p1(e))
                                                        1(e = 0)                1(e = 0)

Notes: We plot the proportion of low-usage observations—defined as usage within the
first percentile—and zero-usage observations for treatment and control households. Time
t = ≠1 depicts the last full month before move, t = 0 the month in which the move
occurs, t = 1 the first full month after move, and so on.
                          Online Appendix Table 1: Persistence in Studies of Habit Formation

                                                                        Significance
                                              Weeks Since                 Level of
                                                 End of      Reported    Reported      Citation for
Study                           Topic         Intervention    Effect       Effect      Reported Effect                    Persistence
Charness & Gneezy 2009          Exercise            0           1.32       0.01        Online Appendix & Authors’ Calc.        1
Charness & Gneezy 2009          Exercise            5           0.88       0.01        Online Appendix & Authors’ Calc.      0.67
Charness & Gneezy 2009          Exercise            8           0.67       0.05        Online Appendix & Authors’ Calc.      0.51
Milkman, Minson, & Volpp 2014   Exercise            0           0.48       0.01        Table 3, Col. 2                         1
Milkman, Minson, & Volpp 2014   Exercise            9           0.03      >0.05        Table 3, Col. 2 & Authors’ Calc.        0
Acland & Levy 2015              Exercise            0          1.449       0.01        Table 1, Col. 1                         1
Acland & Levy 2015              Exercise            8          0.188       0.05        Table 1, Col. 1                       0.13
Acland & Levy 2015              Exercise           27          0.096      >0.05        Table 1, Col. 1                         0
Royer, Stehr, & Syndor 2015     Exercise            0           0.56       0.01        Table 2, Col. 2                         1
Royer, Stehr, & Syndor 2015     Exercise            9           0.12       0.05        Table 2, Col. 2                       0.21
Royer, Stehr, & Syndor 2015     Exercise           22           0.11       0.05        Table 2, Col. 2                       0.20
Royer, Stehr, & Syndor 2015     Exercise           48           0.12       0.05        Table 3, Col. 2                       0.21
Royer, Stehr, & Syndor 2015     Exercise          100           0.12      >0.05        Table 3, Col. 2                         0
Volpp et al. 2008               Weight Loss         0            9.2       0.05        Table 2 & Authors’ Calc.                1
Volpp et al. 2008               Weight Loss        13            7.4      >0.05        Figure 2 & Corresponding Text           0
Levitt, List, & Sadoff 2010     Education           0          0.083       0.05        Table 7, Col. 1                         1
Levitt, List, & Sadoff 2010     Education          52          0.063      >0.05        Table 7, Col. 1                         0
Levitt, List, & Sadoff 2010     Education         104         -0.003      >0.05        Table 7, Col. 1                         0
Levitt, List, & Sadoff 2010     Education         156         0.017       >0.05        Table 7, Col. 1                        0
Volpp et al. 2009               Smoking            0            9.7       0.01         Table 2                                1
Volpp et al. 2009               Smoking            26           5.8        0.01        Table 2                               0.60
Volpp et al. 2006               Smoking             0           11.7       0.01        Abstract                               1
Volpp et al. 2006               Smoking            13           1.9       >0.05        Abstract                               0
              Online Appendix Table 2: Overview of Utilities in the Sample

                              All Households                        Movers
 Utility   Location    Unique Homes Observations   Unique Homes    Observations   Percentage
 1         Midwest       346,480      14,450,660       72,384       3,013,774       20.89
 2         Midwest       320,414      11,024,640       40,247       1,394,702       12.56
 3           West         34,693       1,226,796        8,239        286,772        23.75
 4         Midwest       482,902      16,291,960       44,694       1,625,511        9.26
 5         Midwest       182,083       4,890,361       19,698        529,661        10.82
 6         Midwest        76,721       2,175,558        2,837         83,622         3.70
 7           West        119,025       4,479,500       13,046        484,373        10.96
 8         Northeast     182,875       3,975,601        5,536        113,633         3.03
 9         Northeast      50,374       1,092,431        3,948         81,246         7.84
 10        Northeast     128,243       2,791,966        1,406         29,112         1.10
 11         South         62,566       1,898,726          66           1,495         0.11
 12          West         96,980      2,651,808         9,329        267,076         9.62
 13          West         24,708        908,969        5,049         184,099        20.43
 14        Midwest        73,918      2,122,780         6,309        177,671         8.54
 15        Northeast     109,207      2,618,094         6,427        149,159         5.89
 16        Midwest        40,680      1,252,132         6,123        193,201        15.05
 17         South         96,434       2,731,790        6,754        208,618         7.00
 18          West         26,773        556,650        1,091          22,362         4.08
 19          West         83,896      5,527,008        18,319       1,206,545       21.84
 20          West         39,918        680,969          12             141          0.03
 21          West        122,580      2,546,808         3,783        77,302          3.09
 22        Midwest       106,308      4,566,773        14,398        632,713        13.54
Notes: The table presents an overview of all utilities in the Opower sample with simple
summary statistics. A nondisclosure agreement prohibits us from naming utilities but
we present the geographic location. Please note that some utilities implement multiple
treatment assignment waves (between one and six). For our research question, we focus
on households from which initial occupants move out after receiving treatment for at
least one month in both treatment and control (“Movers”). The last column provides
the percentage of households that are movers in each utility, e.g. for utility one about
21 percent of households move during the sample period. All results presented in this
paper are based on the movers subsample only.
                          Online Appendix Table 3: Movers Summary Statistics by Wave-of-Treatment

                  Movers            Pre-Treatment Use                                     Movers            Pre-Treatment Use
 Wave   Number      Observations      T           C        First Letter   Wave   Number     Observations      T           C        First Letter
 1ı
         30,395      1,291,026      864.363     833.725    Aug 2010       22      3,948        81,246      1,066.304   1,076.468   Jul 2012
 2       23,070       978,824      1,688.004   1,694.489   Aug 2010       23      1,406        29,112      1,014.776   1,011.297   Jul 2012
 3       15,822       656,702      1,182.726   1,163.252   Aug 2010       24        66          1,495      1,790.643   1,724.128   May 2011
 4        3,097        87,222      2,141.371   2,123.092   Nov 2011       25      4,244       139,754       744.238     736.733    Apr 2011
 5       14,463       616,760      1,084.527   1,073.237   Jul 2010       26     5,085        127,322       520.897     538.172    Feb 2012
 6       12,423       411,274      1,162.318   1,179.342   May 2011       27      5,049       184,099       638.862      661.12    Mar 2011
 7       13,361       366,668       807.008     809.596    Nov 2011       28     6,309        177,671       978.627      977.99    Oct 2011
 8        8,239       286,772       390.083     388.592    Apr 2011       29     4,489        107,770      1,068.279   1,091.592   Feb 2012
 9       12,933       699,228      1,236.463    1,271.17   Jul 2009       30     1,938        41,389        847.694     844.301    May 2012
 10        800        32,865       1,126.435   1,150.096   Sep 2010       31     5,812        188,273       819.573     828.201    Jun 2011
 11      19,697       657,358      1,634.975   1,635.109   May 2011       32ù      311         4,928         621.94        .       Nov 2012
 12       2,314        59,800      1,080.175   1,086.286   Jan 2012       33      6,702       207,878      1,700.615   1,687.892   Jun 2011
 13       6,266       124,023        525.36     528.389    Jul 2012       34        52           740       2,730.257   2,653.666   Jan 2013
 14       2,684        52,237       1,576.21   1,546.465   Jul 2012       35      1,091        22,362      1,894.862   1,881.965   Jul 2012
 15       8,724       287,265       852.642     859.739    May 2011       36     18,319      1,206,545      923.236     914.195    Oct 2008
 16       2,431        55,822       787.757     752.441    Feb 2012       37        12           141        798.864     395.571    Jun 2011
 17       3,079        67,365       787.383     800.248    Apr 2012       38      3,783        77,302      1,411.025   1,427.986   Jul 2012
 18       5,464       119,209       579.811      588.76    Apr 2012       39     10,821       541,080        837.02     847.447    Dec 2009
 19       2,837        83,622       793.282     780.959    Jul 2011       40      1,129        31,823       1,163.58   1,138.052   Nov 2011
 20      13,046       484,373       787.648     775.622    Jan 2011       41     2,448         59,810       611.772      605.47    Mar 2012
 21ı      5,536       113,633      1,131.824   1,158.822   Jul 2012

Notes: The table presents descriptive statistics for movers in every wave-of-treatment (RCT) of our sample. Stars (ı ) denote
waves that fail a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of the distribution of pre-experiment average usage across treatment
and control at the 5 percent level. Exclusion of waves at the 10 percent level would also include waves 22, 23, and 40; results
do not change qualitatively if this smaller sample is used instead. Additionally, wave 32 (denoted by ù ) does not feature
any control movers. We consequently exclude waves 1, 21, and 32 from all main specifications. The “First Letter” column
indicates the date on which the first treatment letter was generated; households enter the sample approximately one year
prior to that. T denotes pre-experiment average monthly usage of households assigned to the treatment group (Home Energy
Report) while C stands for control homes (no correspondence). Multiple waves can belong to the same utility (between one
and six).
       Online Appendix Table 4: Summary Statistics of Pooled Movers Sample

                                              Treatment     Control      Total
          Pre-Treatment Use                    1,090.703   1,073.156   1,084.505
                                               (620.013)   (589.549)   (609.483)
          Post-Treatment & Pre-Move Use (H)     945.846     941.816     944.418
                                               (636.551)   (612.991)   (628.307)
          Post-Move Use (M)                     884.492     873.899      880.75
                                               (701.722)   (674.904)   (692.385)
          Months in Sample                       35.509      39.456      36.904
                                                (11.506)    (13.193)    (12.275)
          Premises                              163,877      89,505     253,383
          Observations                         5,819,193   3,531,552   9,350,745
Notes: The table presents descriptive statistics for the pooled sample of movers in all 38
waves. Average monthly usage is reported for the Pre-Treatment, Treatment and Pre-
Move, and Post-Move time periods. T denotes households assigned to the Treatment
group (Home Energy Report) while C stands for Control. The last column presents the
overall average for the sample.
Online Appendix Table 5: Persistence of Treatment Effects after Move with Different
Samples

                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                 —ˆT        6.03***      5.95***      6.52***      6.50***
                             (1.82)       (1.85)       (2.03)       (2.05)
                 —ˆH       -41.58***    -43.77***    -52.20***    -53.71***
                             (1.57)       (1.59)       (1.73)       (1.72)
                 ”ˆtrt     -23.69***    -23.45***    -25.02***    -24.98***
                             (1.86)       (1.89)       (2.06)       (2.05)
                 —ˆM      -131.33***   -134.63***   -145.69***   -148.30***
                             (2.60)       (2.64)       (2.68)       (2.73)
                 ”ˆmove    -10.62***    -10.48***    -11.03***    -11.35***
                             (2.59)       (2.62)       (2.60)       (2.64)
                 R2         0.223        0.223        0.216        0.216
                 N        11,149,461   10,906,948   9,491,121    9,350,745
Notes: Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of observation is
household-month. All models include wave-of-treatment (RCT) and month-of-sample
fixed effects. Coefficients superscripted by T, M, and H denote the Pre-Treatment,
Treatment and Pre-Move, and Post-Move time period, respectively. We estimate the
model for four samples: (1) all observations of households initially flagged as movers for
balanced waves, (2) exclusion of households that were wrongfully flagged as movers due
to changes to the account holder (e.g. marriage or divorce), (3) additional exclusion of
households whose move-out date was updated with a later data pull and who moved
after our last observation for the given customer ID, and (4) additional exclusion of
households with updated move-out date that moved before the first treatment letter was
received. Robust standard errors are clustered at the property level for all specifications.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10
percent level.
           Online Appendix Table 6: Development of Persistence Post-Move

                                            (1)            (2)
                                       12-36 Months   15-33 Months
                       —ˆT                  6.33*         7.70*
                                           (3.45)        (4.06)
                       —ˆH                10.08***      31.57***
                                           (2.67)        (3.11)
                       ”ˆtrt             -27.09***     -28.39***
                                           (2.21)        (2.51)
                       —ˆM              -127.14***     -95.92***
                                           (5.11)        (6.06)
                       —ˆM · Time         10.65***      13.68***
                                           (0.37)        (0.46)
                       ”ˆmove            -18.48***     -20.44***
                                           (4.90)        (5.97)
                       ”ˆmove · Time        0.89*         0.46
                                           (0.45)        (0.57)
                       R2                 0.203          0.202
                       N                4,069,425      2,909,426
Notes: Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of observation is
household-month. All models include wave-of-treatment (RCT) and month-of-sample
fixed effects. Coefficients superscripted by T, M, and H denote the Pre-Treatment,
Treatment and Pre-Move, and Post-Move time period, respectively. Time denotes the
time in months since move-out of the original household. Interactions with this time
indicator provide a measure of decay. (1) utilizes all households that were exposed to
treatment between 12 and 36 months before move, (2) those who were exposed between
15 and 33 months. Robust standard errors are clustered at the property level for all
specifications. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level,
and * at the 10 percent level.
   Online Appendix Table 7: Heterogeneity in Persistence with a Meta-Analysis Approach and various Exclusion Rules

                                  Rule 1      Rule 2      Rule 3      Rule 4      Rule 5       Rule 6
                            Underlying Model: Month-of-Year FEs
                            “ˆ   0.3383***   0.3517***   0.3547***   0.3425***   0.3562***   0.2918***
                                  (0.0425)    (0.0417)    (0.0438)    (0.0418)    (0.0434)    (0.0525)
                            N        693         691        677         700         679         414
                            Underlying Model: Month-of-Sample FEs
                            “ˆ   0.3409***   0.3544***   0.3576***   0.3292***   0.3591***   0.2940***
                                  (0.0426)    (0.0418)    (0.0439)    (0.0428)    (0.0435)    (0.0527)
                            N        693         691        677         700         679         416
Notes: The table presents estimates of “ based on (8). Robust standard errors are clustered at the wave level for all
specifications. Model 1 utilizes a first stage regression with month-of-year fixed effects. Model 2 uses month-of-sample fixed
effects. We estimate “ via weighted least squares according to the inverse variance of ”ˆjc     ˆtrt . Exclusion rules are: Rule 1:
                                                                                          move /”
                                                                                                  jc
Exclude wave-cohorts with fewer than ten movers; Rule 2: Exclude wave-cohorts with 16 or fewer movers; Rule 3: Exclude
first to fifth percentile of wave-cohorts in terms of number of movers; Rule 4: Exclude wave-cohorts with less than 100
observations; Rule 5: Exclude first to fifth percentile of wave-cohorts in terms of number of observations; Rule 6: Rule 1 and
exclude all wave-cohorts with positive ”ˆtrt , i.e. no reduction in response to the social comparison messaging. *** denotes
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.
Online Appendix Table 8: Linear Trend of Persistence using a Meta-Analysis Approach

                                                 (1)
                                    “ˆtotal
                                      prst
                                              0.2442***
                                               (0.0720)
                                    Cohort     0.0108**
                                               (0.0046)
                                    R2          0.014
                                    N            654
Notes: Coefficients in the table represent the average proportion of initial treatment
effects (i.e., during the treatment and pre-move time period) that persist in the Post-
Move time period, “. For example, a coefficient of 0.3 means that 30% of the initial
treatment persist after move. Cohort denotes the length of exposure to treatment pre-
move. Inclusion of this variable is aking to a simple time trend in length of exposure. We
excludes wave-cohorts with less than 10 unique households. We estimate “ via weighted
least squares according to the inverse variance of ”ˆjc    ˆtrt . Robust standard errors are
                                                     move /”
                                                             jc
clustered at the wave level for all specifications.
Online Appendix Table 9: Sorting of Households based on Home Vacancies and Envi-
ronmental Sentiment

                           (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
                         Vacancy     Env. Index   Env. Index   Green Party   Green Party
                          Rate        (Annual)    (Lifetime)    (District)    (County)
     —ˆT                   7.83**        6.33*       6.87**      16.42***       6.74***
                           (3.47)        (3.35)       (3.37)       (4.77)        (2.07)
     Sorting Variable      -0.45*      -0.47***     -0.44***      9.96***          0.04
                           (0.27)        (0.05)       (0.05)       (1.59)        (0.06)
     —ˆT · Sorting          -0.18         0.00         -0.01      -4.53**         -0.06
                           (0.31)        (0.05)       (0.05)       (1.99)        (0.07)
     —ˆH                 -40.29***    -44.85***    -44.81***    -44.49***     -52.48***
                           (2.89)        (3.28)       (3.25)       (3.74)        (1.75)
     —ˆH · Sorting        -1.51***     -0.18***     -0.17***     -4.27***      -0.28***
                           (0.27)        (0.06)       (0.06)       (1.54)        (0.07)
     ”ˆtrt               -27.86***    -34.51***    -35.63***    -33.36***     -25.68***
                           (3.46)        (3.97)       (3.94)       (4.89)        (2.08)
     ”ˆtrt · Sorting        0.39        0.20***      0.23***       3.86*         0.16**
                           (0.33)        (0.07)       (0.07)       (2.05)        (0.08)
     —ˆM                -138.29***   -167.22***   -169.14***   -145.22***    -147.90***
                           (4.38)        (4.20)       (4.27)       (5.31)        (2.76)
     —ˆM · Sorting        -1.19***      0.43***      0.47***        -1.39         -0.10
                           (0.40)        (0.06)       (0.06)       (2.13)        (0.09)
     ”ˆmove              -21.50***     -11.68**    -13.21***    -16.51***     -11.88***
                           (4.78)        (4.69)       (4.83)       (6.21)        (2.68)
     ” move · Sorting      1.16**         0.03         0.07          2.32          0.13
                           (0.47)        (0.08)       (0.08)       (2.59)        (0.10)
     R2                   0.216        0.217        0.217        0.216         0.216
     N                  9,247,833    8,916,489    8,921,649    9,350,745     9,350,642
Notes: Dependent variable is monthly energy usage (kWh). The unit of observation is
household-month. All models include wave-of-treatment (RCT) and month-of-sample
fixed effects. Coefficients superscripted by T, M, and H denote the Pre-Treatment,
Treatment and Pre-move, and Post-Move time period, respectively. We use five differ-
ent sorting variables: (1) Vacancy Rate, i.e. the percent of empty homes in a given
month and ZIP code from 0 to 100, (2) Average Annual Environmental Index for Con-
gressional Representatives for each ZIP-year in the sample from 0 to 100, (3) Lifetime
Environmental Index for every representative in all years of the sample, (4) Proportion
of households donating to any Green Party committee between 2008 and 2015 in each
Congressional District, and (5) Proportion of donors in each county. Sample sizes differ
because data for some ZIP codes, counties or districts are missing. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the property level for all specifications. *** denotes significance
at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.
