                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                REGIONAL HETEROGENEITY AND MONETARY POLICY

                                        Martin Beraja
                                        Andreas Fuster
                                         Erik Hurst
                                        Joseph Vavra

                                     Working Paper 23270
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23270


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                              March 2017, March 2018




First draft: May 2015. We thank Caitlin Gorback, Karen Shen and Eilidh Geddes for excellent
research assistance. We would also like to thank our discussants John Campbell, Wouter Den
Haan, Daniel Greenwald, Amit Seru, Junyi Zhu and Mark Zandi, as well as Adrien Auclert,
Arlene Wong, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth, University of Minnesota, NYU, MIT
Sloan, Berkeley Haas, IIES Stockholm, University of Zurich, Central Bank of Ireland, NBER
Summer Institute, ECB Annual Research Conference, ASSA Chicago, SED-Edinburgh, SITE
Stanford, Hutchins Center at Brookings, the Frontiers in Central Banking conference at the
Bundesbank, and the CEPR–University of St. Gallen workshop on Household Finance and
Economic Stability for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Martin Beraja, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regional Heterogeneity and Monetary Policy
Martin Beraja, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 23270
March 2017, March 2018
JEL No. E21,E32,E5,R1,R2

                                         ABSTRACT

We argue that the time-varying regional distribution of housing equity influences the aggregate
consequences of monetary policy through its effects on mortgage refinancing. Using detailed
loan-level data, we show that regional differences in housing equity affect refinancing and
spending responses to interest rate cuts but that these effects vary over time with changes in the
regional distribution of house price growth. We then build a heterogeneous household model of
refinancing with both mortgage borrowers and lenders and use it to explore the aggregate
implications for monetary policy arising from our regional evidence. We find that the 2008 equity
distribution made spending in depressed regions less responsive to interest rate cuts, thus
dampening aggregate stimulus and increasing regional consumption inequality, whereas the
opposite occurred in some earlier recessions. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that
monetary policy makers should track the regional distribution of equity over time.

Martin Beraja                                   Erik Hurst
Department of Economics                         Booth School of Business
MIT                                             University of Chicago
77 Massachusetts Avenue                         Harper Center
Cambridge, MA 02139                             Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
martinberaja@gmail.com                          erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Andreas Fuster                                  Joseph Vavra
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Booth School of Business
Research Group                                  University of Chicago
33 Liberty St                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
New York, NY 10045                              Chicago, IL 60637
andreas.fuster@gmail.com                        and NBER
                                                joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu
1   Introduction
Collateralized borrowing in the housing market can potentially play an important role in the monetary
transmission mechanism, as interest rate cuts encourage households to refinance their mortgage and
extract home equity to fund current consumption.1 Since housing markets are locally segmented,
regional house price shocks are a critical determinant of home equity and the strength of this refinancing
channel of monetary policy.
    In this paper, we argue that the time-varying regional distribution of home equity plays a crucial
role in determining both the aggregate effects of monetary stimulus and whether this stimulus flows
to the regions which need it most. Our analysis is motivated by striking differences across recessions
in the cross-region distribution of house price growth. During the Great Recession, house prices fell
substantially on average, but declines varied greatly across space and were largest where economic
activity also fell most (e.g., Nevada). In contrast, house prices grew on average throughout the 2001
recession with little regional variation. The resulting differences in the regional equity distribution
across these recessions affect the refinancing channel of monetary policy for two reasons. First, lenders
generally require a minimum level of equity in order to allow borrowers to refinance, even if they
are not extracting equity. Second, the level of equity potentially extracted during refinancing clearly
depends on the existing level of equity in the house prior to refinancing.
    Our paper begins by using detailed micro-data to show that interest rate declines during the Great
Recession mostly stimulated regions with the smallest declines in house prices (which also had the
smallest increases in unemployment). In contrast, refinancing was strongest in high unemployment
regions in the 2001 recession, when regional house price growth was mostly uncorrelated with un-
employment. Then, we build a heterogeneous household model of refinancing and use it to explore
aggregate implications of this regional evidence for monetary policy. Our model implies that interest
rate cuts in 2008 indeed had the smallest effects on depressed regions. More importantly, the regional
distribution of housing equity in 2008 substantially dampened the aggregate effects of monetary pol-
icy. Since the distribution of equity both varies across time and changes the consequences of monetary
policy, we conclude that it is important for policy makers to track this variation. Furthermore, we show
how certain mortgage market policy interventions can successfully complement monetary policy if the
refinancing channel is again hindered in the future.
    In more detail, the first half of our paper provides empirical evidence that regional variation in
housing equity matters for the refinancing channel of monetary policy. We start by studying the
response of different regions to the large interest rate declines immediately following the first round of
the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase program—commonly called quantitative easing (QE1).
Based on loan-level data, we document three facts about the regional response to QE1. First, there was
a boom in household mortgage refinancing right after the QE1 announcement. Second, refinancing
activity and the amount of equity extracted increased more in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)
that had lower unemployment and where homeowners had more housing equity on the eve of QE1.
Specifically, very little refinancing occurred in places like Las Vegas, where most homeowners were
underwater when QE1 was implemented. Third, MSAs with the most refinancing right after QE1 also
   1 See e.g.  https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2004/february/testimony.htm and https://www.
newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2012/dud120106.html for recent policy discussion of this channel.



                                                    1
experienced the largest resulting increases in consumption, as measured by car purchases.
   The effects of equity on refinancing are robust to a variety of controls and are economically mean-
ingful. The increase in refinancing in response to QE1 more than doubles when moving from the
bottom to the top quartile of MSAs by home equity. The additional equity extracted in these high
equity MSAs is comparable to total unemployment benefits paid out in low equity MSAs in 2009,
and our estimates imply that QE1 led to almost 250,000 additional car purchases in these high equity
MSAs. Overall, these facts show that, during the Great Recession, the refinancing channel of monetary
policy was weakest in the regions with the worst housing and labor market conditions.
   Our second set of empirical results moves beyond QE1 to provide evidence that the consequences of
monetary policy vary over time. First, we show there is large variation in the cross-region distribution
of house price growth, and thus home equity, across different recessions over the last forty years.
While we have long time-series for local house prices, it is more difficult to measure local refinancing
activity in historical data. However, we are able to do so for the 2001 recession. Importantly, house
price patterns were very different in 2001 than in 2008. In particular, aggregate house prices grew
throughout the 2001 recession, and regional house price growth varied little across regions and was
mostly uncorrelated with regional unemployment. Furthermore, we show that refinancing was higher
in the 2001 recession than in the 2008 recession despite similar declines in interest rates. In addition,
refinancing increased most in high unemployment MSAs in 2001 whereas the opposite was true in
2008. Finally, using aggregate (rather than regional) refinancing data going back to the early 90s, we
present evidence that the aggregate refinancing response to interest rate changes varies systematically
with features of the regional house price growth distribution.
   In the second half of the paper, we ask: what does this regional evidence imply for the aggregate
consequences of monetary policy? Answering this question without a theoretical model is challenging.
First, many features of the regional equity distribution move over time. With only a small number of
recessions, it is essentially impossible to determine directly from the data which particular features of
this distribution determine the strength of the refinancing channel of monetary policy. Second, echoing
ideas in Beraja, Hurst, and Ospina (2016), drawing conclusions about aggregate spending from regional
evidence requires accounting for offsetting behavior by lenders which cannot be measured in our data.
An analysis of aggregation and counterfactuals then requires a formal model.
   Thus, we build an equilibrium, incomplete-markets, heterogenous agents model with both mort-
gage borrowers and lenders. The goal of the model is to clarify the channels through which the regional
distribution of equity matters for aggregate policy making and to explore whether the empirical effects
we document at the regional level are indeed of any quantitative consequence for aggregates. While
the exact magnitudes vary somewhat with different model assumptions and calibrations, we always
find that regional variation has quantitatively important aggregate implications for monetary policy.
   The key model feature driving our results is the inclusion of mortgage borrowers who face house
price and income risk and can refinance mortgages and extract housing equity by paying a fixed
cost. This implies refinancing decisions which follow threshold rules around some inaction region,
in the spirit of Arrow, Harris, and Marschak (1951), Barro (1972), or Sheshinski and Weiss (1977).
Households must satisfy a collateral requirement to refinance, so when interest rates fall, those with
substantial equity can reduce their interest rate while also extracting equity whereas those currently
underwater would need to put up additional cash. Hence, when interest rates fall, many households


                                                   2
with positive equity refinance and further increase consumption by extracting equity, whereas almost
no households with negative equity do. This leads to consumption responses to interest rate cuts
that are highly convex in equity because households that are mildly underwater exhibit the same
zero response as those substantially underwater, whereas households with substantial positive equity
exhibit much stronger consumption changes than those with mildly positive equity. This convexity
then implies that changing the distribution of equity affects the economy’s response to rate declines.
Thus, while the model includes many quantitatively realistic features and is rich enough to capture
key aspects of the data shown in the first part of the paper, it delivers transparent intuition for why
the refinancing channel depends crucially on the distribution of equity.
   Our first quantitative results focus on the consequences of interest rate cuts in a benchmark econ-
omy that matches the joint distribution of housing equity and income observed in 2008. To discipline
this exercise, we pick baseline parameters so our model matches the regional effects of QE1 docu-
mented in the first part of the paper and then compute the aggregate effects of this policy. We find that
a decline in interest rates of the magnitude observed after QE1 modestly raises aggregate spending.
This implies that the spending offset coming from lenders in equilibrium is not one-for-one, which
occurs because our model features an important role for cash-out activity in determining spending.
Households accumulate equity over time and periodically pay a refinancing cost to access this equity.
Furthermore, since borrowers are more liquidity constrained than lenders, equity extraction increases
spending on net. When interest rates decline, refinancing and equity extraction are accelerated and
aggregate spending rises. However, under 2008 economic conditions, this aggregate spending effect is
quantitatively small. As in our empirical analysis, we also find that monetary stimulus mainly flows
to regions that are doing relatively well and thus amplifies cross-region consumption inequality.
   In contrast, when we simulate the response to the same change in interest rates under economic
conditions in 2001, we find very different effects: monetary policy generates much larger aggregate
spending responses, and it actually mildly reduces cross-region inequality. These conclusions depend
importantly on the fact that in 2001, aggregate house price growth is positive and local house price
growth is essentially uncorrelated with local economic conditions.
   Then, we ask: what can policy makers do in situations like 2008, when monetary policy’s effective-
ness through the refinancing channel is hindered? We show that targeted debt reduction and relaxation
of collateral constraints for refinancing can amplify the stimulative effects of monetary policy and also
reduce the trade-off with inequality. Policies along these lines were implemented during the Great
Recession (though only after the large drop in interest rates we study) through the Home Affordable
Modification and Refinance Programs (HAMP and HARP), and our results show that such mortgage
market interventions can successfully complement monetary policy.
   More generally, our model has interesting implications for the interaction between mortgage market
design and the strength of the refinancing channel. It is often assumed that monetary policy should
be more effective with adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) than with fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) since
households with ARMs automatically receive payment reductions when rates fall. Our model shows
that this intuition is incomplete: while it is true that ARMs generate spending that is more sensitive
to interest rates during times of low equity, the reverse is true when equity is high and refinancing
constraints do not bind. This is because when FRM borrowers actively refinance, they can extract
equity and front-load their increased spending, while passive rate resets under ARMs do not result in


                                                   3
equity extraction. This means that whether ARMs amplify or dampen the effectiveness of monetary
policy cannot be answered without knowing the distribution of equity in the economy.
    Finally, it is useful to discuss the practical implications of our results for policy making. Central
banks typically have no mandate to reduce spatial inequality or eliminate regional business cycles,
and it is not clear that monetary policy has the tools necessary to address such concerns even if
they wanted to. However, monetary policy makers do care about aggregates. Our results highlight
that the aggregate impact of monetary policy depends importantly on the regional distribution of
housing equity. Furthermore, even if central banks focus only on aggregate stabilization, their actions
will nevertheless have consequences which vary across space. Such regional effects may in turn be
important for the design of national fiscal policy, which is often the policy instrument of choice for
stabilizing regional business cycles. State and other local authorities also have an obvious interest in
forecasting the local consequences of monetary policy. Thus, even if central banks themselves only use
regional information to more precisely estimate aggregate effects of their actions, there are still many
additional reasons to understand the local implications of monetary policy.
    We note that while our empirical analysis focuses mostly on QE1 since it provides a relatively
well-identified shock to mortgage rates, our conclusions also apply to conventional monetary policy.
Because conventional expansionary monetary policy also lowers mortgage rates, it will have similar
time-varying interactions with the equity distribution.2
    We study the distribution of equity and inequality across regions rather than across households
within regions for similar practical reasons. Changes in the individual equity distribution in our
data are mostly driven by regional house price movements, and regional house price data is more
readily available at high frequencies than data on individual equity so regional distributions are a
more practical input for policy making.3 In addition, inequality within regions is largely determined
by income and wealth heterogeneity rather than by the refinancing channel of monetary policy.


2    Related Literature
Our work is related to much existing research. We depart from the New Keynesian literature which
typically assumes frictionless household capital markets with one-period borrowing. In reality, the
bulk of household borrowing occurs through the mortgage market, which features collateral require-
ments and long-term fixed nominal payments that can only be refinanced at some cost. Together, these
features give rise to what we call the "refinancing channel" of monetary policy, which we show depends
on the time-varying distribution of housing equity in the economy. We thus contribute to the grow-
ing literature arguing that the economy exhibits time-varying responses to aggregate shocks which
depend on the microeconomic distribution of agents.4 Most closely related of these papers is Berger
et al. (2015) who argue that increases in household leverage during the housing boom contributed to
the large decline in spending when house prices subsequently crashed. Interestingly, we show here
   2 See, e.g., Gertler and Karadi (2015) or Wong (2016). There is time-variation in the pass-through from short rates to

long-term bond yields (e.g., Hanson, Lucca, and Wright, 2017) and from long-term yields to mortgage rates (e.g., Fuster, Lo,
and Willen, 2017), but we find no systematic relationship of this pass-through with house price growth, a proxy for equity.
   3 Equity also varies due to leverage differences at origination, differential equity extraction and amortization, and due to

sub-region house price shocks which is why we use equity rather than house price growth in our analysis when available.
   4 See, e.g., Caballero and Engel (1999), Vavra (2014), Berger and Vavra (2015), and Winberry (2016).




                                                              4
that these same leverage patterns hampered monetary policy’s ability to stimulate the economy.
     We are not the first to model monetary policy transmission through the mortgage market. Rubio
(2011), Garriga, Kydland, and Sustek (2013) and Greenwald (2016) also model this channel but using a
representative borrower. This means their models have no role for the distribution of housing equity
which is at the heart of our paper. Our focus on realistic modeling of household borrowing and how it
interacts with heterogeneity in the economy parallels many of the themes in Auclert (2015), who argues
that the covariance of the marginal propensity to consume with interest rate exposure across agents
matters for aggregate consumption responses to rate changes. His analysis abstracts from refinancing,
which we show interacts with the time-varying distribution of housing equity. Wong (2016) uses a
model closer to our own, but in partial equilibrium and she focuses on how aging affects monetary
policy. Since the age distribution changes slowly across time, age effects are more relevant for cross-
country comparisons and long-run trends than for shorter-run changes in the refinancing channel
of monetary policy. Guren, Krishnamurthy, and McQuade (2017) and Hedlund et al. (2017) build
general equilibrium models with heterogeneity but use them to study alternative mortgage designs
and housing market liquidity, respectively.
     On the empirical front, Fuster and Willen (2010) measure effects of QE1 on the primary US mort-
gage market. They emphasize differential effects on borrowers with different creditworthiness, while
we emphasize regional disparities. Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2016) study refinancing re-
sponses to quantitative easing and replicate our facts at the state-level, but their focus is on the time-
varying composition of Fed asset purchases and their effects on conforming and non-conforming loans.
Our empirical patterns in the QE1 episode are similar to those documented by Caplin, Freeman, and
Tracy (1997) for the 1990 recession based on mortgage data from a single bank. We use more rep-
resentative data over a longer time period and present a model that allows us to analyze aggregate
implications and counterfactuals. Our results on spending effects of mortgage payment reductions and
cash-out activity are in line with related findings by Bhutta and Keys (2016), Di Maggio et al. (2017),
Agarwal et al. (2017), and Abel and Fuster (2018). There is also a growing literature using aggregate
VARs to document that responses to monetary policy vary with regional housing markets (Fratantoni
and Schuh, 2003) and household debt (Alpanda and Zubairy, 2017).
     Finally, a large literature studies a "credit channel" of monetary policy, where changes in collateral
values amplify output responses to rate changes.5 This channel is complementary but distinct from
ours, as it arises from monetary policy changing collateral values which, in turn, affect economic
activity. In contrast, we take the distribution of collateral at a point in time as given and show that
it affects the transmission from interest rates to spending. We think both channels are important and
exploring their interaction is an interesting area for future work.


3     Data
We briefly describe our primary mortgage-related data here. The Online Appendix provides additional
details as well as discussion of other data used in our analysis.
     Our main local refinancing measures come from Equifax’s Credit Risk Insight Servicing McDash
    5 Forexample, Iacoviello (2005) shows that adding collateral constraints on housing to a financial accelerator model like
that in Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) amplifies the effects of rate changes.


                                                             5
(CRISM) data set. This data set merges McDash mortgage servicing records (from Black Knight Finan-
cial Services) with credit bureau data (from Equifax) and is available beginning in 2005. The structure
of the data set makes it possible to link multiple loans by the same borrower together, something that is
not possible with mortgage servicing data alone. This allows us to measure refinancing activity much
more accurately than what can be achieved with previous data. Since we know both the outstanding
amount of the old loan (as well as any second liens) and the new loan, we can measure the dollar
amount of equity removed (or "cashed out") from the home during refinancing. CRISM covers roughly
two-thirds of the US mortgage market during the period we study.
      We also use CRISM data to measure borrowers’ home equity. We define home equity as one
minus the household’s combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratio, which we estimate for each household
by adding balances of first mortgages and any second liens and dividing by estimated property values.
We estimate property values using appraisal values at loan origination, which we then update using
location-specific house price indices from CoreLogic. Our preferred summary statistic for local equity
conditions is the equity of the median borrower in a location.6 This statistic Emed
                                                                                j,t varies across MSAs j
and time t. We particularly emphasize Emed
                                       j,Nov2008 : median equity in November 2008, just prior to QE1.
      We supplement our analysis of refinancing activity using data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA). For each mortgage application, HMDA data reports a variety of loan characteristics in-
cluding loan purpose (purchase or refinance) and property location. HMDA data has broader coverage
over a longer time period than CRISM data, which allows us to extend our analysis to the 2001 reces-
sion. However, it does not contain information on outstanding loans, which is necessary for measuring
both the equity distribution and equity removed during refinancing. In the Appendix, we show that
regional refinancing patterns after QE1 are nearly identical in HMDA and CRISM data.


4     The Refinancing Channel Across Regions: Evidence from QE1
This section documents several facts relating regional heterogeneity in housing equity to the refinanc-
ing channel. We use an event-study of the interest rate decline following QE1 to show: (1) mortgage
originations increased substantially after QE1, mostly driven by households refinancing existing mort-
gages rather than by an increase in new purchases; (2) refinancing activity and equity extraction were
higher in MSAs where homeowners had more equity (which were also locations where unemploy-
ment was lower) prior to QE1; and (3) car purchases increased the most after QE1 for individuals who
removed equity when refinancing and in MSAs with the largest refinancing response.


4.1    Aggregate Trends in Mortgage Activity Around QE1

Figure 1 shows the monthly Mortgage Bankers Association Refinance Index from 2000 to 2012 (solid
line) as well as the difference between the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage (FRM) rate in month t and
the average of the 30-year mortgage rate over the prior five years (dashed line). Negative values mean
mortgage rates in a given month are low relative to previous years, giving many borrowers an incentive
to refinance. Several points stand out in Figure 1. First, there is a strong negative relationship between
    6 Wecompute medians weighting borrowers by outstanding mortgage balances. Repeating our analysis using the fraction
of borrowers with CLTV above 0.8 or above 1 yields very similar results.



                                                          6
                    Figure 1: Mortgage Refinancing Activity in the US over 2000-2012
                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                FRM rate relative to 5-yr moving average
                                                           8000




                              MBA Refi Application Index
                                                           6000                                                                            0


                                                           4000

                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                           2000



                                                             0                                                                             -2
                                                               0

                                                                     1

                                                                           2

                                                                                 3

                                                                                       4

                                                                                             5

                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                         7

                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                     9

                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                       2
                                                             n0

                                                                   n0

                                                                         n0

                                                                               n0

                                                                                     n0

                                                                                           n0

                                                                                                 n0

                                                                                                       n0

                                                                                                             n0

                                                                                                                   n0

                                                                                                                         n1

                                                                                                                               n1

                                                                                                                                     n1
                                                            Ja

                                                                  Ja

                                                                       Ja

                                                                            Ja

                                                                                 Ja

                                                                                       Ja

                                                                                             Ja

                                                                                                   Ja

                                                                                                         Ja

                                                                                                               Ja

                                                                                                                     Ja

                                                                                                                           Ja

                                                                                                                                 Ja
                                                                   MBA Refi Application Index (left scale)
                                                                   FRM rate relative to 5-year moving average (right scale)


Figure shows monthly average of Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) Refinancing Index (seasonally adjusted; March
1990=100) and the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rate (relative to 5-year moving average), also from MBA.


refinancing and mortgage rates: the correlation between the two series is -0.77. Second, mortgage rates
fell and refinancing activity expanded sharply when QE1 was announced in November 2008, marked
as a vertical line in the figure. The Appendix shows that similar patterns hold in HMDA data and
that the increase in mortgage originations after QE1 was almost entirely refinancing rather than new
purchase mortgages. For this reason, we focus our analysis on refinancing.
    We focus on QE1 because it was largely unexpected and was followed by such a sharp drop in
mortgage rates, and because our CRISM data begins in 2005. While high-frequency event studies
show that both mortgage rates and applications reacted strongly to QE announcements (Fuster, Lo,
and Willen, 2017), it is of course likely that other factors also contributed to the low rates following
QE1. This is not a problem for us since we are more generally interested in the transmission of interest
rate drops to refinancing and household consumption, and monetary policy is one key driver of such
interest rate drops. Thus, our focus is also not QE-specific: the refinancing channel of monetary policy
can potentially operate whenever monetary policy moves mortgage rates. While the refinancing boom
after QE1 was larger than at any time since mid-2003, it was stronger still in 2001-2003 when falling
rates were coupled with broad-based house price appreciation in most locations. Therefore, we will
often contrast the effects of the refinancing channel in 2008-2009 with the effects in 2001-2003.
    It also bears noting that the beginning of QE1 is separated in time from other housing market
policies implemented in response to the Great Recession. Specifically, the Home Affordable Modifi-
cation and Refinance Programs (HAMP and HARP) were announced in March 2009, with the goal of
alleviating the collateral friction we study (as we return to in Section 7) but for various reasons (such
as limited participation by servicers) had a very slow start. In particular, HARP only started having
large effects on refinancing volumes in 2012 (Agarwal et al., 2017), well after our study window.7 Fur-
thermore, any debt reduction policies around the time of our sample would likely reduce our effects
  7 Agarwal    et al. (2017) show that refinancing spurs spending and that this channel was strengthened by the HARP’s
reduction of collateral frictions, in line with the mechanism we emphasize. Another major policy intervention was that
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed in federal conservatorships in September 2008, but this did not by itself lead to a
drop in mortgage rates or a refinancing boom; it did however assure that credit supply continued relatively uninterrupted,
at least for conforming mortgages (Frame et al., 2015).



                                                                                                   7
of interest since they would have larger effects in low equity MSAs.
      To get a sense of the potential effects of refinancing on borrowers’ disposable resources during the
Great Recession, we note that in the CRISM data over the first half of 2009, the median rate on the old
loan was 6.125%, while the median rate on the new (refinance) loan was 4.875%. The average balance
of the first-lien mortgage being refinanced was $206,000, so that, leaving the balance unchanged and
assuming a 30-year FRM, the monthly payment would decrease by at least $160.8 If we discount this at
5% per year over 7 years (roughly the average lifespan of a mortgage) then the present value of pre-tax
savings is $11,400 for monthly payments and $15,000 for interest payments. The latter is larger since
the lower rate leads to faster amortization. In addition to lowering the interest rate, many borrowers
also increase the balance of their loan by withdrawing some of their equity. Over 2009:H1, the mean
and median equity withdrawal in our data are $25,000 and $7,400, respectively.


4.2      Regional Variation in Equity Distributions Prior to QE1

Throughout the paper, we use metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) as our measure of "regions." We
begin by showing that equity distributions evolved very differently across MSAs between 2007 and
2008. Figure 2 shows the distribution of household housing equity in two different time periods for
five MSAs: Chicago, Las Vegas, Miami, Philadelphia, and Seattle. These are examples of MSAs that
had house price declines from 2007 to 2008 that were large (Miami and Las Vegas), medium (Chicago),
and small (Philadelphia and Seattle).9 Panel (a) shows the housing equity distribution for these MSAs
in January 2007, just prior to the nationwide house price decline. For all five MSAs, housing equity
distributions are quite similar. As noted above, we often summarize the distribution in each MSA j at
a point in time using the equity of the median borrower Emed                      med
                                                         j,t . In January 2007, E j,t in most of these
MSAs is between 0.3 and 0.4. The equity of the median borrower in Las Vegas is a bit lower (roughly
0.23) since house prices there starting falling before 2007.

                                                  Figure 2: Distributions of Borrowers’ Equity in their Homes across 5 MSAs
                                                                 (a): January 2007                                                                                      (b): November 2008
                                           1                                                                                                           1
         Share of loans with Equity < X%




                                                                                                                     Share of loans with Equity < X%




                                           .8                                                                                                          .8


                                           .6                                                                                                          .6


                                           .4                                                                                                          .4


                                           .2                                                                                                          .2


                                           0                                                                                                           0
                                            −40          −20              0              20            40   60                                          −40          −20              0              20            40   60
                                                            Equity, in percent of estimated home value                                                                  Equity, in percent of estimated home value
                                                  Philadelphia       Seattle            Chicago                                                               Philadelphia       Seattle            Chicago
                                                  Miami              Las Vegas                                                                                Miami              Las Vegas




Figure shows the cumulative distribution of borrower equity in five illustrative MSAs in January 2007 and November 2008.
Equity is measured for each household using CRISM data as the estimated current house value minus total current mortgage
debt, divided by estimated current house value (i.e., equity = 1−CLTV). Distributions are weighted by mortgage balance.

  8 In   reality the decrease would typically be larger since the old monthly payment is based on the higher original balance.
  9 Appendix      Table A-1 shows descriptive statistics for all 381 MSAs in our analysis.



                                                                                                                 8
      Panel (b) shows that by November 2008, when QE was announced, there was large variation in eq-
uity distributions across MSAs. Between early 2007 and late 2008, the equity distribution in places like
Las Vegas and Miami shifted dramatically relative to places like Philadelphia and Seattle. By Novem-
ber 2008, Emed                                                                med
           j,t was around -0.17 in Las Vegas and zero in Miami. Conversely, E j,t in Philadelphia and
Seattle was around 0.25-0.3, so the median borrower in these MSAs still had substantial equity. The
equity of the median borrower correlates strongly with other moments of the equity distribution. For
example, 50 percent of borrowers in Miami and 70 percent of borrowers in Las Vegas had negative
equity in November 2008, while only 6 to 10 percent had negative equity in Philadelphia and Seattle.
      The Appendix explores many additional results that reinforce the patterns in Figure 2. Specifically,
we show the distribution of Emed
                             j,t across all 381 MSAs in January 2007 and November 2008 to highlight
that the cross-region heterogeneity in Figure 2 is representative. We also show similar patterns for the
distribution of individual equity rather than Emed
                                               j,t to illustrate that focusing on median equity is not
essential for our conclusions. Additionally, we show the relationship between equity, unemployment
changes, and house price growth from January 2007 to November 2008. Over this period, differential
house price declines across MSAs were the main driver of differences in Emed
                                                                         j,t . On average, a 10 percent
decline in house prices from January 2007 to November 2008 is associated with an 8.3 percentage point
lower Emed
       j,Nov2008 . We cannot measure local equity before 2005, but this relationship between house price
growth and equity will allow us to use regional variation in house price growth to proxy for regional
variation in housing equity in earlier periods.
      Finally, we document that MSAs with the largest increases in local unemployment rates also had
the lowest Emed
            j,Nov2008 . This is unsurprising since house price declines were associated with weakening
labor markets during this period (Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo, 2013; Mian and Sufi, 2014), but it
is important for interpreting the cross-region effects of monetary policy, since we will now show that
refinancing activity responded least to QE1 in the locations with the least home equity.


4.3     Regional Variation in Mortgage Activity Around QE1

We now show that in the months after QE1 was announced, refinancing activity was much higher in
regions with more home equity and lower unemployment. To facilitate the exposition of our results, we
divide all MSAs into quartiles based on Emed
                                         j,Nov2008 .
                                                     10 Figure 3 shows refinancing activity over time for

MSAs in the top and bottom quartiles of Emed                                  med
                                         j,Nov2008 . The bottom quartile of E j,Nov2008 includes MSAs like
Las Vegas where the median mortgage borrower was underwater. The top Emed
                                                                      j,Nov2008 quartile includes
MSAs like Seattle where most borrowers had sufficient equity to refinance.
      Panel (a) shows monthly refinancing propensities from January 2008 through December 2009. Re-
financing propensities are higher throughout in the high equity quartile, but they evolve similarly
between high and low equity MSAs up to November 2008. After QE1, refinancing activity jumped—
but it jumped much more in the high equity MSAs relative to the low equity MSAs.11
  10 Quartiles  are population-weighted using 2008 numbers from the Census. This ensures that there are the same number
of people within each quartile. Appendix A.1 lists the specific MSAs within each of the Emed
                                                                                         j,Nov2008 quartiles.
   11 The jump happens in January/February (rather than December) because CRISM measures originations, not applications,

and there is a delay of 1-3 months between when a mortgage application is initially made and when the actual mortgage
origination takes place due to the underwriting process. As Fuster, Lo, and Willen (2017) document, loan processing times
increased following the QE1 announcement, but based on HMDA data with exact application and origination dates, we find
little differential increase between high- and low equity MSAs. In Appendix Figure A-5, we use the HMDA data to show



                                                           9
Figure 3: Mortgage Refinance Activity 2008-2009 in Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs Defined by
Median Borrower Equity in November 2008

                                                           (a): Refinance Propensities                                                                                                                          (b): Cumulative Difference




                                                                                                                                                  Cumulative sum of refinance propensities (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                  minus quartile’s average over Jan−Nov 2008
                                          1.5
     Monthly refinance propensity, in %




                                                                                                                                                                                                 4


                                           1                                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                           .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1



                                           0                                                                                                                                                     0
                                            1

                                                       3

                                                              5

                                                                       7

                                                                              9

                                                                                       11


                                                                                               1

                                                                                                        3

                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                          8m

                                                  8m

                                                           8m

                                                                  8m

                                                                           8m




                                                                                            9m

                                                                                                   9m

                                                                                                            9m

                                                                                                                   9m

                                                                                                                            9m




                                                                                                                                                                                            8m

                                                                                                                                                                                                       8m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                8m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9m
                                                                                  8m




                                                                                                                                   9m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9m
                             0

                                                   0

                                                          0

                                                                   0

                                                                          0




                                                                                           0

                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                          20

                                                20

                                                       20

                                                                20

                                                                       20


                                                                                   0

                                                                                        20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                       Highest Equity Quartile                 Lowest Equity Quartile                                                                                  Difference between High Equity and Low Equity Quartiles




Panel (a) shows monthly refinance propensities in CRISM, defined as the dollar amount of refinance mortgage originations divided by
outstanding mortgage amounts in the prior month. Calculations are done over MSA quartile groups for the highest and lowest Emed
                                                                                                                            Nov2008
quartiles. Panel (b) shows the cumulative difference between the two groups, after subtracting each group’s average refinancing propensity
from January to November 2008. Vertical lines show the month of the QE1 announcement (November 2008).



    Panel (b) shows the cumulative difference between the two groups, after subtracting each group’s
average refinancing propensity from January to November 2008 to remove the initial level difference.
Prior to QE1, the cumulative difference is essentially flat at zero, reflecting the parallel pre-trend in
panel (a). After QE1, a sharp difference emerges, eventually leading to a cumulative refinancing
propensity about 5 percentage points larger in the high equity MSA group than in the low equity MSA
group. This is a substantial difference, since the cumulative refinancing propensity in the low equity
group is only 7 percent over the entire year 2009.
    While Figure 3 shows a clear difference in refinancing responses to QE1 in high and low equity
MSAs, one might be concerned that this difference is driven by other factors that vary across these
MSAs. We thus complement these figures with difference-in-difference style regressions which allow
us to control for additional local factors and assess statistical significance. Specifically, we estimate:


                                                                                            j,Nov2008 × postQE ) + Γ ( X j,Nov2008 × postQE ) + ε j,t ,
                                                                Re f i j,t = α j + αt + β( Emed                                                                                                                                                                                                   (1)

where Re f i j,t is the monthly refinancing propensity in each MSA over the six months prior to QE1
and the six months after QE1, α j and αt are MSA and time fixed effects, and postQE is an indicator
variable that equals one for the six months after QE1. We use February 2009 as the start of the post-
QE-announcement period since there is a lag between the time one applies for a mortgage and when
it is originated, as discussed in footnote 11. X j,Nov2008 is a vector of local controls including changes in
the unemployment rate between January 2007 and November 2008, changes in local income between
January 2007 and November 2008, average borrower FICO score, average outstanding interest rate on
mortgages, average loan age, average mortgage balance, and local ARM, jumbo, GSE and privately
securitized shares of loans. All the latter variables are measured in November 2008. We also include
that applications jumped immediately after the announcement of QE1, and more so in high equity MSAs.


                                                                                                                                             10
local age, education, and homeownership controls measured using the 2008 American Community
Survey. Regressions are run including one control at a time as well as jointly including all controls.
      To conserve space, we show the full estimates of these conditional regressions in the Appendix.
The results reinforce the patterns found in Figure 3, but some results are worth highlighting. First,
β is always positive and highly statistically significant, indicating that the patterns in Figure 3 are
robust to many detailed local controls. Importantly, all controls are interacted with postQE so that the
responsiveness of refinancing to interest rates can vary with these observable characteristics, and all
regressions include MSA fixed effects which absorb any permanent differences in refinancing across
MSAs due to unobservables. Adding the average FICO score of mortgage borrowers (interacted with
postQE) to the regression reduces the coefficient on equity by almost half, but average FICO scores
are themselves endogenous to changes in local equity (since underwater borrowers are more likely
to default); therefore, we view the fact that equity remains strongly significant as underscoring its
importance in explaining differences in refinancing. Adding all additional controls at once further
reduces β. Again, this is to be expected since a linear combination of these variables is very highly
correlated with median equity. Nevertheless, equity remains individually significant.
      One might also be concerned that our results could reflect relatively tighter credit supply in low
equity locations in the period after QE1. However, consistent with results in Hurst et al. (2016), the
Appendix shows there is little variation in mortgage rates across MSAs and that rates fell as much in
low equity locations as in high equity locations after QE1. This suggests that lower refinancing rates in
low equity locations are not driven by higher borrowing costs. This likely reflects the fact that during
this time period, the mortgage market consists almost entirely of loans whose default risk is insured
by GSEs, which do not vary their pricing with regional default risk (again see Hurst et al., 2016).
      While we focus on effects of CLTV constraints, borrowers must also satisfy payment-to-income
(PTI) constraints to refinance. During the QE1 episode, house price declines are highly correlated with
increases in unemployment, so it is possible our results might be driven by PTI rather than CLTV
constraints. Although it is indeed the case that, conditional on local equity levels, MSAs with larger
increases in unemployment saw moderately smaller increases in refinancing, equity effects remain
independently very large. Controlling directly for income also has little effect on our coefficient of
interest. The Appendix further shows that the distribution of PTI for newly originated loans in 2009 is
very similar in high and low equity MSAs and exhibits no bunching around institutional constraints,
in contrast to substantial bunching and spatial variation in the distribution of CLTVs. This strongly
suggests that our results are primarily driven by spatial variation in equity rather than PTI constraints.
      Collectively, the results from Figure 3 and the various robustness results provided in the Appendix
show there were large regional differences in refinancing activity in response to QE1. Regions with the
least equity were the least responsive to QE1 in terms of subsequent mortgage refinancing activity.


4.4     Regional Variation in Equity Extraction and Spending Around QE1

To what extent do these spatial differences in refinancing activity lead to differences in spending?
Unfortunately, local spending data is extremely limited, but we provide evidence on this front in
two ways. First, we explore the extent to which households removed equity from their home when
refinancing. Prior research has shown that households typically spend a large amount of such "cash-


                                                    11
outs" on current consumption and home improvements.12 Second, we use R.L. Polk data on new car
purchases at the MSA level as one measure of local spending, as in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013).

Figure 4: Cash-Out Refinancing in Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs by Median Borrower Equity
in November 2008

                                                       (a): Cash-out Volumes, in $                                                                                                                                    (b): Cumulative Difference




                                                                                                                                                         Cumulative sum of cashout amount (USD mn)
                                    6000                                                                                                                                                              8000




                                                                                                                                                         minus quartile’s average over Jan−Nov 2008
     Total amount cashed out (mn)




                                    5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                      6000

                                    4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                      4000

                                    3000

                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                    2000


                                    1000                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                          1

                                                   3

                                                             5

                                                                      7

                                                                               9

                                                                                        11


                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                    5

                                                                                                                             7

                                                                                                                                      9

                                                                                                                                               11




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                         m

                                                  m

                                                           m

                                                                    m

                                                                             m




                                                                                              m

                                                                                                       m

                                                                                                                m

                                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                                  m




                                                                                                                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                    m




                                                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                     08

                                              08

                                                        08

                                                                 08

                                                                          08




                                                                                             09

                                                                                                      09

                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                        09

                                                                                                                                 09




                                                                                                                                                                                                       08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  09
                                                                                   08




                                                                                                                                          09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           09
                                    20

                                             20

                                                      20

                                                               20

                                                                        20




                                                                                         20

                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                      Highest Equity Quartile                     Lowest Equity Quartile                                                                                            Difference between High Equity and Low Equity Quartiles



Panel (a) shows total cash extracted during refinancing in the top and bottom MSA quartiles by Emed
                                                                                                j,Nov2008 . Panel (b) shows
the cumulative difference between the two groups, after subtracting each group’s average cash-out amounts from January to
November 2008. Since CRISM data does not cover the whole mortgage market, we scale up dollar amounts in CRISM for
this figure; see Appendix A.2.3 for details. Vertical lines show the month of the QE1 announcement (November 2008).


    Figure 4 shows the amount of equity removed during refinancing for the top and bottom quartile
MSAs by Emed
         j,Nov2008 . Panel (a) shows dollar amounts per month, while panel (b) shows the cumula-
tive difference between the two groups, after subtracting each group’s average cash-out amounts from
January to November 2008. The total amount of equity removed during the refinancing process sums
over households who removed no equity, those who put equity into their home, and those who ex-
tracted equity. On net, borrowers remove equity during the refinancing process in both high and low
equity locations. At all points in time, there is more equity removal in high equity locations, but trends
evolve similarly prior to the QE1 announcement. After QE1, equity removal increases substantially in
the high Emed                                       med
          j,Nov2008 locations relative to the low E j,Nov2008 locations.
    Summing across all MSAs in the top equity quartile, about $23.8 billion of equity was cashed
out during refinancing in the six months after QE1 (January-June). Conversely, for the MSAs in the
bottom equity quartile, only $10.9 billion of equity was cashed out. However, some of this $12.9 billion
difference reflects the continuation of differential extraction levels prior to QE1. Panel (b) shows the
cumulative difference in cash-out amounts over 2009 between the two MSA groups—after subtracting
each group’s pre-QE averages—amounted to around $8 billion.13,14
  12 SeeBrady, Canner, and Maki (2000), Canner, Dynan, and Passmore (2002), Hurst and Stafford (2004) and Bhutta and
Keys (2016).
  13 Regressing MSA-level cash-out amounts on group dummies interacted with a post-QE dummy (with standard errors

clustered by MSA) we get an estimate of this cumulative difference of $7.95 billion with a standard error of $3.11 billion.
  14 Our equity extraction measure does not include HELOC draws. Unlike cash-out refis, HELOC balances can be adjusted

without closing costs, and interest rates are usually variable. This mutes incentives to respond to long-term rate declines.
Nevertheless, our $8 billion could be overstated if high equity MSAs extract equity by refinancing while low equity MSAs do
so through HELOCs. However, using quarterly FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel data, HELOC balances grew more in high
equity than low equity MSAs over 2008-2009, and differentially increased in high equity locations by roughly $4 billion after


                                                                                                                                                    12
    Is an $8 billion difference in equity extraction across regions caused by QE1 a large number? Since
this number comes from a cross-region calculation, which differences out any aggregate effects, it
should not be interpreted as the effect of QE1 on aggregate equity extraction or compared to the overall
size of the recession. In the second half of the paper we use a model to infer aggregate effects from our
cross-region evidence, but for now it is more relevant to compare the $8 billion cash-out difference to
differences in the size of the recession across regions. Using BEA data, we find that $8 billion is around
10% of the differential spending change from 2008 to 2009 between the two MSA groups.15 This effect
is both large and similar in size to the effects in our model. It is also useful to compare these numbers
to other stabilization programs. Unemployment benefit payments in 2009 totaled around $16 billion
in the lowest equity MSAs. Thus, $8 billion is similar in magnitude. However, our results show it
differentially went to the regions with the lowest instead of highest unemployment rates.16 Dividing
$8 billion by the number of households in the highest equity quartile implies that QE1 increased
potential spending per household in those locations by roughly $280. This is similar in size to tax
stimulus payments received by households in the recession, and suggests that QE1 had cross-region
effects similar to sending an extra tax rebate only to locations which were already doing relatively well.
    The Appendix also shows results from a regression similar to equation (1) but with monthly equity
removed (relative to outstanding balance) as the dependent variable. We refer to this variable as the
cash-out share. Echoing the results in Figure 4, we find a positive relationship between Emed
                                                                                          j,Nov2008 and
the cash-out share after QE1 that is highly significant and robust to a variety of additional controls.
We also show that high equity places extract more equity even after conditioning on the frequency of
refinancing. That is, the patterns in Figure 4 are not driven just by the differential refinancing propen-
sities shown in Figure 3. To show this, we add monthly refinancing propensities as separate controls in
our regression. We find that both the coefficient on Emed
                                                      j,Nov2008 × postQE and on the monthly refinancing
propensity are positive and strongly significant. Hence, low Emed
                                                              j,Nov2008 MSAs both refinanced less and
removed less equity, conditional on refinancing. This is intuitive, since these places indeed have less
equity to remove when refinancing.
    Since prior research has shown tight links between equity removal and spending, these results
suggest that locations with different Emed
                                       j,Nov2008 had different spending responses to QE1. However,
differences in the marginal propensity to consume could potentially lead consumption to respond
more to QE1 in low equity regions despite smaller refinancing responses. In particular, it could be the
case that instead of spending extracted home equity, households in high equity MSAs used it to pay
down other (higher-interest) non-housing debt. However, as a robustness exercise in the Appendix, we
use FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel data to show that average non-housing debt per person actually
modestly increased in high equity MSAs relative to low equity MSAs after QE1. This suggests that
borrowers in those MSAs used withdrawn equity for spending, rather than to pay down existing debt.
    We now show this more directly using auto sales data from Polk. Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows
total monthly auto sales in the top and bottom Emed
                                                j,Nov2008 groups. A few things stand out. First, the

QE1. So including HELOCs would increase the differential QE effects on equity extraction to roughly $12 billion.
  15 Total GDP in low equity MSAs fell by $113.5 billion more than total GDP in high equity MSAs between 2008 and 2009.

Scaling these differences by the aggregate share of consumption in GDP of 68% delivers .104=8/(.68*113.5).
  16 Unemployment benefit payments are only reported at the state-level by the Department of Labor, but we apportion state-

level benefits payments to individual MSAs using each MSA’s share of total state unemployment. This calculation implies
the lowest equity MSAs received $16.3 billion in unemployment benefits payments in 2009 and $9.6 billion in 2008.



                                                            13
Figure 5: New Auto Sales in Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs Defined by Median Borrower Equity
in November 2008

                                              (a): Monthly Auto Sales                                                                                                                      (b): Cumulative Difference
                          300000                                                                                                                                                  300000




                                                                                                                                    minus quartile’s average over Jan−Nov 2008
                                                                                                                                           Cumulative sum of auto sales
                                                                                                                                                                                  200000
     Monthly auto sales




                          250000


                                                                                                                                                                                  100000


                          200000
                                                                                                                                                                                       0



                          150000                                                                                                                                                 −100000
                                   1

                                          3

                                                   5

                                                          7

                                                                   9

                                                                          11


                                                                                   1

                                                                                           3

                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                           7

                                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                                          11




                                                                                                                                                                                       20 1

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 3

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 5

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 7

                                                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                                                             11


                                                                                                                                                                                       20 1

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 3

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 5

                                                                                                                                                                                       20 7

                                                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                              8m

                                       8m

                                              8m

                                                       8m

                                                              8m




                                                                               9m

                                                                                       9m

                                                                                               9m

                                                                                                       9m

                                                                                                               9m




                                                                                                                                                                                           8m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                       8m




                                                                                                                       9m




                                                                                                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                                                                          08

                                                                                                                                                                                          08

                                                                                                                                                                                          08

                                                                                                                                                                                          08




                                                                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                                                          09
                               0

                                      0

                                               0

                                                      0

                                                               0




                                                                               0

                                                                                       0

                                                                                               0

                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                         08




                                                                                                                                                                                         09
                            20

                                   20

                                            20

                                                   20

                                                            20


                                                                      0

                                                                            20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                            20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                   20




                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                       Highest Equity Quartile                 Lowest Equity Quartile                                                                                      Difference between High Equity and Low Equity Quartiles



Figure shows the total volume of new car purchases in the top and bottom MSA quartiles by Emed
                                                                                           j,Nov2008 using R.L. Polk data.
Panel (a) shows total monthly car purchase volumes, summed over MSAs in each quartile. Panel (b) shows cumulative
differences between the two groups, after subtracting from each group’s series the group’s average car purchases from
January to November 2008. MSA groups are the same as in Figure 3. The vertical line shows the month of QE1 announcement.


trend in auto sales was very similar in the high and low equity quartiles prior to QE1. In both groups,
new auto sales fell rapidly throughout 2008. Second, these trends remained parallel through February
2009. This is not surprising since refinancing applications that took place in December 2008 would
not result in new mortgage originations until January or February 2009. Third, and most important,
after February 2009, auto sales diverge sharply between the two equity groups. On average, sales
increased by 31 percent in March-May 2009 relative to November 2008 in the high equity MSAs while
they only increased 15 percent in the low equity MSAs. This difference is economically and statistically
significant, and the timing lines up perfectly with expected spending responses to QE1.17 Panel (b)
shows that cumulative differences between the groups through 2009 amount to 250,000 cars, or roughly
1.5 months of sales. It is also worth noting that these differences all occur prior to the start of the Cash-
for-Clunkers program in July 2009 and so are not driven by this program.18


4.4.1                      Household-level Analysis of Spending after Refinancing

Of course, high and low equity MSAs differ in many ways, so that observed differences in spending
following QE1 could be due to factors other than mortgage refinancing and equity withdrawal. Our
spending regressions include both MSA fixed effects and long-run MSA trends to control for many
  17 The  Appendix shows MSA-level regressions, similar to equation (1), but using the log of monthly new car sales as our
dependent variable. β is positive and statistically significant even if we allow for differential time trends across locations with
different equity levels. Furthermore, to directly test the link between refinancing, equity extraction, and auto sales, we add
both refinancing and cash-out propensities as independent variables and find they are both correlated with stronger auto
sales over this period. Once we control for both equity and refinancing propensities, only the latter are significant, consistent
with the hypothesis that equity only matters for spending through its effects on refinancing.
   18 The start of the program can be seen as a large spike in panel (a). Although irrelevant for our regressions with MSA

fixed effects, clunker shares are actually mildly negative correlated with median equity which should imply larger responses
to cash-for-clunkers in low equity regions. This correlation, together with the fact that the program pulled forward many
purchases from the future, may explain why spending differences with equity disappear after July 2009.



                                                                                                                               14
differences across MSAs, so any alternative explanation would need to interact at high frequencies
with our QE1 event study. However, channels aside from refinancing might satisfy this requirement.
For instance, mortgages defaults were higher in low Emed
                                                     j,2008 MSAs, which would lower credit scores
and make it more difficult to benefit from lower interest rates on car loans.
    To provide direct evidence that spending effects indeed arise from refinancing, we move to CRISM
data at the household level (rather than the MSA level) and study spending responses of borrowers
who refinanced at some point in 2009. The credit record component of the data includes information
on each borrower’s monthly auto loan balances, and we follow the literature (e.g. Agarwal et al., 2017;
Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer, 2016) in using large balance increases from one month to the next as
a proxy for a car purchase. We then conduct an "event study" where we look at borrowers’ propensity
to purchase a car in the months around refinancing. Given our earlier analysis, we are particularly
interested in how spending responses differ between cash-out and non-cash-out refinances.

     Figure 6: Borrower-Level Evidence on Response of Car Purchase Propensity to Refinancing

                            (a): Monthly Averages around Refinancing                                                                                             (b): Regression Coefficients
                                2.4                                                                                                                    .8

                                                                                                            Estimated effect on prob(new car loan),
                                2.2                                                                                                                    .6
     Prob(new car loan), in %




                                                                                                                     in percentage points



                                 2                                                                                                                     .4


                                1.8                                                                                                                    .2


                                1.6                                                                                                                    0


                                1.4                                                                                                                   −.2
                                      −4      −2      0        2        4       6        8   10   12                                                        −4      −2      0       2        4       6      8   10   12
                                                      Distance from refinance (months)                                                                                     Distance from refinance (months)
                                      Non−cash−out refinance     Cash−out refinance                                                                         Non−cash−out refinance    Cash−out refinance



Panel (a) shows average fractions of refinancing borrowers who obtain a new car loan in each month surrounding a mortgage
refinancing (in month 0), distinguishing between cash-out and non-cash-out refinancing. We identify a borrower as obtaining
a new car loan in month t if their car loan balance increases by $2,000 or more between month t − 1 and month t. Panel (b)
shows coefficients on month indicators (relative to the refinancing month, with -1 as the omitted month) from a regression of
the new car loan indicator on calendar-month-by-MSA fixed effects as well as months-from-refinancing indicators interacted
with whether the refinancing involves cash-out. Dashed lines are 95 percent confidence intervals based on robust standard
errors clustered at the MSA level. See Appendix A.2.5 for additional details.


    Panel (a) of Figure 6 simply shows average car purchase propensities for borrowers in the months
before and after completing a cash-out or non-cash-out refinance. Supporting the view that refinancing
spurs spending, purchase propensities spike for both groups following the refinance, and more so for
borrowers who remove equity during the process. Panel (b) shows monthly coefficients (and 95 percent
confidence intervals) from a regression of the car purchase indicator on calendar-month-by-MSA fixed
effects, as well as indicators of the distance in months to the time of the refinance, with month -1 as
the omitted month. The results show a strong increase in car purchase propensities in the months
following refinancing, with a peak after two months that is almost twice as large for cash-out as for
non-cash-out refinances. Effects remain positive for several months after refinancing, and there is little
pre-trend prior to refinancing. While this link from refinancing to car spending is not necessarily causal


                                                                                                       15
(we do not have exogenous variation in refinancing propensity at the individual level), it nevertheless
supports the view that refinancing in the wake of QE1 did stimulate consumer spending, and more so
if the borrower also removed equity in the process. We further note that positive refinancing effects
on spending are also found in work exploiting exogenous variation in access to refinancing (Agarwal
et al., 2017; Abel and Fuster, 2018) or payment reductions from ARM resets (Di Maggio et al., 2017).
    The results in this section suggest that QE1 raised aggregate spending by borrowers (in part by
inducing them to remove equity) but that regional spending responses differed with equity at the
onset of QE1. Collectively, our results show that the "refinancing channel" of monetary policy interacts
with the regional distribution of housing equity and that the 2008 distribution reduced the effectiveness
of monetary policy by preventing it from stimulating places which needed it most.


5    The Time-Varying Refinancing Channel in the US
In this section, we first show that there is substantial time-variation in the regional distribution of house
price growth and its correlation with unemployment changes. We then focus on the 2001 recession,
which exhibits house price patterns most distinct from 2008, and show that this recession also has very
different refinancing patterns. Finally, we present longer-term evidence that the refinancing response to
interest rate changes depends on the regional distribution of house price growth. Together these results
provide evidence that the time-varying regional equity distribution produces time-varying effects of
monetary policy through the refinancing channel.

                 Figure 7: Changes in Distribution of House Price Changes Across Time

                                              (a) Average House Price Growth
                                 10

                                  0

                                 -10

                                       1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005    2010
                                 (b) Cross-State Standard Deviation of House Price Growth
                                  8
                                  6
                                  4
                                  2
                                       1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005    2010
                                    (c) Unemployment-House Price Growth Relationship
                                  5
                               -t 0
                                  -5
                                 -10
                                       1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005    2010

Figure shows time-series of the mean and standard deviation of state-level annual house price growth and of the cross-state
relationship between house price growth and unemployment rate changes. Calculations are population weighted by state.


    Since CRISM data begins in 2005, we cannot construct the housing equity data necessary to simply
replicate our prior analysis in earlier recessions. However, as noted in Section 4.2, house price changes
and housing equity are strongly correlated in this recession. Motivated by this relationship, we now
show that the cross-region distribution of house price growth varies substantially across time. Panel


                                                            16
(a) of Figure 7 shows average real house price growth in CoreLogic data from 1976-2013.19
    While the large house price declines in the Great Recession stand out, there is substantial variation
across time. During the 2001 recession, real house prices were growing rather than falling, and house
price declines in the previous three recessions were mild. Panel (b) plots the standard deviation of
house price growth across states in each year. Clearly, spatial variation in house price growth was
unusually high in the late 80s and in the Great Recession and unusually low during the 2001 recession.
    Finally, panel (c) explores relationships between state-level unemployment and house price growth,
a moment that will be particularly important for determining monetary policy implications for cross-
region inequality. In particular, we run a regression of one-year house price growth on state-level
one-year changes in unemployment (in percentage points) interacted with annual dummies for each
year from 1976-2013 and including year and state fixed effects so that the results are not driven by slow
moving state-level trends or aggregate unemployment changes or house price growth:

                                    ∆ log HPi,t = α + β t ∆URi,t + γt + ζ i + ei,t                                     (2)

β t then measures the comovement between house prices and unemployment in the cross-section each
year. Panel (c) shows that in the Great Recession, unemployment and house price growth were unusu-
ally negatively correlated. Again, these patterns vary across time. In the 2001 and 80s recessions there
was basically no relationship between unemployment and house price growth.
    In the following section we build a theoretical model consistent with these time-series patterns
and show they imply important time-varying consequences of monetary policy. Supporting these
conclusions, Figure 8 illustrates that the pass-through of monetary policy through the mortgage market
was much stronger in the 2001 recession than in the 2008 recession and that regional effects were also
very different.20 Panel (a) shows the time series of monthly refinancing propensities in HMDA for
the lowest and highest unemployment quartile MSAs during the 2008 recession. MSAs are sorted into
quartiles based on the total increase in unemployment from November 2007 to October 2009. The top
(bottom) quartile experienced unemployment increases of 6.3 percent or more (3.8 percent or less) over
this period.21 Given the high correlation between unemployment changes and house price changes,
the unemployment results in panel (a) are very similar to those shown for equity quartiles in Figure 3.
    Panel (b) shows time-series patterns for monthly refinancing by unemployment quartiles during
the 2001 recession. The sorting is again done by total increases in unemployment over this period. The
top (bottom) quartile the unemployment rate increased by 2.5 percent or more (1.6 percent or less).
The refinancing patterns are very different from those shown in panel (a): during the entire period,
refinancing volumes were higher in the MSAs with more rapidly rising unemployment.22 Overall
  19 State-level house prices are deflated using the CPI-U and are population weighted. We concentrate on the state-level

rather than MSA-level distribution of house price growth, since MSA-level labor market data is only available starting in
1990, but patterns at the MSA (and zip code) level are similar for the mean and standard deviation.
  20 Since CRISM data starts in 2005 we must use HMDA data for this analysis.
  21 These periods match turning points in the overall seasonally adjusted US civilian unemployment rate. In the earlier

episode, national unemployment increased from a low of 3.9 percent in December 2000 to a high of 6.3 percent in June 2003.
In the latter episode, unemployment increased from 4.7 percent in November 2007 to 10.0 percent in October 2009.
  22 Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov (2013) similarly find that over 1993-2009, refinancing activity at a point in time was

higher in states with worse economic conditions. Avery et al. (2011) document lower refinancing propensities in 2010 than
in 2003 using credit records data. While these data do not allow one to measure borrower equity, state-level differences in
propensities are consistent with lack of equity being an important impediment to refinancing in 2010.



                                                            17
Figure 8: Refinancing Propensities for High and Low Unemployment Change Quartiles, 2008 Re-
cession and 2001 Recession

                                         (a): Refinance Propensities 2007-2009                                                                                             (b): Refinance Propensities 2001-2003
                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                   1.5


                                                                                                                                                                      4
      Refinance propensity, in %




                                                                                                                                         Refinance propensity, in %
                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                      3


                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                    .5

                                                                                                                                                                      1


                                    0                                                                                                                                 0
                                     10



                                                 1



                                                            4



                                                                       7


                                                                                  10



                                                                                              1



                                                                                                         4



                                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                           1


                                                                                                                                                                                      4


                                                                                                                                                                                                 7


                                                                                                                                                                                                        10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                            8m



                                                       8m



                                                                  8m




                                                                                          9m



                                                                                                    9m



                                                                                                               9m




                                                                                                                                                                          1m


                                                                                                                                                                                 1m


                                                                                                                                                                                            1m




                                                                                                                                                                                                               2m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3m
                                   7m




                                                                             8m




                                                                                                                          9m




                                                                                                                                                                                                     1m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2m
                                             0



                                                        0



                                                                   0




                                                                                          0



                                                                                                     0



                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
              0


                                          20



                                                     20



                                                                20



                                                                              0


                                                                                       20



                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                             20



                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
           20




                                                                           20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                            Lowest Unempl. Quartile                    Highest Unempl. Quartile                                                                 Lowest Unempl. Quartile                        Highest Unempl. Quartile



Figure shows monthly refinancing propensities for the top and bottom quartiles of MSAs by unemployment changes. Specif-
ically, for each MSA we compute the change in unemployment between November 2007 and October 2009 (panel a) and
December 2000 to June 2003 (panel b). Each MSA is placed into population-weighted quartiles by this measure. Refinancing
propensities are computed using HMDA data on origination volumes (by month of loan application) divided by the total
number of mortgages in MSA quartiles from the American Community Survey in 2008 (panel a) or 2000 (panel b).


refinancing propensities were also dramatically higher in this earlier episode, when house prices were
growing rather than shrinking (especially between mid-2002 and mid-2003). While there was no single
monetary policy "event" during this period, as the federal funds rate instead declined gradually, it
is evident from Figure 1 that overall mortgage rate declines relative to recent levels were similar in
2001-2003 and 2007-2009. Because the decline in mortgage rates was similar during both recessions,
the fact that refinancing activity was much higher in 2001-2003 is consistent with much higher home
equity during this period.
    Of course, 2001 and 2008 are different in many ways besides their house price patterns. For in-
stance, credit standards were likely tighter in 2008 due in part to the disappearance of non-agency
securitization. Thus, we now provide some broader time-series evidence that the aggregate respon-
siveness of refinancing to interest rate changes depends systematically on housing market conditions.
Formally, we separately estimate the following two regressions:

                                     Re f it = ω0 + ω1 Ratet + ω2 ∆HPt + ω3 Ratet × ∆HPt + ω4 SD (∆HPt ) + ω5 Ratet × SD (∆HPt ) + et                                                                                                                                       (3)

and

   ∆Re f it = ω0 + ω1 ∆Ratet + ω2 ∆HPt + ω3 ∆Ratet × ∆HPt + ω4 SD (∆HPt ) + ω5 ∆Ratet × SD (∆HPt ) + et                                                                                                                                                                     (4)

where Re f it is the ratio of refinance mortgages with application month t (from HMDA) to the stock of
outstanding mortgages in month t − 1 (from the Flow of Funds), and ∆Re f it is the one-year change in
Re f i (i.e., between months t − 12 and t). For Ratet in spefication (3), we use a measure of the average
incentive to refinance, defined as the difference between the market rate on new 30-year fixed-rate
mortgages in month t and the average rate on outstanding mortgages in month t. The more negative
this difference, the more the average borrower gains from refinancing. ∆Ratet in equation (4) is either
the 12-month change in the market rate on new 30-year FRMs, or the 12-month sum of monthly

                                                                                                                                    18
monetary policy surprises from Gertler and Karadi (2015). These rate measures are interacted with
one-year rolling average real house price growth across states (∆HP, as in Figure 7a) and the standard
deviation of house price growth across states (SD(∆HP), Figure 7b) to study how the transmission of
monetary policy to refinancing varies with the regional house price distribution.

                         Table 1: Aggregate Refinancing Propensities and Interest Rates


                                     (1)                   (2)                            (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)
           Dep. var.:                              Refit                                                         ∆Refit−12,t
           Int. rate measure:     Mtg. rate minus avg. outstanding                      ∆Mtg. ratet−12,t              Σtt−12 Mon. pol. shocks
           Rate                   -0.697***            -0.962***                      -0.977***         -0.983***     -1.387***   -2.094***
                                   (0.181)              (0.139)                        (0.126)           (0.128)       (0.478)     (0.532)
           ∆HP                                         0.063***                                           0.004                     0.007
                                                        (0.012)                                          (0.021)                   (0.029)
           Rate × ∆HP                                  -0.095***                                        -0.070**                   -0.248**
                                                        (0.030)                                          (0.032)                    (0.120)
           SD(∆HP)                                     0.116***                                          -0.076                    -0.106
                                                        (0.036)                                          (0.060)                   (0.084)
           Rate × SD(∆HP)                              -0.178**                                          -0.176*                   -0.944*
                                                        (0.077)                                          (0.092)                   (0.490)
           Constant               1.003***             0.964***                        -0.241**          -0.180*       -0.192       -0.193
                                   (0.077)              (0.060)                         (0.113)          (0.108)       (0.148)     (0.124)
           Adj. R2                   0.22                  0.63                          0.50             0.56          0.12         0.20
           Obs.                      222                   222                           258              258           258          258

Table shows results from regressions of monthly aggregate refinancing propensities on measures of (mortgage) interest rates. In columns (1)
and (2), the interest rate measure is the mortgage rate on new 30-year FRMs (from Freddie Mac PMMS) minus the weighted average coupon
on outstanding mortgages guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae (from eMBS, available since Jan 1994). In columns (3)
and (4), the interest rate variable is the 12-month change in the rate on new 30-year FRMs (one standard deviation = 0.78). In columns
(5) and (6), the interest rate variable is the 12-month sum of monthly monetary policy surprises (the surprise in the three-month ahead
futures rate) from Gertler and Karadi (2015) (one standard deviation = 0.28). Sample period: columns (1)-(2): Jan 1994–June 2012; (3)-(6):
Jan 1991–June 2012. June 2012 is when Gertler-Karadi series ends. Standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West (4 lags) in columns (1)-(2)
and Hansen-Hodrick (12 lags) in columns (3)-(6). Significance:    ∗   p < 0.1,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01.


    Table 1 presents the results. Column (1) shows that, as expected, there is a strong relationship
between refinance propensities at the aggregate level and the average borrower’s incentive (ω1 < 0).
However, column (2) shows the strength of this relationship varies with prior house price growth: it
is significantly stronger when house prices were growing on average (ω3 < 0) and if there is more
heterogeneity in house price growth across space (ω5 < 0). These results are at the heart of the
mechanism in this paper, as the theoretical model below will help clarify.
    In columns (3) and (4), we repeat these regressions in one-year changes, using the change in 30-year
FRM rates as the key right-hand side variable. As rates fall, we find refinancing strongly increases.
Again, this refinancing response rises with the mean and dispersion of house price growth. Columns
(5) and (6) shows result are similar when redoing the same regression using monetary policy shocks,.
This specification alleviates concerns about reverse causality, although we would generally expect them
to go in the opposite direction of what we find: for instance, one could imagine that as refinancing
increases and aggregate demand strengthens, that would lead to an increase in interest rates. While

                                                                         19
these regressions are not as cleanly identified as our results using regional variation around QE1, we
find it encouraging that these aggregate time series results are consistent with our model predictions.23


6      A Model of Regional Heterogeneity and Monetary Policy
In this section, we move to a theoretical analysis of the interaction between monetary policy and re-
gional heterogeneity that can be used to interpret our empirical results. Our goal is to clarify how the
regional equity distribution affects the transmission from interest rate cuts to both local and aggregate
spending through the refinancing channel. Because the equity distribution is time-varying, we argue
that this leads to situations where expansionary monetary policy provides the least stimulus to the
places that need it most and thus faces a trade-off between stimulating aggregate spending and in-
creasing cross-region consumption inequality. Our model includes many realistic features of mortgage
markets, including equilibrium effects between borrowers and lenders but is intentionally stylized in
many other dimensions, as the goal is to transparently illustrate how the refinancing channel of mon-
etary policy interacts with the regional distribution of equity. Embedding our framework into a richer
DSGE structure might produce more realistic numerical results but would complicate the analysis in a
way that obscures the interaction between interest rates and local equity. As discussed in Section 8.6,
complicating the analysis in this way would likely amplify many of our conclusions.
      The starting point is a standard consumption-savings model with income shocks and borrowing
constraints as in Huggett (1993). To this standard framework, we add housing and mortgages. Houses
are subject to stochastic regional house price shocks, and agents can borrow against the value of
their homes using fixed-rate mortgages that can be refinanced by paying a fixed cost. We account
for equilibrium interactions between borrowers and lenders by assuming that mortgage payments are
received by lenders in the economy who potentially adjust consumption when borrowers refinance.


6.1      Model Description

      Environment.         The economy is populated by a continuum of infinitely-lived households, indexed
by i and located in region j = 1, 2, ..., J, and a representative lender.
                                                                                                    ij
      Idiosyncratic Earnings.         In each period t, household’s nominal earnings are given by yt , which
follows a random walk with drift,

                                                         ij      j         ij      ij
                                                    log(yt ) = µy + log(yt−1 ) + ε t

                                                j                                       ij
with region-specific income drift µy and mean zero income shock ε t , which is i.i.d. over time but
possibly correlated both across and within regions.
                                                                                             ij
      Assets and Liabilities.       Households have access to a risk-free nominal asset at paying nominal in-
                                                                 ij
terest rate rt , with a no-borrowing constraint at ≥ 0. They are endowed with one unit of housing
                              j
with nominal price qt , which can be used as collateral for mortgage borrowing. House prices follow a
random walk with drift,
                                                          j      j         j       j
                                                    log(qt ) = µq + log(qt−1 ) + νt
    23 Results   are also similar when using only data from before 2008.


                                                                      20
          j                                                                  j
where µq is region-specific trend house price growth and νt is a mean zero individual house price
shock that is i.i.d. over time but is perfectly correlated within a region.
    We assume that both earnings and house prices are random walks for two reasons. The first is
computational: it allows us to reduce the state space, as we show in Appendix A.3. The second
is because it simplifies aggregation: households can be collected into regions and aggregated in a
straightforward manner without adding additional state variables because aggregate, regional, and
idiosyncratic household shocks enter symmetrically in the problem.
    Since our empirical evidence focuses on refinancing for non-moving households, we assume for
simplicity that agents cannot buy or sell houses and that mortgage debt is of infinite maturity. Nominal
                                                                        ij
mortgage debt requires a constant mortgage payment rτm0 mτ0 every period, which is determined at the
moment of debt issuance τ0 . However, households can refinance their mortgage at any time τ > τ0
                                             ij j                                ij
by paying a fixed monetary cost Fτ qτ .24 We assume that Ft is an i.i.d. stochastic process that is
uncorrelated with house prices or income in order to generate heterogeneity in refinancing decisions
conditional on other household states and thus better fit the data, but our conclusions are similar if
this randomness is eliminated.
    When refinancing, households lock in the current nominal interest rate rτm and future mortgage
                 ij
payments rτm mτ . Furthermore, we assume that when refinancing, households always borrow up to the
maximum amount allowed by the loan-to-value requirement γ. This simplifies the household decision
problem and computations in our benchmark model, but we show in Section 8.2 that relaxing this
                                                                                                                  ij      j
assumption has little effect on our conclusions. This implies that the new mortgage balance is mτ = γqτ
                                        ij     ij
and that cashed-out equity is mτ − mτ0 . These borrowing constraints capture the primary features of
fixed-rate mortgages with options to refinance common in the US. Finally, we assume nominal interest
rates {rt , rtm } follow an exogenous Markov process, which we discuss in the calibration.

    Household Problem. For notational clarity, we drop agent and region indices ij when describing the
household problem. We start by describing how households’ sequential budget constraints at time t
depend on refinancing decisions and then formally state the household problem and value function.
    In a period where the household does not refinance, the sequential budget constraint is

                                         pt ct + at+1 ≤ at (1 + rt ) + yt − γrτm0 qτ0

where ct is period t real consumption and pt is the price level. In a period where the household
refinances, the sequential budget constraint is

                            pt ct + at+1 ≤ at (1 + rt ) + yt − γrtm qt + γ(qt − qτ0 ) − Ft qt

    In order to state the household problem recursively, we express all variables relative to house prices.
                                qτ0
In particular, define x̃t =      qt   as the inverse of accumulated equity and { ãt , ỹt , p̃t } as real assets, real
earnings, and consumption good prices in terms of house prices. Furthermore, in order to bound the
value function and ensure real variables have a well-defined stationary distribution, we exogenously
bound ỹ between [y, ȳ], and assume earnings and house prices grow on average at identical rates (i.e.,
  24 We assume the fixed cost is proportional to current house prices so that these costs remain relevant in the presence of

house price growth and because this is necessary to make the household value function homogeneous in house prices.



                                                             21
µy = µq ). Finally, as with nominal interest rates, we assume p̃t follows an exogenous Markov process
which is possibly correlated with local house prices and earnings but grows on average at rate π.
   Then, the value function of a household with assets ã, earnings ỹ, accumulated equity x̃, mortgage
rate and balance {r0m , γ x̃ }, and facing prices p̃, current nominal mortgage rate r m , nominal interest rate
r, and fixed cost F can be written recursively as,

           V ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F, p̃) = max{V nore f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F, p̃), V re f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, p̃)}
                                                                                    x̃ 0 0 0 m m0 0 0 0
     V nore f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F, p̃) = max u(c) + βE[V ( â0             , ỹ , x̃ , r0 , r , r , F , p̃ ))|(ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, p̃)]
                                                   { â0 ,c}                         x̃
                           s.t.     p̃c + â0 ≤ ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr0m x̃
                                           â0 ≥ 0, c ≥ 0
                                    log( x̃ 0 ) = −µq + log( x̃ ) − ν
                                    log(ỹ0 ) = µy − µq + log(ỹ) + ε − ν
                                                                                    x̃ 0 0 x̃ 0 m m0 0 0 0
            V re f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, p̃) = max u(c) + βE[V ( â0              , ỹ , , r , r , r , F , p̃ ))|(ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, p̃)]
                                                   { â0 ,c}                         x̃       x̃
                           s.t.     p̃c + â0 ≤ ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr m + γ(1 − x̃ ) − F
                                           â0 ≥ 0, c ≥ 0
                                    log( x̃ 0 ) = −µq + log( x̃ ) − ν
                                    log(ỹ0 ) = µy − µq + log(ỹ) + ε − ν

   Inspecting this problem, we can see the household’s incentives to refinance. When the current
interest rate r m is below the rate when the household last refinanced r0m , the household can secure a
permanently lower mortgage payment, even if house prices are unchanged. When the current house
price is above the price when the household last refinanced, the household can refinance to cash-out
                             1
accumulated equity          x̃t   even if rates have not changed, but then faces greater future mortgage payments.
Furthermore, when µq > 0, households accumulate equity, on average, when not refinancing. Once
enough time has passed to acquire substantial equity, it is optimal to refinance and cash out this equity.
This logic is typical of fixed adjustment cost models, where inaction is optimal until the state changes
enough to justify paying the fixed cost. These models are often stylized enough that the state-space
is one-dimensional with optimal policies characterized by a single adjustment "threshold." This is not
true in our setup since we have a richer state-space, with a state (assets ãt ) evolving endogenously
when not refinancing. Numerical solutions nevertheless yield refinancing decisions characterized by
threshold equity levels, which depend on assets, income, fixed costs, and interest rates.
   Finally, in order to characterize policy functions numerically, it is helpful to eliminate a state vari-
                                                                                                                  c1t −σ
able. By assuming that households period utility function is u(ct ) =                                             1− σ     with σ ≥ 1 and p̃ is a
random walk with a drift, we show in the Appendix that we can eliminate p̃ as a state variable because
the value function is homogenous of degree σ − 1 in p̃. We denote this transformed value function
J ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ). The Appendix also provides a detailed description of our computational pro-
cedure. In practice, because we wish to compute aggregate consumption as well as its cross-region
variance, we need p̃ to have a well-defined stationary distribution. As such, we assume that consump-
tion good prices are proportional to local house prices, implying that p̃ grows at a constant rate π − µq


                                                                           22
and c̃ can be interpreted as real consumption.25

     Mortgage Lenders.               We introduce mortgage lenders because we are interested in computing ag-
gregate consumption responses to changes in interest rates. If we ignored lenders when computing
aggregate consumption, we would potentially miss important offsetting equilibrium effects. For ex-
ample, when borrowers refinance after a decline in interest rates, the dividends accruing to lenders
decrease, which should reduce their consumption (see Greenwald, 2016).
     However, a large fraction of mortgage debt is ultimately held by foreign lenders, and we do not
want to count changes in their consumption as offsets against the consumption of domestic borrowers.
Thus, we assume that mortgage debt is paid into a mutual fund and that a share θ of this fund is held
by a representative US lender while share 1 − θ is held by foreign lenders (e.g., Chinese investors). This
means that the representative lender ultimately holds a fixed fraction θ of outstanding mortgage debt.
For simplicity, we assume the representative lender is a permanent income consumer and receives
certain dividend payments d from the mutual fund (a consequence of a law of large numbers for
households). Given a law of motion for dividends d0 = G̃ (.), the lender’s value function is:26

                                            VR ( a R , d, r ) = max
                                                                  0
                                                                    u(c R ) + β R V ( a0R , d0 , r 0 )
                                                                c R ,a R

                                          s.t.   cR +   a0R   ≤ a R (1 + r )e−π + θd
                                                        cR ≥ 0


     Recursive Equilibrium Definition.              A Recursive Equilibrium is an initial distribution S for { ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , F }
across households i in regions j; initial lender assets a0R ; a law of motion for d0 , r m and r; value
functions J ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ), VR ( a R , d, r ); and policy functions â0 , c̃, x̃, Ire f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ) and
                                                                                                          

[ a0R , c R ] ( a R , d) such that

    1. The policy functions solve households’ and lender’s problems.

    2. For all realizations of {ỹt (i, j), x̃t (i, j), Ft (i, j), rtm , rt }∞
                                                                             t=0 across households and regions (i, j ), the
        law of motion for dividends G (S, r m , r ) implied by the policy functions is equal to the perceived
        law of motion by lenders G̃ (.) and satisfies
                       Z h                                                                                            i
                                   re f i                              re f i
                dt =         (1 − It (i, j))γr0,t
                                              m
                                                  (i, j) x̃t (i, j) + It (i, j) (γrtm + Ft (i, j) − γ(1 − x̃t (i, j))) didj


     This equilibrium definition does not impose market clearing on the asset and consumption mar-
ket because we take interest rates, goods and house prices, and income as exogenously determined.
However, we assume the mortgage market clears by introducing the representative lender. Finally,
a region in this economy is defined as a collection of households that experience common shocks to
house prices and income. Aggregates are simply obtained by adding up all regions.
  25 While  we make this assumption mainly for simplicity and convenience, Stroebel and Vavra (2016) show that local
retail prices indeed respond strongly to changes in local house prices. As an alternative, we have also performed all our
computations by exogenously bounding p̃ and our quantitative results are almost identical.
  26 The law of motion is determined in equilibrium as a function of the refinancing decisions of all households. Since we

do not endogenize interest rates, this is straightforward since we can calculate the present value response of dividends to a
decline in interest rates entirely from the borrower side and then separately calculate lender consumption responses.


                                                                           23
6.2     Calibration Strategy

The model is annual and most parameters are standard. As is common in the risk-sharing literature,
we set σ = 2 to generate an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 1/2. We assume a constant
nominal risk-free rate r = 0.03, inflation rate of π = .02, and set β = 0.95. For simplicity, we set β R =
 1 −π
1+r e    so that lenders perfectly smooth consumption. For our baseline results, we assume the nominal
mortgage rate is constant at r m = 0.06 and then show the response to a one-time, unanticipated
permanent decline to r m = 0.05, which roughly matches 30-year fixed rates before and after QE1.
This specification illustrates effects transparently in the simplest possible environment and facilitates
numerical calculations, since it eliminates r m expectations from the value function. In Section 8, we
instead assume that r m follows an AR process and show that this delivers very similar quantitative
conclusions. We set γ = 0.8, so that new mortgages require 20 percent equity and θ = 0.5 to account
for the substantial fraction of US mortgage debt held abroad, either directly (about 20 percent in 2008
Flow of Funds data) or indirectly through ownership of other institutions (such as banks) that hold
mortgage debt. We show robustness to this assumption in Section 8.
      Following Kaplan and Violante (2010), income shocks are normally distributed with standard devi-
ation of 0.1 to match earnings changes in PSID data. This is the total standard deviation of household
income, but some portion of income is common to households in a region. The standard deviation of
this common component is set to 0.025, to match our regional data. As described above, trend income
and house price growth are assumed identical. We calibrate house prices to match the annual growth
rate and standard deviation of nominal MSA house price changes from 1990-2014 in CoreLogic data of
0.025 and 0.065. We assume that in the stochastic steady-state, shocks to house prices and income are
independent. This independence on average is assumed when households make their policy decisions,
but one of the primary questions we explore in our model is how particular realizations of shocks
affect the consequences of monetary policy. During the Great Recession, house prices fell substantially
on average but there were substantial differences across regions, which were highly correlated with
income changes. Since our empirical evidence is drawn from this period, we calibrate the remain-
ing parameters of the model to match the distribution of house prices and income in 2008 and the
refinancing responses across regions following QE1. We call this calibration our baseline economy.
      More specifically, to construct our baseline economy, we initialize the model from the stochastic
steady-state, but in period t, we hit the economy with the aggregate house price decline of 12.5%
observed in 2008. Households are also hit with an additional regional house price shock which can
take the value -12.5%, 0%, +12.5% so that 1/3 of regions experience a total house price decline of 25%,
1/3 experience a decline of 12.5% and 1/3 experience no decline. The 25% decline is picked to match
the house price decline for the lowest housing equity quartile in our empirical analysis, while the 0%
change matches that in the highest housing equity quartile. This means regions in our model can be
mapped directly to those in our empirical analysis. Similarly, we calibrate regions so they differ by
-2SD, 0 and +2SD of the regional income shock. If these income shocks were uncorrelated with house
prices our simulated economy would have 9 regions, representing the 3x3 combinations of house price
and income shocks. However, we instead assume regional house price and income shocks are perfectly
correlated in our baseline model to match the very high correlation in the Great Recession. This means
our baseline economy effectively has three regions: relatively high house price and income, middle


                                                   24
house price and income and low house price and income.
      Finally, the fixed cost process is calibrated to match the regional responses to mortgage rate reduc-
tions under QE1. In particular, we assume that each household draws an i.i.d. fixed cost each period
that can take on either a high or a low value and pick the levels of the high and low fixed costs and
their relative probabilities to target a monthly refinancing rate just prior to QE1 of 0.0025, an increase
in the refinancing rate of 0.0025 in the lowest house price region, an increase of 0.0075 in the middle
house price region, and an increase of 0.011 in the highest house price region. This matches the simple
elasticity in the data between house price growth and refinancing.
      We calibrate to the 2008 period rather than the stochastic steady-state for several reasons. First, this
is the period for which we have strong empirical evidence on the distribution of house price changes,
income and refinancing responses from our QE1 event study. Second, our loan level data starts in
2005. It is unclear that any year over the housing boom-bust represents a "normal" steady-state period.
Furthermore, by design, monetary stimulus is correlated with recessions and so any empirical evi-
dence on the effects of interest rate reductions is going to come from periods with negative aggregate
conditions. That is, any empirical measure of refinancing elasticities to interest rate reductions will
always be primarily identified from recession periods. Therefore, we explicitly target this elasticity
during such a period in the model. Finally, we focus on the elasticity of refinancing to interest rate
reductions across regions rather than aggregate changes in refinancing since aggregate relationships
may be contaminated by other confounding unmodeled aggregate shocks.
      Although not targeted by our calibration, we document in the Appendix that the household level
distribution of equity in the 2008 calibration of the model is a good fit to its empirical counterpart. In
both the model and data there is substantial household heterogeneity in equity, with a non-trivial frac-
tion of households more than 20% underwater. While it would be desirable to also compare model and
data relationships between home equity, financial assets and consumption at either the household or
regional level, unfortunately, the data necessary to make these comparisons does not exist. Neverthe-
less, we view the model fit in the Appendix as well as the fact that the model reproduces cross-region
refinancing patterns before and after QE1 as a reassuring check on its quantitative usefulness.


6.3     Theoretical Results in the 2008 Baseline Economy

Figure 9 shows the threshold property for refinancing decisions in a stationary environment with
permanently high or low mortgage rates for a household with median income and assets, as well
as in a non-stationary environment right after a permanent mortgage rate decline.27 The refinancing
equity threshold is lower when mortgage rates are permanently low than when they are permanently
high, leading to more frequent refinancing. More importantly, right after a mortgage rate decline,
households refinance at even lower levels of equity. Intuitively, refinancing is more frequent in an
economy with low mortgage rates because the cost of borrowing—future mortgage payments—is lower
while the benefit—equity cash-out net of fixed costs—is independent of mortgage rates.28
      Figure 10 shows the impulse response of each region to a decline in mortgage rates from 0.06 to
0.05 in the baseline economy which matches economic conditions in 2008. The top panel shows the
 27 Since   households cannot sell housing, extractable equity is all equity above the fraction 1 − γ required when refinancing.
 28 Appendix    Figure A-11 shows how the refinancing threshold changes with assets and earnings.



                                                               25
                          Figure 9: Refinance Decision Follows a Threshold Policy
                                                              1
                                                                     r low
                                                             0.9     r high
                                                                     r decline

                                                             0.8

                                                             0.7




                                       Refinance Indicator
                                                             0.6

                                                             0.5

                                                             0.4

                                                             0.3

                                                             0.2

                                                             0.1

                                                              0
                                                              -0.6       -0.4    -0.2       0         0.2    0.4   0.6       0.8
                                                                                        Extractable Equity



change in the fraction of loans refinancing at a monthly rate. By construction, this matches the changes
in Figure 3, since the model is calibrated to hit these numbers. Just as in the data, regions with high
equity are more likely to refinance in response to the decline in rates. The bottom panel shows that real
consumption also responds more in high equity regions. While we do not have broad consumption
data at the regional level, this is consistent with empirical patterns for auto spending in Figure 5.

                              Figure 10: Response to Interest Decline by Region
                                                                                             Refi IRF
                               0.015
                                                                                                                             Low P
                                                                                                                             Mid P
                                0.01                                                                                         High P



                               0.005



                                  0
                                       0                             1             2              3          4           5             6
                                                                                                Years
                                                                                                C IRF
                               0.015
                                                                                                                              Low P
                                                                                                                              Mid P
                                                                                                                              High P
                                0.01



                               0.005



                                  0
                                       0                             1             2              3          4           5             6
                                                                                                Years
For the baseline 2008 calibration, the refinancing impulse response function (IRF) shows the change in the monthly fraction
of households refinancing in response to a one percentage point reduction in mortgage rates. The consumption (C) IRF
shows the change in log consumption in response to the same one percentage point reduction in mortgage rates.


    We next compute aggregate consumption and the variance of log consumption across regions.
The blue lines in Figure 11 show responses to the decline in mortgage rates in our 2008 baseline
economy and give our first important theoretical result: a reduction in interest rates increases aggregate
consumption but also increases the variance of consumption across regions. This increase in variance

                                                                                                26
              Figure 11: Aggregate Stimulus vs. Cross-Region Inequality in 2008 and 2001

                                                           Aggregate Refi IRF
                                0.015
                                                                                         2008
                                 0.01
                                                                                         2001
                                0.005

                                     0
                                         0   1         2           3            4    5          6
                                                               Years
                                                 Regional Consumption Variance IRF
                                  0.2
                                                                                         2008
                                     0                                                   2001


                                 -0.2
                                         0   1         2           3            4    5          6
                                                                 Years
                                                            Aggregate C IRF
                                0.015

                                0.01                                                     2008
                                                                                         2001
                                0.005

                                 0
                                         0   1         2           3            4    5          6
                                                                 Years

Impulse response functions show the change in the monthly fraction of households refinancing, log aggregate consumption
and log consumption variance across regions in response to a one percentage point reduction in mortgage rates. See text for
the description of the baseline economy calibrated to match November 2008 as well as the model specification for the 2001
recession.


occurs because consumption increases most in regions with high house prices.29 Since house prices and
income are correlated in this economy, these regions already have the highest income and consumption
before the interest rate declines. Thus, while monetary policy increases overall consumption, it does
so mainly by stimulating consumption in locations that are already doing relatively well.
    This trade-off between aggregate stimulus and inequality is strongly suggested by our empirical
results showing a strong correlation between house prices, income, refinancing and auto spending
around QE. However, the model addresses the concern that 1) our empirical results measure only cross-
region effects on borrowers and not offsetting aggregate effects from lenders and 2) we do not have
comprehensive empirical measures of regional consumption. Despite these potential concerns, our
model nevertheless implies that under economic conditions in 2008, rate declines moderately increased
aggregate consumption but that these benefits flowed most strongly to regions doing relatively well.
    In terms of quantitative magnitudes, our model implies that a 1 percentage point rate decline
under economic conditions in 2008 leads to an increase in aggregate consumption of 0.41%. We show
below that this response more than doubles to 0.92% under economic conditions in 2001. For an
aggregate point of comparison, VAR-based estimates which do not allow for time-varying responses
imply aggregate consumption responses on the order of 0.5-2%. The standard errors in such time-series
estimates are large, but these numbers nevertheless suggest that the refinancing channel of monetary
policy is an important part of the overall monetary transmission mechanism, especially when there is
substantial housing equity in the economy.
    What drives these aggregate effects and why do declines in lender consumption not fully offset in-
creases in consumption by borrowers? First, some mortgage debt is owned by foreign lenders. Second,
  29 Note that MPCs out of equity are mildly higher in the worst-off region relative to the best-off regions (0.52 vs 0.46) but
that substantially greater equity extraction in the best-off region swamps this difference in MPCs.


                                                                 27
borrowers consume a large fraction of extracted equity on impact while lenders smooth consumption
by using the income they receive from future repayment of that borrowing, as shown in the Appendix.
To explore these effects more concretely, we decompose the IRF of consumption on impact arising
from two different channels: 1) intertemporal effects from changing the timing of borrowing and lend-
ing and 2) wealth transfers between lenders and borrowers arising from changes in the present value
of monthly payments. The first channel represents pure cash-out effects taking the present value of
payments as given while the second channel arises from both changes in the mortgage rate (holding
mortgage balances constant) and from changes in the level of mortgage balances (holding rates con-
stant).30 Importantly, channel 1) is identically zero for lenders since they only care about the net present
value of payments and not their timing. This means that this term is independent of equilibrium effects
arising from lender offsets and so will not vary with the foreign share of lenders.
      We find that in our baseline calibration, the total aggregate consumption response on impact arising
from pure cash-out effects (i.e., the first channel) is 0.26%, relative to a total consumption response
of 0.41%. Thus, in our baseline model, cash-out effects represent more than half of total aggregate
effects. Remaining effects arise from a net increase in domestic consumption as monthly mortgage
payments from borrowers to lenders decline. In our baseline model, these payment effects are fairly
large, but this depends importantly on the fact that a substantial fraction of lenders are abroad and
so have no effect on domestic consumption. In a closed economy version of the model in which all
lenders are domestic, the cash-out effect is again 0.26%, but the total effect falls to 0.25%, so that 105%
of the aggregate consumption response to interest rates on impact is driven by intertemporal cash-
out effects.31 Unsurprisingly, total aggregate consumption effects are even larger (0.57%) in a partial
equilibrium version of the model where all lenders are foreign so that there are no lender consumption
offsets. Together these results show that equilibrium lender effects matter, but they do not completely
undo the consumption response of borrowers because of the presence of cash-out refinancing.


6.4     Counterfactual Analysis

That our model reproduces the behavior of the economy just before and after QE1 gives us confidence
in using it for more ambitious counterfactual analysis. We now show that the theoretical effects of
monetary policy are highly non-linear with respect to the regional distribution of housing equity. This
means that accounting for time-variation in this distribution, which we documented in Section 5, is
crucial for correctly predicting the aggregate and regional consequences of monetary policy.


6.4.1    2008 vs. 2001 Economic Conditions

Figure 11 compares the impulse response function of aggregate refinancing activity, aggregate con-
sumption and cross-region consumption inequality to an interest rate shock in the 2008 baseline model
to that which would occur if regional house price patterns in 2008 had instead looked like those in
2001. Under the 2001 model distribution of shocks, house prices are constant for the lowest one-third
  30 Formally,we measure effect 2 by computing the net present value of payment changes for both borrowers and lenders
and multiplying that times the domestic MPC out of wealth for borrowers and lenders. Effect 1 is then the difference between
this payment effect and the total consumption response on impact.
  31 The small effect of the payment channel is consistent with the logic in Greenwald (2016). The payment effect is slightly

negative in the closed economy because the MPC out of permanent shocks for borrowers is slightly less than 1.


                                                             28
of regions, rise by 5% for the middle third, rise by 10% for the highest third of regions, and regional
house prices and income are uncorrelated.
    As seen in Figure 11, changing the equity distribution dramatically changes the consequences of
monetary policy. In 2001, the same decline in interest rates raises aggregate consumption by 2.25 times
as much as in 2008.32 This means QE1 would have had much larger stimulative effects if enacted under
the equity distribution in 2001 as opposed to 2008. There are two reasons for the larger consumption
response. First, as shown in the top panel, the aggregate refinancing response to the rate decline
is nearly twice as large in 2001 because fewer borrowers are underwater. Second, households that
refinance have more equity to extract in 2001, which contributes to an additional consumption boost.
Interestingly, as seen in the middle panel of the figure, inequality across regions falls mildly when
rates fall in 2001 so that there is not always a trade-off between stimulus and cross-region inequality.

       Figure 12: Distribution of Equity and Refinancing Probability: 2008 Calibration vs 2001
                                                              0.4                                                                      4
                                                                                                           r permanently low
                                                                                                           r permanently high
                                                             0.35                                          r decline                   3.5
                                                                                                           Equity distribution 2001
                                                                                                           Equity distribution 2008
                                                              0.3                                                                      3
                                    Adjustment Probability




                                                             0.25                                                                      2.5




                                                                                                                                             Equity Density
                                                              0.2                                                                      2


                                                             0.15                                                                      1.5


                                                              0.1                                                                      1


                                                             0.05                                                                      0.5


                                                               0                                                                        0
                                                               -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2     0       0.2       0.4       0.6          0.8
                                                                                     Extractable Equity


Note: This figure shows the simulated distribution of equity and the fraction of households refinancing under two different
equity distributions.


    To understand why the 2008 distribution of equity makes refinancing respond less to monetary
policy than in 2001, it is useful to illustrate how equity interacts with refinancing decisions. The solid
upward sloping lines in Figure 12 show the probability of refinancing as a function of extractable
equity under different interest rate policies. These are analogous to the thresholds in Figure 9 but
averaging over the joint distribution of assets and income rather than conditioning on a particular
value of these variables. When the interest rate is permanently 0.05 (in blue) households are more
willing to extract equity than when the interest rate is permanently 0.06 (in red) since borrowing is
less costly. This means that the blue refinancing hazard lies slightly above the red refinancing hazard.
The line in yellow is the most interesting since it shows the refinancing probability in the period when
interest rates fall from 0.06 to 0.05. When rates fall, many more households refinance since refinancing
delivers the benefit of extracting equity plus the benefit of locking in a lower rate. This means that the
yellow line is substantially above the red line.
    The vertical distance between the yellow and red lines shows the fraction of households who are
  32 Specifically, consumption rises by 0.41% in the first year in 2008 vs. 0.92% in 2001. The consumption of borrowers rises

by 0.56% in 2008 and 1.15% in 2001, so lender offsets are similar in both years.


                                                                                           29
induced to refinance by the interest rate decline at each level of extractable equity. The aggregate
increase in refinancing induced by the rate decline will then be the vertical difference between the
yellow and red lines, weighted by the distribution of equity when the interest rate falls. This means
that when the distribution of equity changes, the aggregate refinancing response to rate declines will
change. The distribution of equity in our 2008 calibration is shown in dotted green and that in 2001 is
shown in dashed purple. In 2008, the distribution of equity shifts left and fans out relative to 2001. On
net, this leaves much less mass of the equity distribution in the region where the difference between
the yellow and red lines is large. That is, fewer refinancing decisions are triggered by rate declines in
2008 and so the refinancing impulse response to interest rates is reduced.


6.4.2   Housing Equity Statistics and the Consequences of Monetary Policy

                                     Figure 13: Effects of Changing Equity Distribution
                                                        (a) Average Equity Effects
                                 Regional Consumption Variance IRF                    #10 -3   Aggregate C IRF
                           0.3                                                   10
                                                    Baseline                                             Baseline
                           0.2                      Larger P decline                                     Larger P decline
                                                                                 5
                                                    No P Decline                                         No P Decline
                           0.1
                                                                                 0
                            0

                          -0.1                                                   -5
                                 0         2             4              6             0         2             4              6
                                               Years                                                Years
                                                        (b) Equity Variance Effects
                                 Regional Consumption Variance IRF                    #10 -3   Aggregate C IRF
                           0.3                                                   10
                                                   Baseline                                             Baseline
                           0.2                     Lower P Variance                                     Lower P Variance
                                                                                 5
                                                   Higher P Variance                                    Higher P Variance
                           0.1
                                                                                 0
                            0

                          -0.1                                                   -5
                                 0         2             4              6             0         2             4              6
                                               Years                                                Years

                                                (c) Income-Equity Correlation Effects
                                 Regional Consumption Variance IRF                    #10 -3   Aggregate C IRF
                           0.2                                                   6
                                                                                                    Baseline: P,Y pos corr
                                                                                 4                  P,Y uncorr
                            0
                                                                                                    P,Y neg corr
                                                                                 2
                                               Baseline: P,Y pos corr
                          -0.2
                                               P,Y uncorr                        0
                                               P,Y neg corr
                          -0.4                                                   -2
                                 0         2             4              6             0         2             4              6
                                               Years                                                Years
Impulse response functions show the change in log aggregate consumption and in log consumption variance across regions
in response to a one percentage point reduction in mortgage rates. The baseline economy includes a 12.5% aggregate house
price decline. In panel a, the "larger P decline" calibration features a 25% decline in house prices. The variance of equity and
its correlation with income are fixed at the 2008 calibration across all simulations. In panel b, the high variance calibration
doubles the difference between high and low house price regions, while the low variance calibration halves it. All economies
feature the same baseline decline in house prices and correlation with income. In the bottom panel, the baseline calibration
has income and house prices positively correlated across regions. In the other two calibrations they are uncorrelated or
negatively correlated. All simulations feature the same baseline decline in house prices and variance across regions.


    The distribution of equity in 2008 in the model is different in three ways from 2001. We now show
the independent roles of changes in the level of equity, the cross-region variance of equity, and the
correlation between regional income and regional equity for responses to rate declines.


                                                                            30
   Panel (a) of Figure 13 shows the effect of changing the mean of the equity distribution at the time of
a decline in interest rates. As the level of house prices rises, both inequality and aggregate consumption
respond by more to the same decline in interest rates. Aggregate consumption responses increase
with house prices, since more households are pushed into the part of the equity distribution where
refinancing decisions respond to rate changes, and households also have more equity to consume
conditional on refinancing. Cross-region inequality responds more to rate declines when house prices
rise because refinancing decisions and resulting consumption responses are highly convex in equity.
In regions with negative equity, few households refinance and consumption responses are always near
zero. This is true whether households are deeply underwater or only mildly underwater. In contrast,
the consumption response to interest rates increases rapidly with equity as equity rises. This means
that shifting the distribution of the equity to the right has no effect on consumption responses for those
on the left side of the distribution, while it increases them substantially for those on the right side of
the distribution. Since initial levels of equity and income are positively correlated in our 2008 baseline,
an increase in average equity increases the response of cross-region inequality to rate declines.
   Panel (b) of Figure 13 shows the effects of changing the variance of equity across regions. An
increase in the variance of equity amplifies both the response of consumption inequality and aggregate
consumption to rate declines. The intuition is almost identical to that for the effects of mean shifts and
again follows immediately from Figure 12. Moving households with low equity to even lower equity
has no effect on consumption responses to monetary policy, since these households do not refinance
anyway. In contrast, additional equity amplifies the consumption response of those households on the
right side of the distribution with substantial equity.
   Finally, Panel (c) of Figure 13 shows effects of changing the correlation between income and equity.
If income and equity are uncorrelated, then interest rate declines have almost no effect on cross-
region inequality and when income and equity are negatively correlated, declines in interest rates
substantially reduce cross-region inequality. In contrast, the correlation between income and equity has
almost no effect on aggregate consumption impulse responses. The intuition for inequality effects is
straightforward. Consumption levels are higher in high income than low income regions. Consumption
responses to interest rate changes are higher in high equity than in low equity locations. Thus, when
income and equity are correlated, interest rate declines exacerbate the initial consumption inequality.
If income and house prices are instead uncorrelated, as in the stochastic steady-state or our 2001
calibration, then changes in consumption when interest rates fall are largely uncorrelated with initial
levels of consumption. If instead they are negatively correlated, then inequality is reduced.
   The intuition for the lack of aggregate effects is slightly more subtle and reflects two offsetting
forces. Overall, consumption growth is largest for regions with high house price growth and low
income, since they have more equity and are also more liquidity constrained. However, low income
regions also have lower initial consumption levels than high income regions. This means that the
change in consumption levels for high equity-high income regions is similar to that of high equity-low
income regions, so that changing the proportion of such regions by altering the correlation between
income and house prices has a negligible effect on aggregate consumption responses.
   Of course, as shown in Figure 12, the interaction between refinancing and the equity distribution
is highly non-linear, so the effects of changing any one moment of the equity distribution will always
depend on the initial distribution of equity. For example, effects of a given aggregate house price shock


                                                    31
on monetary policy will depend on both the initial mean and variance of equity, since both features
of the initial distribution will determine how the mean shift interacts with non-linear refinancing
decisions. The above analysis shows the effects of particular changes under the 2008 initial distribution,
but the policy function in Figure 12 implies the equity distribution will matter much more generally.
      An additional robustness analysis in the Appendix illustrates this more concretely by showing
that shifts in the mean (µ) of the equity distribution have effects on monetary policy that depend on
the standard deviation (σ) of the distribution. In particular, we have just shown that the aggregate
                                                                          ∂IRF
consumption response to rate cuts grows with mean equity:                  ∂µ    > 0. In the Appendix we show that
                                                           ∂2 IRF
this positive relationship is diminishing with σ:         < 0. That is, the same increase in mean house
                                                            ∂µ∂σ
prices has a smaller effect on the response of consumption to rate drops in a high σ environment. This
is because when σ is large, more households are either deeply underwater or have so much equity
that they will extract it even without a decrease in rates. A rightward shift in the equity distribution
then has relatively modest effects, since it does not induce deeply underwater households to refinance,
and makes households with substantial equity even less sensitive to monetary policy. These results
demonstrate that the effects of shocks to average equity for monetary policy cannot be determined
without knowing the full equity distribution. A corollary of this result is that understanding the
refinancing channel of monetary policy requires a full accounting of the distribution of equity and so
cannot be analyzed in frameworks which abstract from heterogeneity.


7      Interaction with Mortgage Modification Policies
The analysis thus far argues that monetary policy in 2008 provided the least stimulus to regions which
needed it most and that this dampened its aggregate effects. We now show that various complemen-
tary mortgage modification programs which capture elements of policies implemented in the Great
Recession can boost the effectiveness of monetary policy in such situations.
      We explore two mortgage modification policies: "debt forgiveness" and "relaxed refinancing re-
quirements." We intentionally implement these policies in a stylized fashion in order to starkly illus-
trate their interactions with monetary policy, but the first policy captures elements of the mortgage
write-downs available to some borrowers under HAMP, while the second is more similar to the HARP
program.33 We model debt forgiveness by assuming that a portion of mortgage debt for any household
that is underwater in 2008 is forgiven. In particular, all households with an LTV greater than γ have
their loans adjusted so that LTV=γ.34 Under the relaxed refinancing requirements policy, we allow
underwater households to refinance rates without meeting the LTV requirement. To reflect the fact
that these policies also explicitly eliminated appraisal and other fees associated with refinancing, we
assume that underwater households can refinance without paying the fixed cost under both policies.
    33 Existing
             research has shown that institutional features such as servicer participation and market power matter for the
consequences of these policies as actually implemented (Agarwal et al., 2016, 2017). Also, especially with modification
programs, which in practice usually focus on delinquent borrowers, moral hazard is an important concern that we do not
consider. We are not evaluating the specifics of program implementations in the Great Recession or the detailed institu-
tional design of any such programs. We are instead interested in the broad ways in which such programs, independently
implemented by the fiscal authority, might affect the consequences of monetary policy.
   34 We account for the negative effect of this policy on lenders, although in reality, lenders would likely be compensated

by the government, which in turn would raise taxes. But these taxes would likely be borne disproportionately by the richer
lenders. Even with lump-sum taxes from all households, borrowers with forgiven debt would receive a net transfer.



                                                            32
                                                     Figure 14: Mortgage Modification Effects

(a): Response to Mortgage Modification w/ Constant r m(b): Response to Mortgage Modification + r m Decline

                 10-3                   Aggregate C IRF                                                                    10-3                       Aggregate C IRF
       10                                                                                                        10
                                                                             Relaxed refi req                                                                                 Baseline
                                                                             Debt forgiveness                                                                                 Relaxed refi req
                                                                                                                                                                              Debt forgiveness
        5                                                                                                         5



        0                                                                                                         0



       -5                                                                                                        -5
             0            1         2          3                     4          5               6                      0             1            2          3          4        5               6
                                             Years                                                                                                         Years
                              Regional Consumption Variance IRF                                                                           Regional Consumption Variance IRF
      0.2                                                                                                       0.2



        0                                                                                                         0



      -0.2                                                                                                      -0.2



      -0.4                                                                                                      -0.4
             0            1         2          3                     4          5               6                      0             1            2          3          4        5               6
                                             Years                                                                                                         Years



                        (c): Response to r m Decline, Taking Mortgage Modification Programs as Given

                                                              10-3                        Aggregate C IRF
                                                    10
                                                                                                                           Baseline
                                                                                                                           Relaxed refi req
                                                                                                                           Debt forgiveness
                                                     5



                                                     0



                                                    -5
                                                          0              1            2               3     4                 5               6
                                                                                                    Years
                                                                              Regional Consumption Variance IRF
                                                   0.2



                                                     0



                                                   -0.2



                                                   -0.4
                                                          0              1            2               3     4                 5               6
                                                                                                    Years



Panel (a) of this figure shows the effects of the debt reduction and relaxed refinancing requirement policies described in the
text when interest rates are held fixed. Panel (b) shows the effects of simultaneously reducing rates and implementing the
modification policies. Panel (c) shows the change in output and inequality from reducing interest rates and implementing
mortgage modification relative to an economy that implements mortgage modification but has no decline in rates.




                                                                                                    33
      Panel (a) of Figure 14 shows the response to these modification programs, holding interest rates
constant. That is, it shows the effects of the programs alone with no simultaneous monetary policy
change. The debt reduction program increases total consumption in the economy as it redistributes
resources from unconstrained lenders to more constrained borrowers.35 It also reduces cross-region
inequality, since debt forgiveness is available only to underwater households. In contrast, relaxing re-
financing requirements has no effect when interest rates are held constant because underwater house-
holds have no reason to refinance, even if it is costless, when rates are constant. Thus, this policy has
no effect in the model unless accompanied by a reduction in mortgage rates.
      Panel (b) of Figure 14 shows the response to simultaneously lowering rates and implementing mort-
gage modification. That is, it shows the combined effects of these policies. For comparison, we also
show the baseline economy with a rate decline but no mortgage modification. Relative to the baseline,
the combined policies lead to larger increases in spending and smaller increases in inequality.
      Since impulse responses in panel (b) of Figure 14 are computed relative to an economy without
either mortgage modification or monetary policy, they tell us the combined effects of these policies.
In contrast, panel (c) isolates impacts of monetary policy from direct effects of mortgage modification.
In particular, we compute consumption statistics with both rate declines and mortgage modification
relative to an economy with mortgage modification but no rate decline. Clearly, the presence of either
modification program increases the effectiveness of monetary policy and reduces its inequality effects.
Interestingly, from the perspective of monetary policy, these two mortgage modification programs
work nearly identically. Both policies increase the sensitivity of underwater households to changes in
rates and so amplify the response of spending to interest rate declines. The fact that debt forgiveness
has larger effects than relaxed refinancing requirements in panel (b) arises because this policy has direct
effects on the economy independently of rate changes, while the relaxed refinancing requirements
policies work only through their interaction with interest rates. Since debt forgiveness has both direct
effects as well as interaction effects with monetary policy, the combined effects are ultimately larger.
However, implications for the efficacy of monetary policy are nearly identical.
      Thus, even though the regional distribution of shocks in 2008 substantially hampered monetary
policy transmission, there is at least some scope for mitigating these effects under such conditions.
Policies that help underwater households refinance can interact importantly with interest rate changes
to amplify effects of monetary policy and minimize their consequences for cross-region inequality.


8      Robustness and Model Extensions
In this section, we consider many model extensions and show that time-variation in the consequences
of monetary policy continues to hold. While the quantitative magnitudes vary a bit across specifica-
tions, the qualitative conclusions are very robust since they are driven by two simple features of the
economy: 1) underwater households cannot refinance without putting new cash into the house, which
makes policy functions very non-linear in equity, and 2) the regional distribution of equity changes
over time. Time-varying refinancing responses to rate changes arise immediately from the interaction
of these two features. Since this non-linearity is highly robust across models (and indeed in any rea-
    35 These
           effects are tiny on impact but grow with time. This is consistent with conclusions in Ganong and Noel (2017) that
debt forgiveness has little effect on consumption if, as in our experiment, households still have no equity after forgiveness.


                                                             34
sonable model, underwater households should not be able to refinance and tap into home equity),
it is unsurprising that our conclusions are equally robust. Our discussion is intentionally brief but
additional details are provided in the Appendix for interested readers.


8.1     Accounting for Additional Heterogeneity

8.1.1    ARM Shares

Our baseline analysis assumes that all mortgages have fixed rates. In reality, a substantial fraction
of households have adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) whose rates reset even if households do not
refinance. The presence of ARMs has some potential to change the refinancing channel of monetary
policy. On the one hand, with ARMs, payments decrease when rates decline even if households do
not refinance. To the extent that borrowers have higher MPCs than lenders, this should amplify the
spending response to monetary policy (e.g., Auclert, 2015). On the other hand, the presence of ARMs
reduces the interaction between cash-out decisions and interest rate declines since households do not
need to accelerate equity extraction to take advantage of lower rates today. This makes cash-out-based
spending less responsive to monetary policy.
      Accounting for ARMs also potentially matters for cross-region inequality, since ARM shares of out-
standing loans in November 2008 were higher in MSAs with lower equity. We show these patterns in
the Appendix. ARM shares increased more during the boom years in areas with larger price increases,
which subsequently experienced larger busts. Since ARMs were more prevalent in low equity regions,
it is possible more mortgages experienced rate declines in these regions despite our previous evidence
that fixed-rate mortgages were less likely to be refinanced.
      The importance of ARM offsets depends crucially on what fraction of ARM borrowers actually saw
rate resets after QE1. There are many reasons why not all ARM borrowers benefit from rate declines:
(i) most ARMs are "hybrids" with initial fixed-rate periods of 3-10 years, (ii) ARMs typically have
"rate floors," which are often set at the initial rate of the loan, and (iii) the initial fixed-rate period
often coincides with an interest-only (IO) period during which the borrower pays only interest and
not principal. When the IO period ends, required payments jump up, which can more than offset
simultaneous rate decreases. The Appendix shows the share of ARMs that experience significant rate
reductions of 1 percentage point or more from November 2008 – June 2009 against Emed
                                                                                 j,Nov2008 . Cross-
MSA differences in rate resets are muted relative to differences in ARM shares. Overall, the variation
in ARM resets with Emed
                    j,Nov2008 is less than half that of FRM refinancing propensities so that declines in
effective rates were still larger in high equity MSAs after accounting for ARMs.
      To explore the role of ARMs for our theoretical results, we solve a model in which some households
borrow using FRMs while others use ARMs. ARMs in the model adjust every period to the current
mortgage rate, and we calibrate regional ARM shares to match the data. In light of the above discus-
sion, this overstates the actual cross-region variation in ARM resets after QE1. Thus, it is a conservative
upper bound on the extent to which ARMs change our results. However, even under this conservative
calibration, ARMs have little effect on our conclusions. Low equity regions have more ARM but less
FRM rate resets. On net, the FRM effect dominates so that there are more rate reductions in high equity
regions. Moreover, low equity regions have no cash-out activity since there is no equity to remove,



                                                    35
while high equity regions have significant cash-out and spending response to rate declines.36
      We also separately decompose the role of ARM and FRM borrowers in determining aggregate
time-series variation in spending responses to rate declines. Clearly, time-variation is much larger for
FRM borrowers than ARM borrowers, and aggregate spending patterns are much closer to those of
FRM borrowers since they are a larger share of the economy. However, the spending response of ARM
borrowers still declines by 20% in 2008 relative to 2001. It is also interesting to note that in 2001, FRM
borrowers respond more to rate declines than ARM borrowers, in contrast to typical intuition that
more flexible mortgages amplify responses to monetary policy. This is because when FRM borrowers
actively refinance, they also extract equity and thus front-load their increase in spending, while passive
rate resets under ARMs do not result in equity extraction.


8.1.2   Strength of Cross-Region Effects

Our baseline model calibrates refinancing costs to match the raw correlation between refinancing and
equity across regions in the data after QE1. However, as discussed earlier, the strength of this relation-
ship depends on what additional covariates are included in regressions. To explore the robustness of
our results to smaller responsiveness of local refinancing to housing equity, we solve a model with less
regional heterogeneity in refinancing by doubling fixed costs, which roughly halves the cross-region
differences in refinancing after QE1. Clearly the exact magnitude of our effects is moderately reduced,
but the qualitative patterns remain unchanged and time-variation remains economically significant.


8.1.3   Preceding Booms

Does the boom-bust nature of the Great Recession where regions with the largest house price declines
previously had the largest house price booms change our implications for cross-region inequality? To
assess this, we repeat our baseline exercise but in a model where the house price bust is preceded by
a boom of equal magnitude. We find that our conclusions are unchanged with such an exercise.


8.2     Endogenous Cash-out

In our baseline model, we abstract from the distinction between cash-out and non-cash-out refinancing
by assuming households always extract all available equity when refinancing. We make this assump-
tion largely for tractability, but find that it makes little difference for our conclusions. In particular, the
Appendix shows that our results are very similar in a model where households can choose between
a cash-out refi, modeled as before, and a pure rate refi, in which they lower their rate but do not
cash-out any equity. Allowing households to choose between cash-out and non-cash-out refi makes
little difference because households in high equity locations typically extract equity when refinancing
anyway, and households in low equity locations on average have little equity to extract, so that the
distinction between a cash-out and a rate refi is less relevant.
  36 Since this result is driven by variation in equity, it is consistent with results in Di Maggio et al. (2017) that after

conditioning on equity, greater ARM shares are associated with larger spending responses to rate changes.




                                                            36
8.3    Interest Rate Process

In our baseline, we assume mortgage rates are constant across time and show responses to one-time
unanticipated declines in these rates. In response to QE1, mortgage rates declined and remained low
for an extended period of time. This one-time shock results in the simplest environment and increases
the computational tractability of the model, which allows some of the robustness exercises in this
section. However, we also explored how our results change when r m instead follows an AR process,
with persistence of 0.89 and standard deviation of 0.0055 to match 30-year mortgage rates from 1990-
2015. We find that our results are quantitatively similar under both specifications. Given this, we use
the simpler one-time shock as our baseline.
      Our baseline model also assumes that monetary policy lowers the long-term mortgage rate r m but
not the short rate r. This describes the behavior of rates during QE1 since short-term rates were at the
zero lower bound. However, monetary policy typically results in both rates falling. We find that our
results are similar when we lower both r and r m to maintain a constant spread. This means that our
results apply to QE1, but also to more conventional monetary policy since Gilchrist, Lopez-Salido, and
Zakrajsek (2015) argue that "the efficacy of unconventional policy in lowering real borrowing costs is
comparable to that of conventional policy" throughout the yield curve. Since both conventional and
unconventional monetary policy move mortgage rates, our results thus apply to monetary policy in
general.37 However, our results are quite different when we instead lower only r and not r m . This
experiment shows that the time-varying effects of monetary policy that we emphasize in this paper
work through the refinancing channel since the standard intertemporal channel arising from pure
changes in short-rates is both small and invariant to the distribution of equity.


8.4    Income Process

The solution to the equity extraction problem balances transaction costs against the desire to extract
housing equity. Since our baseline model includes only permanent income shocks, desired equity
extraction is largely determined by past and current house price shocks and interest rate behavior
rather than by a desire to smooth transitory income shocks. Introducing persistent but not permanent
income shocks would substantially complicate the model solution, but it is straightforward to introduce
completely transitory income shocks and thus a role for equity extraction in smoothing income shocks.
Doing so yields results that are very similar to the baseline model.38 Furthermore, our baseline analysis
assumes that regional income and house price shocks are uncorrelated. Since one of our points is that
the correlation between regional income and house prices changes across time, it is not obvious what
the correct correlation to feed into the model is. Nevertheless, we find that our baseline findings are
relatively conservative since results are amplified if we instead assume that regional income and house
price shocks are perfectly correlated.
  37 Using the high frequency monetary policy shocks from Gertler and Karadi (2015), we have explored whether the pass-
through of short-term monetary policy shocks to mortgage rates varies with house price growth in the economy. Running
a regression of monthly changes in the 30-year FRM rate on federal fund rate shocks interacted with annual national house
price growth, we find strong pass-through of federal fund rates to mortgage rates but no interaction with house price growth.
This suggests that any time-variation in the transmission of short to long rates that might exist in the data is orthogonal to
time-variation in the refinancing channel of monetary policy arising from movements in the distribution of equity.
  38 The standard deviation of these temporary shocks is set to 0.05 to match various estimates from earnings data.




                                                             37
8.5     Amortization and Lifecycle Effects

Our model features interest-only mortgages and so households do not accumulate equity through
amortization. This means that our baseline calibration may understate the speed of equity accumu-
lation in the data. Since households cannot buy or sell housing in our baseline model, faster house
price growth is similar to including amortization, and we find that our conclusions are amplified if we
increase house price growth. Thus, our baseline is again relatively conservative. Furthermore, lifecycle
effects mean that households tend to accumulate equity as they age. Lifecycle effects can potentially
have interesting interactions with the refinancing channel of monetary policy, as explored thoroughly
in Wong (2016). As Wong emphasizes, these effects may change over time with population aging, but
this is due to long-run secular trends and thus unlikely to drive the variation in effects of monetary
policy at business cycle frequencies, which are the focus of our analysis. We thus abstract from lifecycle
effects since they would substantially complicate our analysis by introducing another state variable.39


8.6     General Equilibrium Effects

Our baseline analysis allows for equilibrium offsets from the interaction between borrowers and
lenders, but the size of these offsets depends on the domestic share of lenders. Our baseline assumes
50 percent of mortgage payments ultimately go to non-US lenders, but measuring the foreign share of
lenders is difficult since a large share of mortgage debt is held by commercial banks, which are owned
in part by foreigners. As an additional robustness exercise, we explore two extreme assumptions for
mortgage debt holdings. This also allows us to assess the importance of equilibrium lender forces for
our results.40 As the foreign share of lenders declines, equilibrium effects grow in importance and
aggregate consumption responds less to rate cuts. However, short-run effects remain positive even in
the unrealistic case where all mortgage payments go to domestic households so none of our conclu-
sions about short-run stimulus-inequality trade-offs are altered. This is because, as discussed above,
cash-out refinancing is an important part of stimulus effects. Since we assume lenders are equally
distributed geographically, their behavior is irrelevant for cross-region results.
      While we endogenize lender offsets, our model treats income and house prices as exogenous to
simplify the analysis and provide more transparent intuition for our main mechanism. However,
endogenizing income and house prices in a more fully fledged DSGE framework should amplify
our conclusions. We find that refinancing activity and consumption responses to interest rates are
stronger in well-off regions. If some portion of spending is on non-tradable goods and if greater
mortgage borrowing drives up house prices, then income and house prices will rise more in initially
well-off locations, amplifying initial inequality. Similarly, endogenizing aggregate income and house
prices will amplify aggregate time variation if greater aggregate spending generates greater aggregate
income, as in New Keynesian models. In fact, in the representative agent model of Greenwald (2016),
endogenizing house prices indeed amplifies the feedback from equity shocks to monetary stimulus.41
      We also take aggregate inflation as exogenous. If inflation rises when interest rates fall, this in-
troduces a nominal debt revaluation effect which transfers resources from lenders to borrowers. Such
  39 Note also that our empirical results explicitly control for cross-region variation in demographics.
  40 Note that this is isomorphic to changing the MPC out of permanent income for lenders and so also provides robustness
to changing the consumption behavior of lenders.
  41 We thank Dan Greenwald for computing these results.




                                                           38
interactions are previously explored extensively in Auclert (2015).
      Finally, we take both r and r m as given and do not impose liquid asset market clearing. However,
when r m falls, liquid savings rise mildly. If we imposed asset market clearing, this would lead to a
small decline in r and increase consumption through standard intertemporal substitution channels.
Furthermore, this asset response increases with the strength of the refinancing response to r m . Thus,
imposing asset market clearing would complicate the model but amplify our effects.


8.7         Housing Adjustment and Default

We do not allow households to buy/sell housing or default on mortgages. Allowing households to
move to extract equity would complicate the setup but would produce similar non-linear interactions
between equity and consumption. Introducing a construction sector and endogenous housing should
also amplify our results. When households have more equity, there is more scope to purchase larger
houses and increased housing demand will 1) drive up house prices and amplify initial equity differ-
ences and 2) drive up construction, amplifying initial income differences.
      Introducing an option to default and move to rental housing should similarly amplify cross-region
effects, especially in an environment with endogenous house prices. Only underwater households face
default risk. When rates fall, mildly underwater households may put cash into their homes to refi-
nance, lower payments and avoid default but this is infeasible for deeply underwater households. As
foreclosures have negative spillovers to local house prices, the places initially hit by large house price
declines may enter house-price-foreclosure spirals. Since underwater homeowners in these locations
have little ability to refinance into lower payments, rate declines will have little effect on default in the
hardest hit locations and, thus, limited ability to arrest such foreclosure spirals.42


9      Conclusions
The Great Recession led to a prolonged period of monetary stimulus throughout much of the de-
veloped world. These policies are typically studied through the lens of representative agent New
Keynesian models, which emphasize the importance of intertemporal substitution. In this paper, we
explore a complementary channel of monetary transmission through collateralized lending and show
that understanding this channel requires moving beyond a representative borrower. Non-linear inter-
actions between collateral constraints, refinancing and spending mean that the distribution of housing
equity plays a crucial role in the economy’s response to interest rate declines.
      Using an equilibrium, heterogeneous household model of mortgage borrowing, we argue that
the cross-region distribution of housing equity during the Great Recession hampered the ability of
monetary policy to stimulate aggregate spending through the refinancing channel. Furthermore, large
variation in house price growth that was strongly correlated with local economic activity meant that
monetary stimulus largely flowed to the locations which needed it least. These theoretical conclusions
rest on the distribution of equity, which is assumed away in typical representative agent analyses.
    42 Of
        course, the welfare consequences of default must also account for the fact that homeowners may get some benefit from
living in their homes during lengthy foreclosure processes and could get some benefit in certain situations from strategic
default. However, we make no claims on the welfare consequences of default and merely argue that it would amplify the
effects of cross-region equity on monetary policy that are the focus of our analysis.



                                                            39
Under alternative distributions of housing equity, such as that observed in 2001, aggregate monetary
stimulus is much more powerful and can potentially moderate regional business cycles.
   We provide evidence of these collateral effects using novel household-level data on mortgage debt
and refinancing. We show that after QE1, there was an aggregate increase in refinancing but that there
was little response in the hardest hit regions, where many households were underwater. The empirical
distribution of house price growth was quite different during the 2001 recession: aggregate house price
growth was positive throughout the recession, and regional house price growth was uncorrelated with
local unemployment. Consistent with our theoretical predictions, there was much more refinancing
activity during the 2001 easing cycle than during the Great Recession, and refinancing was actually
more common in regions with high unemployment. Thus, the data confirms that variation over time in
the collateral distribution is key for understanding the time-varying consequences of monetary policy.
   Our data come from the US mortgage market, so our analysis focuses on regional house price
shocks since they are the dominant source of shocks to home equity. Changes in the distribution of
other types of collateral will generate many of the same implications for monetary policy, but the
relevant sources of shocks and heterogeneity may differ. For example, sectoral shocks may play an
important role in influencing the distribution of collateral across firms and influence the response
of investment to monetary policy through similar mechanisms. Variation across time in economic
activity and its correlation with housing equity and other forms of collateral is also not unique to the
US. Europe has experienced persistent cross-country differences in economic growth that are highly
correlated with house price movements. While the prominence of fixed-rate mortgages and other
institutional features of mortgage contracts differs between the US and Europe and across countries
within Europe, Section 8.1.1 shows that our conclusions are not particularly sensitive to variation in
fixed-rate shares. We leave a more thorough analysis of the effects of the collateral distribution in
these alternative contexts to future work, but our analysis suggests that central banks are likely to face
trade-offs which vary importantly with the distribution of collateral. Since this distribution varies over
time, tracking its evolution is crucial for accurately assessing the effects of monetary policy (see Fuster,
Guttman-Kenney, and Haughwout, 2016, for an effort along these lines).




                                                    40
References
Abel, Joshua and Andreas Fuster. 2018. “How Do Mortgage Refinances Affect Debt, Default, and Spending?
  Evidence from HARP.” Staff Report 841, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit
  Seru. 2016. “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from the Home Affordable Modification
  Program.” Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tim Landvoigt, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and
  Vincent Yao. 2017. “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition: Evidence From the Home
  Affordable Refinance Program.” Working Paper 21512, NBER.

Alpanda, Sami and Sarah Zubairy. 2017. “Household Debt Overhang and Transmission of Monetary Policy.”
  Working Paper.

Arrow, Kenneth J., Theodore Harris, and Jacob Marschak. 1951. “Optimal Inventory Policy.” Econometrica
  19 (3):250–272.

Auclert, Adrien. 2015. “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel.” Working Paper, MIT.

Avery, Robert B., Neil Bhutta, Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner. 2011. “The Mortgage Market in 2010:
  Highlights from the Data Reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 97 (6).

Barro, Robert. 1972. “A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment.” Review of Economic Studies 39 (1).

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2016. “The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business Cycles.”
  Working Paper 21956, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “House Prices and Consumer
  Spending.” Working Paper 21667, NBER.

Berger, David and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “Consumption Dynamics During Recessions.” Econometrica 83 (1).

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The financial accelerator in a quantitative business
  cycle framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1. Elsevier, 1341–1393.

Bhutta, Neil and Benjamin J. Keys. 2016. “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction during the Housing Boom.”
  American Economic Review 106 (7):1742–1774.

Brady, Peter J., Glenn B. Canner, and Dean M. Maki. 2000. “The Effects of Recent Mortgage Refinancing.” Federal
  Reserve Bulletin 86 (July):441–450.

Caballero, Ricardo and Eduardo Engel. 1999. “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A
  Generalized (S,s) Approach.” Econometrica 67.

Canner, Glenn, Karen Dynan, and Wayne Passmore. 2002. “Mortgage Refinancing in 2001 and Early 2002.”
  Federal Reserve Bulletin 88 (December):469–481.

Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy. 1997. “Collateral Damage: Refinancing Constraints and
  Regional Recessions.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29 (4):496–516.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “Manufacturing Decline, Housing Booms,
  and Non-Employment.” Working Paper 18949, NBER.


                                                      41
Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov. 2013. “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Refinancing and
  Macroeconomic Uncertainty.” Working Paper 19421, NBER.

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven. 2012. “Credit booms and lending standards: Evidence from
  the subprime mortgage market.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (2-3).

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Thomas Piskorski, Rodney Ramcharan, Amit Seru, and
  Vincent Yao. 2017. “Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household Consumption, and Voluntary
  Deleveraging.” American Economic Review forthcoming.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer. 2016. “How Quantitative Easing Works: Evidence
  on the Refinancing Channel.” Working Paper 22638, NBER.

Frame, W. Scott, Andreas Fuster, Joseph Tracy, and James Vickery. 2015. “The Rescue of Fannie Mae and Freddie
  Mac.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (2):25–52.

Fratantoni, Michael and Scott Schuh. 2003. “Monetary policy, housing, and heterogeneous regional markets.”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35 (4):557–589.

Fuster, Andreas, Benedict Guttman-Kenney, and Andrew Haughwout. 2016. “Tracking and Stress-Testing U.S.
  Household Leverage.” Staff Report 787, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Fuster, Andreas, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen. 2017. “The Time-Varying Price of Financial Intermediation
  in the Mortgage Market.” Staff Report 805, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Fuster, Andreas and Paul S. Willen. 2010. “$1.25 Trillion is Still Real Money: Some Facts About the Effects of the
  Federal Reserve’s Mortgage Market Investments.” Public Policy Discussion Paper 10-4, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Boston.

Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel. 2017. “The Effect of Debt on Default and Consumption: Evidence from Housing
  Policy in the Great Recession.” Working Paper, Harvard University.

Garriga, Carlos, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek. 2013. “Mortgages and Monetary Policy.” Working Paper
  19744, NBER.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi. 2015. “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity.” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1):44–76.

Gilchrist, Simon, David Lopez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2015. “Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs
  at the Zero Lower Bound.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1).

Greenwald, Daniel L. 2016. “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission.” Working Paper,
  MIT Sloan.

Guren, Adam, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Timothy McQuade. 2017. “Mortgage Design in an Equilibrium
  Model of the Housing Market.” Working Paper.

Hanson, Samuel G., David O. Lucca, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2017. “Interest Rate Conundrums in the Twenty-
  First Century.” Staff Report 810, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Hedlund, Aaron, Fatih Karahan, Kurt Mitman, and Serdar Ozkan. 2017. “Monetary Policy, Heterogeneity, and
  the Housing Channel.” Working Paper.

Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance economies.” Journal of
 Economic Dynamics and Control 17 (5):953–969.

                                                       42
Hurst, Erik, Benjamin J. Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph S. Vavra. 2016. “Regional Redistribution Through the US
 Mortgage Market.” American Economic Review 106 (10).

Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford. 2004. “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and Household
 Consumption.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36 (6):985–1014.

Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business cycle.”
   American Economic Review 95 (3):739–764.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “How Much Consumption Insurance beyond Self-Insurance?”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4):53–87.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
  Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4):1687–1726.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2014. “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?” Econometrica 82 (6):2197–
  2223.

Rubio, Margarita. 2011. “Fixed- and Variable-Rate Mortgages, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy.” Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 43 (4):657–688.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss. 1977. “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment.” Review of Economic Studies
  44 (2):287–303.

Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra. 2016. “House prices, local demand, and retail prices.” Tech. rep., National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

Vavra, Joseph. 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Interpretation.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1).

Winberry, Thomas. 2016. “Lumpy Investment, Business Cycles and Stimulus Policy.” Working Paper, University
  of Chicago.

Wong, Arlene. 2016. “Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption.” Working
 Paper, Northwestern University.




                                                      43
                                    Online Appendix
A.1     MSA Groups Used in Figures 3, 4, and 5
Note: For large MSAs that are subdivided into Metropolitan Divisions, we use the latter (throughout
the paper).


MSAs in the quartile with lowest Emed in November 2008:
Akron, OH; Anderson, IN; Bakersfield, CA; Bangor, ME; Battle Creek, MI; Bay City, MI; Bradenton-Sarasota-Venice, FL;
Canton-Massillon, OH; Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL; Carson City, NV; Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH; Dalton, GA; Danville,
IL; Dayton, OH; Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL; Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI; El Centro, CA; Elizabethtown,
KY; Elkhart-Goshen, IN; Fairbanks, AK; Flint, MI; Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-Deerfield Beach, FL; Fort Walton Beach-
Crestview-Destin, FL; Fort Wayne, IN; Fresno, CA; Grand Rapids-Wyoming, MI; Greeley, CO; Hagerstown-Martinsburg, MD-
WV; Hanford-Corcoran, CA; Holland-Grand Haven, MI; Indianapolis-Carmel, IN; Jackson, MI; Jacksonville, FL; Kalamazoo-
Portage, MI; Kankakee-Bradley, IL; Lake Havasu City-Kingman, AZ; Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL; Lansing-East Lansing, MI;
Las Vegas-Paradise, NV; Madera-Chowchilla, CA; Mansfield, OH; Memphis, TN-MS-AR; Merced, CA; Miami-Miami Beach-
Kendall, FL; Modesto, CA; Monroe, MI; Muskegon-Norton Shores, MI; Napa, CA; Naples-Marco Island, FL; Niles-Benton
Harbor, MI; Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA; Ocala, FL; Orlando-Kissimmee, FL; Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA; Palm
Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL; Palm Coast, FL; Panama City-Lynn Haven-Panama City Beach, FL; Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent,
FL; Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ; Port St. Lucie, FL; Providence-New Bedford-Fall River, RI-MA; Punta Gorda, FL; Redding,
CA; Reno-Sparks, NV; Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA; Sacramento–Arden-Arcade–Roseville, CA; Saginaw-Saginaw
Township North, MI; Salinas, CA; San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA; Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA; Sebastian-Vero Beach, FL;
Springfield, OH; St. George, UT; Stockton, CA; Sumter, SC; Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL; Terre Haute, IN; Toledo,
OH; Vallejo-Fairfield, CA; Visalia-Porterville, CA; Warren-Troy-Farmington Hills, MI; Weirton-Steubenville, WV-OH; West
Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FL; Wheeling, WV-OH; Winchester, VA-WV; Worcester, MA; Youngstown-Warren-
Boardman, OH-PA; Yuba City, CA; Yuma, AZ.



MSAs in the quartile with highest Emed in November 2008:
Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY; Alexandria, LA; Anderson, SC; Asheville, NC; Athens-Clarke County, GA; Austin-Round
Rock, TX; Baltimore-Towson, MD; Barnstable Town, MA; Baton Rouge, LA; Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX; Bellingham, WA;
Bethesda-Frederick-Rockville, MD; Billings, MT; Binghamton, NY; Bismarck, ND; Blacksburg-Christiansburg-Radford, VA;
Boulder, CO; Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT; Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY; Burlington-South Burlington, VT; Cambridge-
Newton-Framingham, MA; Cedar Rapids, IA; Charleston, WV; Charlottesville, VA; Cleveland, TN; College Station-Bryan,
TX; Corvallis, OR; Cumberland, MD-WV; Dubuque, IA; Duluth, MN-WI; Durham-Chapel Hill, NC; Edison-New Brunswick,
NJ; Elmira, NY; Eugene-Springfield, OR; Fargo, ND-MN; Florence, SC; Fort Smith, AR-OK; Glens Falls, NY; Grand Forks,
ND-MN; Grand Junction, CO; Great Falls, MT; Greenville-Mauldin-Easley, SC; Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA; Harrisonburg, VA;
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT; Honolulu, HI; Hot Springs, AR; Houma-Bayou Cane-Thibodaux, LA; Huntsville,
AL; Iowa City, IA; Johnson City, TN; Kingsport-Bristol-Bristol, TN-VA; Lafayette, LA; Lake Charles, LA; Lancaster, PA;
Lawrence, KS; Lebanon, PA; Longview, WA; Lynchburg, VA; Midland, TX; Missoula, MT; Mobile, AL; Mount Vernon-
Anacortes, WA; Nassau-Suffolk, NY; New Orleans-Metairie-Kenner, LA; New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-NJ; Ocean City,
NJ; Philadelphia, PA; Pittsburgh, PA; Pittsfield, MA; Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton, OR-WA; Raleigh-Cary, NC; Reading,
PA; Roanoke, VA; Salem, OR; San Angelo, TX; San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA; San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara,
CA; Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA; Sioux City, IA-NE-SD; Sioux Falls, SD; Spokane, WA; State College, PA; Trenton-Ewing,
NJ; Tulsa, OK; Victoria, TX; Wenatchee-East Wenatchee, WA; Williamsport, PA; Wilmington, NC; Yakima, WA; York-Hanover,
PA.




                                                           1
A.2      Additional Data Description
A.2.1    CRISM
We start with a 50% sample of all McDash (also known as LPS) mortgages linked to Equifax credit
records that were outstanding for at least one month between January 2007 and December 2010. The
CRISM data set provides the linked Equifax credit records for each McDash mortgage for the lifetime
of the loan, including an additional 6 months before origination and after termination. This link
is done directly by Equifax. Credit records provide a consumer’s total outstanding debt amounts in
different categories (first-lien mortgages, second-lien mortgages, home equity lines of credit [HELOCs],
auto loans, etc.). Additionally, in any month, Equifax provides the origination date, amount, and
remaining principal balance of the two largest (in balance terms) first mortgages, closed-end seconds,
and HELOCs outstanding for a given consumer.
    We convert these records into a loan-level panel with each loan’s type, origination month, origi-
nation amount, termination month, and remaining principal balance for all months that the loan is
outstanding. We restrict our sample to those consumers who start our sample with two or fewer loans
in each category and never have more than three of any of these types of loans outstanding.1 This
amounts to about 96% of the population of Equifax borrower IDs, and these IDs cover about 90% of
the loans in McDash. In creating this loan-level data set, we assume that the month in which the loan
stops appearing in Equifax is the month that it was terminated.
    The variables that McDash provides are already in the form of a loan-level panel and include:
origination date, origination amount, remaining principal balance, termination date, termination type,
lien type, interest type, property zip code, and purpose type. We match these to our Equifax panel. We
consider an Equifax loan/McDash loan pairing a match if the origination date of the Equifax loan is
within 1 month and the origination amount is within $10,000 of the McDash loan. If more than one loan
is matched, we use the origination amount, date, termination date, zip code, and termination balance
as tiebreakers. We are able to match more than 93% of McDash loans using these restrictions, with
more than 80% matching the origination information perfectly (up to $1 in balances due to rounding).
    We use the set of Equifax/McDash matched loans as our universe in our analysis. Owing to
the restrictions above, this amounts to about 82% of the McDash universe. We also verify that we
are correctly measuring the termination date and termination balance using the Equifax records by
checking these variables against their McDash counterparts for the matched loans.
    Over our period of interest (2008-9), our sample contains about 15 million mortgages per month;
per MSA-month, we have on average 39,200 mortgages. One way to assess the coverage of our sample
is to compare the outstanding mortgage balances by MSA to those in the FRBNY Consumer Credit
Panel (CCP). The balances in our sample correspond on average to 29% of those in the CCP (with little
variation over time), with a cross-sectional standard deviation across MSAs of 5% (the 25th percentile
is at 26%, the 75th percentile at 32%). Since we start with a 50% random sample from CRISM and apply
some filters as explained above, this means that CRISM covers over 60% of outstanding mortgages over
this period.

A.2.2    Measuring Refinancing Propensities
Our goal is to measure the proportion of outstanding loans in an MSA that were refinanced in a given
month. For the denominator, we start with all outstanding first liens (where lien type is measured
using the McDash variable) in our Equifax/McDash matched universe, but exclude in each month
loans that terminate in the next month because they were transferred to another servicer or terminate
   1 This restriction allows us to infer the origination month, origination balance, and balance of the third largest loan of

any loan type even though this information does not appear explicitly in Equifax, where if the third largest loan is also the
newest loan, we assume its origination month to be the first month it appears in Equifax. We also drop loans that do not
have complete consecutive Equifax records.



                                                             2
for unknown reasons (since we will be looking at the proportion of loans that are voluntarily paid off
and refinanced).
    We count a loan as being refinanced if: (1) its McDash termination type is a "voluntary payoff,"
and (2) for that consumer, there is another loan that is opened around the time of the first loan’s
termination on the same property (i.e. the new loan is a refinance, rather than a new purchase loan).
More specifically, the most clear indicator that the new loan was a refinance is if the loan has a matching
McDash loan (about 70%), and that McDash loan is marked as a refinance loan (in McDash’s purpose
type variable). On the other hand, the loan is clearly a new purchase loan if the purpose type is marked
as such. However, about 25% of McDash loans have purpose type "Unknown" or "Other," and about
30% of the new loans are not matched in McDash (they only appear in Equifax, since McDash does
not cover the entire market) and thus have no purpose type attached.
    We thus use the following rules to identify refinances. We start by looking for any loan in the
Equifax data set that has an open date within 4 months of the McDash loan’s termination date. We
find at least one such loan for about 81% of the voluntary terminations in 2008 and 2009. We classify
these new loans as a refinance if either:

   • The loan also appears in McDash and is tagged as a refinance in the purpose-type variable (61%
     of the McDash-matched loans).

   • The loan also appears in McDash and is tagged as an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type, and
     has the same property zip code as the original loan.

   • The loan appears only in Equifax but the borrower’s Equifax address does not change in the 6
     months following the termination of the original loan.

    This allows us to compute our measure of interest, the balance-weighted refinance propensity, as
(balance outstanding in t-1 of loans that were refinanced in month t) / (balance outstanding in McDash
in month t-1 that does not terminate for unknown reason in month t).
    As a check, we calculate the refinance propensities separately for the three different cases above
(McDash, known purpose; McDash, unknown purpose; Equifax), and find that these refinance propen-
sities are very similar.

A.2.3   Measuring Cash-outs
To measure cash-out refinancings, we need to both identify refinances and how the balance of the new
loan compares to the outstanding balace of the loan(s) paid off in the process.
    We begin with Equifax/McDash first liens (again using the McDash lien type variable), and keep
only those loans that have a McDash purpose type of refinance or unknown/other. Our algorithm to
identify whether our new loan is a refinance is similar to the algorithm above. This time, we look for
a loan (or loans) in Equifax that terminate(s) around the time when the new loan is originated and
check that this loan looks like it was refinanced. We use McDash refinances rather than outstanding
loans as our point of reference for these statistics so that we can better represent all refinances, rather
than introducing potential bias through only seeing refinances of McDash loans.
    Specifically, we call any loan in the Equifax data set that terminates between -1 and 4 months from
our new loan’s close date a "linked" loan, including first mortgages as well as closed-end seconds and
HELOCs, and we call the new loan a refinance if:

   • The loan is a known refinance in McDash. (For 86% of these, we find a linked loan in either
     McDash or Equifax. For the remaining 14%, we would consider these refinances where there was
     no previous loan on the property.)

   • The loan has an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type in McDash and a linked loan in McDash
     that has a matching property zip code.

                                                    3
   • The loan has an "Unknown" or "Other" purpose type in McDash and a linked loan that appears
     only in Equifax, but the consumer’s Equifax address does not change in the 6 months after the
     new loan was opened.

    If there is more than one linked loan that is a first mortgage in Equifax, we link only the loan that
is closest in balance to the origination amount of the new mortgage. We also allow to be linked only
those Equifax loans that exist in the Equifax data for at least three months to prevent the refinanced
loan balance from being counted in the old balance of the loan.
    For each of these cases, we can then calculate the cash-out amount as the difference between the
origination amount on the refinance loan and the balance of the linked loan(s) at termination. In
order to capture the correct origination amount on the refinance loan, we want to ensure that we are
also including any "piggyback" second liens that are opened with the refinance loan that we find in
McDash. Thus, we look for any loan in the Equifax record linked to our refinance loan that has an
Equifax open date within three months of our refinance loan and an origination balance of less than
25% of our loan’s origination balance if labeled a first mortgage and less than 125% of the refinance
loan’s origination balance if labeled a HELOC or CES, and add the balance of these piggyback seconds
to the refi origination amount when calculating cash-out amounts.2 To eliminate outliers, we also drop
cash-out and "cash-in" amounts that are greater than $1,000,000. These amount to dropping less than
0.05% of the refinance loans.
    At the MSA level, this allows us to calculate the amount cashed out relative to the total outstanding
balance in month t-1. To estimate total dollar amounts cashed out, we scale up the amount cashed out
by the ratio of total housing debt outstanding in an MSA according to the FRBNY Consumer Credit
Panel (CCP) relative to the total outstanding balance in our CRISM sample. (The CCP amounts are
available as end-of-quarter snapshots, so we interpolate between them to get a monthly series.)
    In Figure A-9, we compare the total estimated quarterly cash-out amounts to those estimated on
prime conventional loans by Freddie Mac.3 The figure shows that the two series co-move closely and
also show similar levels. The higher level in CRISM is expected, since the Freddie Mac series does not
include subprime/Alt-A as well as FHA and VA loans.

A.2.4    Measuring CLTVs/Equity
We start with all matched first-lien McDash loans. For a given month, we take the corresponding
Equifax record and assign all outstanding second liens to the outstanding first liens in Equifax using
the rule that each second lien is assigned to the largest first lien (in balance terms) that was opened
on or before the second lien’s opening date. We then add the assigned second lien balance(s) to the
McDash balance of our original loan as our measure of secured debt on a property, which is the
numerator of CLTV. For the denominator, the estimated updated property value, we start from the
appraisal amount of the property at the time of the McDash loan origination and update it based
on the local home price index from CoreLogic (using the zip-code-level index if available, and the
MSA-level index if not).
   Equity is simply defined as 1 − CLTV. When taking medians within an MSA (our measure Emed        j,t ),
we weight individual observations by their current outstanding first-lien loan balance (from McDash).

A.2.5    Household-level Analysis of Car Spending Around Refinancing
In Section 4.4.1, we study the response of car purchases to refinancing at the borrower level. To do so,
we start out with a random 50% sample of borrowers in our CRISM sample who refinance at some
  2 We  impose these upper bounds because we want to avoid picking up other first lien mortgages (to purchase another
property) the borrower might originate at the same time.
   3 To make the two comparable, we multiply our CRISM total by 1/0.9175, where 0.9175 is the share of mortgage balances

in CRISM that is in MSAs (as opposed to micropolitan statistical areas or rural areas) as of November 2008.



                                                           4
point over the year 2009. (We only use 50% for computational reasons.) We obtain monthly information
on these borrowers’ car loans from their Equifax credit records (we sum two categories, "auto bank"—
loans provided by banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations—and "auto finance"—loans
provided by automobile dealers and automobile financing companies) starting 6 months before the
refinancing date until 12 months after. We only retain borrowers for whom there is only one refinancing
in the data over this period. This leaves us with 676,425 refinancers.
    We mark a borrower as obtaining a new car loan in a month if the total balance of car loans
outstanding increases by $2,000 or more (following Agarwal et al., 2017); results are similar if we use
different cutoffs. For Figure 6, we distinguish between non-cashout-refinances and cash-out refinances,
where a refinance is categorized as the latter if 0.98 times the balance of the refinance loan (including
simultaneously opened junior liens, as described in Section A.2.3) is at least $5,000 above the balance
of the old loan(s) that are paid off. Subtracting the 2 percent of the new loan amount is done in order
to account for the fact that some of the cashed out amount may be used to cover costs associated with
the refinancing. This threshold is close to the binary indicator used by GSEs, and conclusions are not
sensitive to altering the cutoff. According to this metric, 44 percent of refinances in our 2009 sample
were cash-outs.

A.2.6       HMDA
For robustness, in Figure A-5 we use a different measure of refinancing activity based on data made
available as part of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), which requires mortgage lenders
to report information on mortgage applications and originations. The HMDA data are generally
perceived to be the most comprehensive and representative source of information on mortgage ap-
plications and originations, with market coverage estimated to be around 90%.4 For each application,
HMDA reports the geographic location of the property, the desired loan amount, the loan purpose
(purchase or refinance), and whether the loan application led to an origination, was rejected by the
lender, or was withdrawn by the borrower.5 While the public-use HMDA data contain only calendar
year indicators, the private-use version of the data set (available to users within the Federal Reserve
System) also contains the exact application date and the exact action date. The action date is the date
on which the loan is originated, the application is rejected, or the application is withdrawn. These ex-
act dates make the data suitable for high frequency event studies (see, for example, Fuster and Willen,
2010). In all our analysis using HMDA data, we retain only applications that led to originations (ac-
tion code = 1), and always use the application date (rather than the action date). We drop multifamily
properties and mortgages with an origination amount >$3 million (about 0.015% of loans).
    While the HMDA data are ideal for measuring the flow volume of mortgage origination activity
across locations, it has two prominent limitations. First, for refinance loans, the HMDA data do not
include any information on the loan that is paid off. As a result, we cannot use the HMDA data to
estimate the extent to which households are removing cash from their mortgage during the refinancing
process—a limitation we overcome with the CRISM data we focus on in the main paper. Second, the
HMDA data do not include any information on the loans after they are originated. Thus, HMDA is not
informative about how many outstanding mortgages there are in an MSA. The stock of outstanding
mortgages is necessary to measure a refinancing propensity.
    To obtain an estimate of the number of outstanding mortgages in each MSA, we supplement
HMDA with data from the 2008 American Community Survey (ACS), which reports the number
of outstanding mortgages (but not their amount) and the number of households for fine geographic
areas. Since the ACS samples only a fraction of the population, we scale up the number of households
based on Census information on the overall number of households in the US in 2008. We use the same
scaling factor for the number of mortgages in each location. By combining the ACS data with the
  4 See,
       for instance Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven (2012).
  5 Thereare actually three designated loan types within the HMDA data: origination, refinancing, and home improvement.
We combine the home improvement loans with the refinancing ones in our work below.


                                                          5
HMDA data, we can compute the number of loan originations per number of outstanding mortgages
for each location within the U.S.
    The measures of MSA-level refinancing propensities in late 2008/early 2009 are highly correlated
between the HMDA data and the CRISM data, once we account for the lag in CRISM relative to HMDA.
The population-weighted cross-sectional correlation between the HMDA refinance propensity in De-
cember 2008 and the CRISM refinance propensity in January (February) 2009 is 0.87 (0.88). Pooling the
second half of 2008 and the first half of 2009, the correlation between HMDA and CRISM propensities
is 0.84 for the one-month-forward and 0.78 for the two-month-forward CRISM propensities.

A.2.7   Other Data
We now briefly describe some additional data used in our analysis. We measure unemployment rates
for each MSA using data from the BLS’s Local Area Unemployment Statistics. Our measure of labor
income is based on the Individual Income Tax ZIP Code Data made available by the Internal Revenue
Service. We first cumulate wage and salary incomes at the MSA level and then divide by the number of
tax returns. We exclude tax returns from the top income category (>$200,000) since those households
can play a dominant role in driving average income changes; however, they are likely not the ones for
which payment-to-income constraints (which we want to proxy for) are most relevant. Including those
households, using adjusted gross income instead of wage and salary income, using the growth over
2007-2008 instead of 2008-2009, or using the income level instead of the growth rate does not change
any of our conclusions in the regression tables below.
    Our MSA-level demographic controls come from the ACS. We combine the 2007 and 2008 data to
ensure the sample sizes are large enough to minimize measurement error. We measure each MSA’s age
composition, education composition, the percentage of homeowners, and the percentage of households
with a mortgage. We restrict the ACS data to those individuals between the ages of 21 and 75 (inclusive)
that were not living in group quarters (e.g., dorms, prisons, or medical facilities).


A.3     Model Proofs and Description of Numerical Solution
We provide here the proof of the homogeneity of the value function as well as a description of our
computational procedure.
    To show the homogeneity property, we proceed by guess and verify. The value functions for
refinancing and not refinancing are

                                                                        ( ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr0m x̃ − â0 )1−σ σ−1
        V   nore f i
                       ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F, 1) p̃σ−1
                                                             = max                                                       p̃
                                                                { â0 }                   1−σ
                                                                             x̃ 0                 0
                                                             + βE[V ( â0 , ỹ0 , x̃ 0 , r0m , r m , r 0 , F 0 , 1)( p̃0 )σ−1 |ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, 1]
                                                                              x̃
                                                                        ( ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr m + γ( x̃ − 1) − F − â0 )1−σ σ−1
                 V re f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, 1) p̃σ−1 = max                                                                              p̃
                                                                { â0 }                               1−σ
                                                                             x̃ 0    x̃ 0           0
                                                             + βE[V ( â0 , ỹ0 , , r m , r m , r 0 , F 0 , 1)( p̃0 )σ−1 |ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F, 1]
                                                                              x̃      x̃


Then we can eliminate p̃ as a state variable to obtain the transformed value function,


                         J ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ) = max{ J nore f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ), J re f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F )}
                                                                         ( ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr0m x̃ − â0 )1−σ
               J nore f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r0m , r m , r, F ) = max
                                                               { â0 }                   1−σ

                                                                                    6
                                                                                              0                                                                  
                                                             (1−σ)(µq −π )              0 x̃          0        0              0
                                                      + βe                   E J ( â              , ỹ , x̃       , r0m , r m , r 0 , F 0 )|ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F
                                                                                          x̃
                                                                 ( ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr m + γ( x̃ − 1) − F − â0 )1−σ
                        J re f i ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r m , r, F ) = max
                                                         { ã0 }                          1−σ
                                                                                       0      0                              
                                                            (1−σ)(µq −π )          0 x̃   0 x̃   m m0 0   0
                                                      + βe                 E J ( â , ỹ , , r , r , r , F )|ỹ, x̃, r , r, F
                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                      x̃     x̃


       In order to solve the transformed value function, we discretize log x̃ using 60 grid points evenly
spaced with width µq between 0.45 and -1.025, 64 grid points for ã between 0 and 1, with more grid
points near the lower asset values to account for the concavity of the value function, and 46 grid points
for ỹ evenly spaced in logs between -0.5 and 0.5. The stochastic shock can take on 3 values: -1SD, 0,
and +1SD with probabilities computed using the Tauchen algorithm. Households assume that interest
rates will remain constant in the future, and the model is solved with both r m = 0.06 and r m = 0.05.
The short-term interest rate r is permanently set to 0.03. The model is then solved using value function
iteration. Finally, the model is simulated using 50,000 households and 9 regions. Households are
initialized at median income and no assets in a middle income, middle house price region and 300
years of the model are discarded as an initial burn-in. Using a longer burn-in period or changing
initial conditions prior to the burn-in period leaves results unchanged.
       A number of alternative models are explored in Sections 7 and 8 which involve changes to the
baseline computational setup.
       In the version of the model with ARMs, we assume that the households with ARMs’ current
payment moves one-for-one with the current mortgage rate when not refinancing. In particular, the
J nore f i is identical except that r0m is always equal to r m .
       We calibrate the ARM share in bad regions to 30 percent, the ARM share in the middle regions
to 20 percent and in the good regions to 10 percent. As described in the text, this is a conservative
calibration for assessing the importance of ARMs since it overstates the actual variation in interest
rate flexibility across space in 2008 as most ARMs do not have substantive rate resets during the QE
episode.
       We next explore a version of the model in which the housing bust in 2008 is preceded by a house
price boom. Specifically, we assume that in the period before the Great Recession, there is an aggregate
house price increase of 10% and a regional shock of ±7.5% that is perfectly negatively correlated with
the shock during the bust. This roughly captures house price movements in the last year of the housing
boom. We do not recalibrate parameters in this exercise to match the effects of QE1, but they are similar
to the baseline.
       We then move to a model which partially endogenizes the cash-out decision when refinancing. In
particular, we let households choose between two different options when refinancing: 1) Extracting
all of their housing equity when refinancing, as in our baseline. 2) Extracting no equity and only
resetting the rate. In this model, we now have three value functions: J nore f i , J re f i and cash−out , J re f i rate only .
J re f i and cash−out is identical to J re f i in the original problem (except with a continuation value that maxi-
mizes over three rather than two value functions). When doing a pure rate-refi, the mortgage balance
is unchanged but the household pays a fixed cost to change their fixed rate to the current mortgage
rate in the economy. This means that J re f i rate only is identical to J nore f i except that the rate adjusts to
the current mortgage rate and the household must pay the refinancing cost. Note also that this value
function is identical to that for the ARM model above, except that the household must pay the fixed
cost to obtain the current rate instead of obtaining it for free:


                re f i rate only              m                       ( ã(1 + r ) + ỹ − γr m x̃ − F − â0 )1−σ
            J                      ( ã, ỹ, x̃, r , r, F ) = max
                                                              { â0 }                   1−σ


                                                                             7
                                                                             0                                                  
                                            (1−σ)(µq −π )              0 x̃          0   0       m0   0    0
                                     + βe                   E J ( â                         m                       m
                                                                                  , ỹ , x̃ , r , r , r , F )|ỹ, x̃, r , r, F
                                                                         x̃

    Also note that this model introduces no new parameters, so the calibration strategy is identical to
that in the baseline model. Ultimately, few households in the model choose to do rate only-refinancing
with no cash-out even when they have this option, because the general equity accumulation and
extraction problem still plays a primary role in decisions. A household who is contemplating a rate
only refinance today still knows that in the future, they will eventually want to extract equity. Since the
fixed cost of refinancing is the same whether they extract equity or not today, it makes sense to extract
equity when refinancing to secure the low rate rather than doing a rate refi today and then paying the
fixed cost again in the near future to extract equity.
    Since we write the above value functions for general interest rate processes, the statement of the
problem with stochastic interest rates is identical to that in the baseline model with a one-time unantic-
ipated shock. Computationally, in the baseline model with a one-time shock, we only need to solve the
model for two values of r m to compute impulse responses, and we do not need to calculate expectations
over r m . In the model with stochastic mortgage rates, r m takes on 5 values with probabilities computed
using the Tauchen algorithm, and this state-variable enters expectations in the value function.




                                                        8
A.4    Appendix Tables and Figures
This section provides additional tables and figures referred to in the main text.

   • Table A-1 provides descriptive statistics on the 381 MSAs in our sample, including all the local
     control variables used in regressions reported in Tables A-2 to A-5.

   • Table A-2 documents the correlations between Emed
                                                   Nov2008 and other local controls.

   • Table A-3 provides the results from regressions of refinancing propensities on EmedNov2008 and other
     local controls, all interacted with a post-QE indicator (equation (1)), discussed in Section 4.3.

   • Table A-4 provides the results from regressions of cash-out shares on EmedNov2008 interacted with
     post-QE indicator and other local controls (including refinancing propensities in the last column),
     discussed in Section 4.4.

   • Table A-5 provides the results from regressions of log(auto sales) on Emed
                                                                            Nov2008 interacted with post-
     QE indicator, refinancing propensities and cash-out shares, discussed in Section 4.4 (footnote 17).

   • Figure A-1 shows that refinancing activity in HMDA data follows similar patterns to those shown
     in Figure 1, and that there was no discernible increase in purchase mortgage activity around QE1.

   • Figure A-2 shows that Emed
                             Nov2008 is highly correlated with local shares of borrowers that have
     CLTV> 80 or CLTV> 100, illustrating that the equity of the median borrower correlates strongly
     with other moments of the equity distribution, as discussed in Section 4.2.

   • Figure A-3 shows distributions of MSA-median and individual-level equity in January 2007 and
     November 2008, as discussed in Section 4.2.

   • Figure A-4 shows the relationships between Emed
                                                 Nov2008 and local house price growth over Jan 2007-
                               med
     Nov 2008, and between ENov2008 and changes in the local unemployment rate over Jan 2007-Nov
     2008, as discussed in Section 4.2.

   • Figure A-5 shows that the patterns shown in Figure 3 are very similar when using the HMDA
     data, where we can sum originated refinance mortgages by their application date. The figures
     show that activity jumped right after the QE1 announcement, and more so in high equity MSAs.

   • Figure A-6 shows that there was essentially no variation in rates on new mortgages between high
     and low equity MSAs, as discussed in Section 4.2.

   • Figure A-7 shows that there was no bunching in PTI ratios and no differences across high and
     low equity MSAs in the PTI distribution in 2009, while there is strong bunching and differences
     across MSA groups in CLTVs, as discussed in Section 4.2.

   • Figure A-8 shows that non-housing debt increased in high equity MSAs relative to low equity
     MSAs following QE1, as discussed in Section 4.4.

   • Figure A-9 shows that cash-out amounts in CRISM comove closely with those in Freddie Mac
     data, as disucssed in Appendix A.2.3.

   • Figure A-10 shows that the household-level distribution of equity in the 2008 calibration of our
     model is a good fit to the empirical distribution shown in Figure A-3, as discussed in Section 6.2.

   • Figure A-11 shows how the refinancing threshold in our model changes with assets and earnings.

   • Figure A-12 shows the separate contributions of borrowers and lenders to the aggregate con-
     sumption impulse response in the 2008 baseline model shown in Figure 11.

                                                   9
    • Figure A-13 shows the consumption response in the model under different assumptions about
      the share of lenders that are in the domestic economy, as discussed in Section 8.6.

    • Figure A-14 shows that shifts in the mean of the equity distribution have effects on monetary
      policy that depend on the variance of the distribution, as discussed in Section 6.4.2.

    • Figure A-15 shows how ARM shares as of November 2008 and ARM payment reductions over
      Nov 2008-June 2009 are related to Emed
                                         Nov2008 , as discussed in Section 8.1.1.

    • Figures A-16-A-18 show results from additional robustness checks discussed in Section 8.




             Table A-1: Descriptive Statistics. Data on 381 MSAs; statistics are unweighted.


                                                           Mean      SD      p10      p25      p50      p75      p90
          Median equity share (Emed ), Jan 2007            0.293    0.066   0.209    0.243    0.289    0.345    0.383
          Median equity share (Emed ), Nov 2008            0.160    0.110   0.015    0.120    0.190    0.230    0.261

          ∆ House Price Index, Jan 2007-Nov 2008           -0.111   0.113   -0.286   -0.161   -0.086   -0.033   0.010
          ∆ Unemployment, Jan 2007-Nov 2008                2.297    1.370   0.700    1.400     2.100    3.000   4.100
          ∆ Labor Income, 2008-2009                        0.003    0.022   -0.022   -0.009    0.003    0.017   0.025

          Average mortgage characteristics as of Nov 2008 (based on CRISM):
          FICO score                                        701.8    17.4  679.4     689.4    701.6    714.9    723.5
          Current interest rate (%)                          6.23    0.16   6.02      6.13     6.23     6.34     6.43
          Loan age (months)                                  39.3     3.8   34.6      36.6     39.1     41.6     44.8
          Share jumbos (based on current balance)           0.046 0.048 0.007        0.014    0.029    0.063    0.115
          Average balance of non-jumbo loans (1000s) 130.7           46.2   87.3     100.0    117.3    153.2    181.2
          Share adjustable-rate mortgages                   0.136 0.098 0.057        0.070    0.098    0.171    0.272
          Share GSE securitized                             0.615 0.097 0.498        0.572    0.631    0.676    0.721
          Share privately securitized                       0.158 0.086 0.083        0.103    0.127    0.180    0.262

          Local demographics (based on ACS):
          Years of education (shares)
            12                                             0.147    0.033   0.105    0.124    0.146    0.170    0.192
            13-15                                          0.315    0.042   0.262    0.287    0.316    0.339    0.371
            16                                             0.172    0.048   0.112    0.135    0.168    0.203    0.234
            >16                                            0.266    0.026   0.236    0.250    0.263    0.281    0.300
          Age group (shares)
            31-45                                          0.286    0.026   0.252    0.271    0.285    0.303    0.318
            46-40                                          0.340    0.024   0.311    0.326    0.340    0.356    0.370
            >60                                            0.206    0.038   0.167    0.183    0.202    0.223    0.244
          Homeowners (share)                               0.779    0.053   0.712    0.751    0.785    0.813    0.839
          Mortgage borrowers (share)                       0.543    0.065   0.454    0.505    0.552    0.591    0.619

Table shows descriptive statistics for all 381 MSAs in our analysis sample, including the distribution of median equity shares
(Emed ) in January 2007 and November 2008, the distribution of house price and unemployment rate changes (in percent
and percentage points, respectively) between January 2007 and November 2008, the distribution of changes in average labor
income between 2008 and 2009, distributions of a number of characteristics of the outstanding mortgages in each MSA as
of November 2008 (taking balance-weighted averages within each MSA), and local demographic characteristics as of 2008.
For years of education and age groups, the base categories (<12 years of education; ages 21-30) are not shown. The share of
mortgage borrowers is relative to all households, not just homeowners.



                                                             10
                             Table A-2: Relationships between Median Equity and Unemployment Increases as well as Various
                             Average Characteristics of Outstanding Mortgages


                                                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                                  ∆ Unemployment, Jan 2007-Nov 2008           -0.0597***                                                   -0.00236
                                                                               (0.00877)                                                   (0.00434)
                                  ∆ Labor Income, 2008-09                                  3.705***                                          0.423
                                                                                            (0.513)                                         (0.257)
                                  FICO score                                                          0.00404***                           0.00528***
                                                                                                      (0.000661)                           (0.000627)
                                  Current interest rate (%)                                                        -0.362***                0.347***
                                                                                                                    (0.110)                 (0.0662)
                                  Loan age (months)                                                                 0.00238                -0.000393
                                                                                                                   (0.00413)               (0.00142)
                                  Share jumbos (based on current balance)                                          -0.473**                 0.661***




11
                                                                                                                    (0.227)                  (0.125)
                                  Average balance (non-jumbo)                                                       -0.0189                 0.169***
                                                                                                                   (0.0467)                 (0.0280)
                                  Share adjustable-rate mortgages                                                              -1.128***   -0.942***
                                                                                                                                (0.321)     (0.150)
                                  Share GSE securitized                                                                         0.0793     -0.437***
                                                                                                                                (0.124)    (0.0643)
                                  Share privately securitized                                                                  0.956**     -0.642***
                                                                                                                               (0.409)      (0.217)
                                  Constant                                     0.302***    0.159***   -2.690***    2.365***     0.126      -4.621***
                                                                               (0.0208)    (0.0107)    (0.467)      (0.766)    (0.0910)     (0.761)
                                  Demographics                                    N          N            N           N           N            Y
                                  N                                              381        381          381         381         381          381
                                  Adj. R2                                        0.36       0.31         0.30        0.16        0.17         0.85

     Table shows the results of regressions of median equity as of November 2008 (Emed
                                                                                   j,Nov2008 ) on various other variables observed as of November 2008 (and shown in Table A-1).
     Sample consists of 381 MSAs. MSAs are weighted by their 2008 population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                             Table A-3: The Responsiveness of Local Refinancing Activity to Equity and Other Local Character-
                             istics around QE1


                                                                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)
                                    Emed
                                     Nov2008 ×   postQE                    1.711***   1.161***     1.530***   0.920***    1.088***     1.856***    1.694***    0.483***
                                                                            (0.232)    (0.258)      (0.288)    (0.237)     (0.115)      (0.233)     (0.186)     (0.184)
                                    ∆UR Jan07− Nov08 × postQE                         -0.0911***                                                              -0.0511***
                                                                                       (0.0188)                                                                (0.0131)
                                    ∆Income2008−09 × postQE                                        2.123*                                                       -1.028
                                                                                                   (1.233)                                                     (0.776)
                                    FICO × postQE                                                             0.0107***                                       0.00876***
                                                                                                              (0.00101)                                        (0.00180)
                                    Current int. rate × postQE                                                            -1.688***                           -0.812***
                                                                                                                           (0.117)                             (0.210)
                                    Loan age × postQE                                                                     -0.0229***                          -0.0326***
                                                                                                                           (0.00369)                          (0.00521)
                                    Jumbo share × postQE                                                                  -1.843***                           -1.238***
                                                                                                                           (0.293)                             (0.409)
                                    Average balance (non-jumbo) × postQE                                                  -0.218***                           -0.231***
                                                                                                                           (0.0315)                           (0.0881)




12
                                    ARM share × postQE                                                                                 2.269***                -0.188
                                                                                                                                        (0.496)                (0.393)
                                    GSE share × postQE                                                                                 0.954***                -0.305*
                                                                                                                                        (0.240)                (0.170)
                                    Private sec. share × postQE                                                                        -2.112***                0.190
                                                                                                                                        (0.616)                (0.534)
                                    Demographics × postQE                    N           N           N           N           N            N          Y           Y
                                    MSA fixed effects                        Y           Y           Y           Y           Y            Y          Y           Y
                                    Month fixed effects                      Y           Y           Y           Y           Y            Y          Y           Y
                                    Adj. R2                                 0.87        0.87        0.87        0.88        0.90         0.88       0.89        0.90
                                    Adj. R2 (within)                        0.18        0.22        0.19        0.28        0.35         0.25       0.30        0.38
                                    Observations                            4572        4572        4572        4572        4572         4572       4572        4572

     Table shows results from regressions of monthly refinancing propensities in 381 MSAs from August 2008 to July 2009, measured in CRISM, on median equity in each MSA
     interacted with a dummy "postQE" that equals one for the period February–July 2009, and other variables also interacted with postQE. Demographic controls in columns
     7 and 8 are location-specific shares of individuals with different years of education: 12,13-15,16,>16 (<12 is omitted), shares of individuals with ages: 31-45,46-60,>61 (21-30
     is omitted), homeowner shares and the share of households with mortgages, from the ACS. Each of these demographic controls is interacted with "postQE" to allow for
     differential responses to rate declines. All regressions also include MSA and month fixed effects. For reference, the average monthly refinancing propensity over August
     2008–January 2009 was 0.4 percent, while over February–July 2009 it was 1.2 percent. Descriptive statistics of explanatory variables are provided in Table A-1. MSAs are
     weighted by their 2008 population. Robust standard errors (clustered by MSA) in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                              Table A-4: The Responsiveness of Cash-Out Refinancing Activity to Equity and Other Local Char-
                              acteristics around QE1


                                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)
                               Emed
                                Nov2008 ×   postQE                    0.167***    0.138***     0.147***    0.103***      0.123***     0.171***   0.157***    0.0458**     0.0626***
                                                                      (0.0224)    (0.0266)     (0.0271)    (0.0233)      (0.0177)     (0.0248)   (0.0189)    (0.0207)      (0.0137)
                               ∆UR Jan07− Nov08 × postQE                         -0.00479***                                                                -0.00414***
                                                                                  (0.00176)                                                                  (0.00145)
                               ∆Income2008−09 × postQE                                         0.236**                                                        0.0303
                                                                                               (0.117)                                                       (0.0906)
                               FICO × postQE                                                              0.000862***                                        0.000297
                                                                                                          (0.0000968)                                       (0.000227)
                               Current int. rate × postQE                                                                -0.115***                           -0.112***
                                                                                                                          (0.0146)                            (0.0231)
                               Loan age × postQE                                                                        -0.00140***                         -0.00219***
                                                                                                                         (0.000434)                          (0.000567)
                               Jumbo share × postQE                                                                      -0.147***                            -0.0226
                                                                                                                          (0.0398)                           (0.0472)
                               Average balance (non-jumbo) × postQE                                                      -0.00633                            -0.00454
                                                                                                                        (0.00537)                            (0.0123)
                               ARM share × postQE                                                                                     0.00399                -0.230***




13
                                                                                                                                      (0.0493)                (0.0435)
                               GSE share × postQE                                                                                     0.131***               0.0437*
                                                                                                                                      (0.0291)               (0.0251)
                               Private sec. share × postQE                                                                             0.0990                0.266***
                                                                                                                                      (0.0663)               (0.0667)
                               Refinancing propensity                                                                                                                     0.0610***
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.00331)
                               Demographics × postQE                    N            N           N            N             N           N          Y            Y            N
                               MSA fixed effects                        Y            Y           Y            Y             Y           Y          Y            Y            Y
                               Month fixed effects                      Y            Y           Y            Y             Y           Y          Y            Y            Y
                               Adj. R2                                 0.80         0.80        0.80         0.81          0.81        0.80       0.80         0.82         0.84
                               Adj. R2 (within)                        0.12         0.12        0.12         0.15          0.17        0.13       0.14         0.20         0.32
                               Observations                            4572         4572        4572         4572          4572        4572       4572         4572         4572

     Table shows results from regressions of monthly equity removed (relative to outstanding balances) in 381 MSAs from August 2008 to July 2009, measured in CRISM, on median
     equity in each MSA interacted with a dummy "postQE" that equals one for the period February–July 2009, and other variables also interacted with postQE. Demographic
     controls in columns 7 and 8 are location-specific shares of individuals with different years of education: 12,13-15,16,>16 (<12 is omitted), shares of individuals with ages:
     31-45,46-60,>61 (21-30 is omitted), homeowner shares and the share of households with mortgages, from the ACS. Each of these demographic controls is interacted with
     "postQE" to allow for differential responses to rate declines. All regressions also include MSA and month fixed effects. For reference, the average monthly equity removed
     over August 2008–January 2009 was 0.09 percent of outstanding balances, while over February–July 2009 it was 0.14 percent of outstanding balances. Descriptive statistics
     of explanatory variables are provided in Table A-1. MSAs are weighted by their 2008 population. Robust standard errors (clustered by MSA) in parentheses. Significance: ∗
     p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                  Table A-5: The Responsiveness of New Vehicle Spending around QE1


                                                (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
         Emed
          Nov2008 ×   postQE                 0.389***         0.246**        0.227***                                                                          0.104          -0.174
                                             (0.0851)         (0.113)        (0.0574)                                                                         (0.129)         (0.144)
         Emed
          Nov2008 × time trend (monthly)                       0.0103        0.0110***                                                                         0.0120          0.0118
                                                             (0.00918)       (0.00316)                                                                       (0.00982)       (0.00969)
         (Refinancing propensity)t−2                                                         0.0994***       0.116***                                        0.0874***       0.0809***
                                                                                              (0.0244)       (0.0206)                                         (0.0212)        (0.0227)
         (Cashout/balance)t−2                                                                                                0.485***        0.369***         0.0511         0.00689
                                                                                                                              (0.165)        (0.0923)        (0.0621)        (0.0513)
         Other cont. × postQE                    N               N               N               N               N               N               N               N               Y
         MSA fixed effects                       Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
         Month fixed effects                     Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
         Adj. R2                                0.99            0.99            0.99            0.99            0.99           0.99             0.99            0.99            0.99
         Adj. R2 (within)                       0.04            0.03            0.05            0.04            0.04            0.01            0.01            0.05            0.09
         Observations                          4572            9144            18288           4572            9144            4572            9144            9144            9144
         Date range                        200808.200907   200801.200912   200701.201012   200808.200907   200801.200912   200808.200907   200801.200912   200801.200912   200801.200912

     Column 1 shows results from regression of monthly log(auto sales) in 381 MSAs on median equity (Emed ) in each MSA (as of November 2008) interacted with a dummy




14
     "postQE" that equals one from February 2009 onward. In columns 2 and 3, the sample period is extended and a monthly trend interacted with Emed
                                                                                                                                                Nov2008 is added. In columns
     4 and 5, log(auto sales) is directly regressed on two-months-lagged local refinancing propensities; in columns 6 and 7 the same is repeated for local cash-out amounts (relative
     to outstanding balance). Columns 8 and 9 add Emed
                                                   Nov2008 × postQE and both refinancing measures simultaneously; in column 9 we further add all mortgage market and
     demographic controls interacted with postQE (as in the last column of Table A-3). All regressions also include MSA and month fixed effects. MSAs are weighted by their 2008
     population. Robust standard errors (clustered by MSA) in parentheses. Auto sales are from R.L. Polk; refinancing propensities and cash-out fractions are measured in CRISM.
     Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                           Figure A-1: Mortgage Activity in the US over 2000-2012, Based on HMDA Data

                                     (a): Refinance Mortgage Originations                                                                                                                  (b): Purchase Mortgage Originations

                            350                                                                                                                                                 350


                            300                                                                                                                                                 300
  Origination amount (bn)




                                                                                                                                                      Origination amount (bn)
                            250                                                                                                                                                 250


                            200                                                                                                                                                 200


                            150                                                                                                                                                 150


                            100                                                                                                                                                 100


                            50                                                                                                                                                  50


                             0                                                                                                                                                   0
                                 1

                                          1

                                                   1

                                                            1

                                                                     1

                                                                              1

                                                                                       1

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                             m

                                       m

                                                m

                                                         m

                                                                  m

                                                                           m

                                                                                    m

                                                                                             m

                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                                                                    m

                                                                                                                                                                                                             m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                            00

                                     01

                                              02

                                                       03

                                                                04

                                                                         05

                                                                                  06

                                                                                           07

                                                                                                    08

                                                                                                             09

                                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                                               11

                                                                                                                                        12




                                                                                                                                                                                00

                                                                                                                                                                                         01

                                                                                                                                                                                                  02

                                                                                                                                                                                                           03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                       20

                                  20

                                           20

                                                    20

                                                             20

                                                                      20

                                                                               20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
Figure shows mortgage originations on 1-4 unit homes in HMDA, by month in which the borrower applied for the loan. The
vertical line indicates the month of the QE1 announcement (November 2008).




                                                                                                                                                 15
Figure A-2: Median Equity vs. Fraction of Borrowers over CLTV 80 or CLTV 100 Thresholds, as of
November 2008.




                                            Fraction of loans with CLTV>80% or >100%
                                                                                       .8



                                                                                       .6



                                                                                       .4



                                                                                       .2



                                                                                       0
                                                                                            −.4                   −.2                 0                               .2                     .4
                                                                                                                        Median Equity Share, Nov 2008
                                                                                              Fraction with CLTV>80%            Fraction with CLTV>100%

Figure shows the relationship between median equity in an MSA as of November 2008 (Emed
                                                                                    j,Nov2008 ) and the share of borrowers
in the MSA who have an estimated CLTV in the same month higher than 80 percent (black circles) or higher than 100 percent
(gray circles). Equity/CLTVs are measured based on CRISM. Each observation is an MSA, with 381 in total (per series). The
size of the circle represents the 2008 population of the MSA.




Figure A-3: Distributions of Borrowers’ Equity in their Homes — MSA Medians and Individual
Level
                                          (a): MSA Medians                                                                                                       (b): Individual Level

                                                                                                                                                  2
                 5



                 4                                                                                                                               1.5


                 3
       Density




                                                                                                                                       Density




                                                                                                                                                  1

                 2

                                                                                                                                                  .5
                 1



                 0                                                                                                                                0
                     −.4              −.2                                                      0             .2            .4                          −.5                     0                  .5   1
                                                                                             Median Equity                                                                          Equity
                           January 2007              November 2008                                                                                     January 2007        November 2008




Panel (a) shows kernel density of Emed j,t across 381 MSAs in January 2007 and November 2008; MSAs are weighted by
their 2008 population. Panel (b) shows kernel density of individual borrower equity in January 2007 and November 2008;
borrowers are weighted by loan amount. Individual equity is more disperse than median equity at the MSA level because
individual variation has life-cycle and other idiosyncratic components that are large relative to cross-region variation.




                                                                                                                                  16
                                              Figure A-4: Relationship between Equity and Other Measures of Economic Activity.

                                    (a): House Price Growth vs. Median Equity                            (b): Unemployment Rate Change vs. Median Equity

                                   .4                                                                                                      .4
  Median Equity Share, Nov 2008




                                                                                                          Median Equity Share, Nov 2008
                                   .2                                                                                                      .2




                                   0                                                                                                       0




                                  −.2                                                                                                     −.2




                                  −.4                                                                                                     −.4
                                        −.6            −.4               −.2               0        .2                                          0                2              4                 6             8
                                                   Change in House Price Index, Jan 2007−Nov 2008                                                   Change in Unemployment (percentage points), Jan 2007−Nov 2008


Panel (a) shows MSA house price growth between January 2007 and November 2008 vs. the median borrower’s equity (as
a share of estimated home value) in the MSA in November 2008. Each observation is an MSA, with 381 in total. The size
of the circle represents the 2008 population of the MSA. The figure also shows the simple (population weighted) regression
through the scatter plot: a 1 percent decline in house prices is associated with a 0.83 percentage point decrease in median
equity (standard error 0.07) with an R-squared of 0.69. Panel (b) shows the change in an MSA’s unemployment rate between
January 2007 and November 2008 vs. the median borrower’s equity (as a share of estimated home value) in the MSA in
November 2008. The simple regression line shows that a 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated
with a 6.0 percentage point decline in median equity (standard error 0.09) with an R-squared of 0.36.




                                                                                                    17
Figure A-5: Mortgage Refinance Activity 2008-2009 in Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs Defined
by Median Equity in November 2008, Based on HMDA Data

                                                                                  (a): Refinance Origination Volumes

                                                                                 50




                                           Refinancing origination amount (bn)
                                                                                 40


                                                                                 30


                                                                                 20


                                                                                 10


                                                                                  0
                                                                                      1

                                                                                               3

                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                 7

                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                   11


                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                        3

                                                                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                                                                             7

                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                  m

                                                                                            m

                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                        m




                                                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                                 08

                                                                                          08

                                                                                                   08

                                                                                                            08

                                                                                                                     08




                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                   09

                                                                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                                                                        09

                                                                                                                                                                                  09
                                                                                                                              08




                                                                                                                                                                                           09
                                                     20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                               Highest Equity Quartile                         Lowest Equity Quartile




                                                                                                (b): Refinance Propensities

                                                                                  .02



                                                                                 .015
                                           Refinance propensity




                                                                                  .01



                                                                                 .005



                                                                                      0
                                                                                        1

                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                   7

                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                     11


                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                      m

                                                                                               m

                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                 8m




                                                                                                                                                                                            9m
                                                                                   08

                                                                                            08

                                                                                                     08

                                                                                                              08

                                                                                                                       08




                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                     09

                                                                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                                                                         09

                                                                                                                                                                                09
                                                                                 20

                                                                                          20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                   Highest Equity Quartile                      Lowest Equity Quartile




                               (c): Total Origination Volumes (Refinance and Purchase)

                                                                                 60
                                           Total origination amount (bn)




                                                                                 50


                                                                                 40


                                                                                 30


                                                                                 20


                                                                                 10
                                                                                      1

                                                                                               3

                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                 7

                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                   11


                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                        3

                                                                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                                                                             7

                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                  m

                                                                                            m

                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                        m




                                                                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                     m

                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                 08

                                                                                          08

                                                                                                   08

                                                                                                            08

                                                                                                                     08




                                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                                   09

                                                                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                                                                        09

                                                                                                                                                                                  09
                                                                                                                              08




                                                                                                                                                                                           09
                                                     20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                               Highest Equity Quartile                         Lowest Equity Quartile



Panel (a) shows total mortgage refinance volume in HMDA by month in which borrower applied for the mortgage, where months are re-
defined such that they start on the 25th day of the prior month. Panel (b) shows corresponding refinance propensities, defined as the number
of refinance originations in HMDA divided by the total number of mortgages outstanding as measured in the 2008 American Community
Survey. Panel (c) shows total mortgage origination volume (purchase and refinance) in HMDA by month in which borrower applied for the
mortgage. In all three panels, calculations are done at the level of MSA quartile groups and vertical lines indicate the month of the QE1
announcement (November 2008).




                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                    Figure A-6: No Spatial Variation in Mortgage Interest Rates

                                    (a): Raw Interest Rates by Equity Quartile                                                               (b): Interest Rate Gaps After Controlling for Observables

                              6.5                                                                                                                               .5
  Average Mortgage Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                                                0
                               6
                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                                                                            −.5


                              5.5
                                                                                                                                                            −1



                               5                                                                                                                           −1.5
                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                                                                                     5

                                                                                                                                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                                m

                                                                                                                                                                          m

                                                                                                                                                                                   m

                                                                                                                                                                                            m

                                                                                                                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                                            08

                                                                                                                                                                      08

                                                                                                                                                                                08

                                                                                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                                                                                                  08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09
                                                                                                                                                                                                           08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  09
                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                   1

                                            3

                                                     5

                                                              7

                                                                       9

                                                                                11


                                                                                          1

                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                       11
                               m

                                         m

                                                  m

                                                           m

                                                                    m




                                                                                      m

                                                                                                m

                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                           m
                                                                             m




                                                                                                                                    m
                              08

                                       08

                                                08

                                                         08

                                                                  08




                                                                                     09

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                       09

                                                                                                                09

                                                                                                                         09
                                                                           08




                                                                                                                                  09
                 20

                                    20

                                             20

                                                      20

                                                               20




                                                                                 20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                              Average Mortgage Rate, Difference Relative to Nov 2008
                                                                        20




                                                                                                                               20




                                            Highest Equity Quartile                       Lowest Equity Quartile                                                              Average Rate Residual, Low Equity − High Equity MSAs



Panel (a) shows average interest rate on newly originated non-purchase mortgages in CRISM in the top and bottom MSA
quartiles by Emed
              j,Nov2008 , showing that the evolution of mortgage rates was almost identical across locations. In panel (b), the
black line shows the difference in the average interest rate on newly originated mortgages relative to its level in November
2008. The gray line shows the gap between average rate residuals in the top and bottom MSA quartiles by Emed
                                                                                                         j,Nov2008 .
Rate residuals are obtained following Hurst et al. (2016), by regressing each newly originated mortgage’s interest rate on
quadratic functions of FICO and LTV, and dummies for different loan purposes (purchase, rate refi, cashout refi, unknown),
all interacted with month dummies. The gap averages only around 5 basis points over our sample and does not increase
after QE1.




                                                                                                                                            19
Figure A-7: 2009 Distributions of PTI and CLTV for Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs Defined by
Median Borrower Equity in November 2008

                                                                         (a): PTI (2009)                                                                                                                      (b): CLTV (2009)
                                           1                                                                                                                             1



                                           .8                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                        CDF of CLTV in 2009
  CDF of PTI in 2009




                                           .6                                                                                                                       .6



                                           .4                                                                                                                       .4



                                           .2                                                                                                                       .2



                                           0                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                                                                           30



                                                                                                                                                                                                        40



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                          10



                                                                    20



                                                                               30



                                                                                            40



                                                                                                       50



                                                                                                                     60



                                                                                                                                  70
                                            0




                                                         Highest Equity Quartile            Lowest Equity Quartile                                                                         Highest Equity Quartile                      Lowest Equity Quartile



Figure shows the distribution of PTI and CLTV at origination in high and low equity MSA groups for loans originated in
2009 using the pooled sample of loans acquired by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in Single Family Loan Performance (SFLP)
Data. In total, we observe 1,886,365 originations in the highest equity quartile and 1,514,085 originations in the lowest equity
quartile. We set the 48,537 loans with missing PTI equal to 0.65 since SFLP does not report PTI above 0.65, but results are
similar when instead excluding these loans. Panel (a) shows that the distribution of PTI exhibits little bunching and is similar
in both high and low equity MSAs (as listed in Appendix A.1). Panel (b) shows that the distribution of CLTV (for the flow of
new mortgages in SFLP) exhibits substantial bunching and that CLTVs on newly originated loans tend to be higher in MSAs
where borrowers have less equity in outstanding mortgages (as measured in CRISM).


Figure A-8: Evolution of Non-Housing Debt for Top and Bottom Quartile of MSAs Defined by
Median Borrower Equity in November 2008

                                                         (a): Non-Housing Debt per Person                                                                                                               (b): Quarterly Change

                                           11500                                                                                                                                   800
                                                                                                                                           Quarterly Change in Non−housing Debt
     Non−housing Debt per Person, in USD




                                                                                                                                                                                   600
                                                                                                                                                     per Person, in USD




                                           11000
                                                                                                                                                                                   400


                                                                                                                                                                                   200

                                           10500
                                                                                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                                                                  −200
                                           10000
                                                    q1



                                                              q3



                                                                        q1



                                                                                  q3



                                                                                           q1



                                                                                                      q3



                                                                                                                q1



                                                                                                                             q3




                                                                                                                                                                                      q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                   q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q3
                                                 07



                                                           07



                                                                     08



                                                                               08



                                                                                        09



                                                                                                   09



                                                                                                             10



                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                                                   07



                                                                                                                                                                                                07



                                                                                                                                                                                                             08



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          08



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       09



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    09



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                20



                                                          20



                                                                   20



                                                                             20



                                                                                       20



                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                                                                                                         20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                            Highest Equity Quartile           Lowest Equity Quartile                                                                            Highest Equity Quartile                    Lowest Equity Quartile



Figure shows level (panel (a)) and quarterly change (panel (b)) of non-housing debt per person in the FRBNY Consumer
Credit Panel in the top and bottom MSA quartiles by Emed
                                                     j,Nov2008 . Non-housing debt includes auto loans, credit card balances,
student loans, consumer finance loans (sales financing, personal loans), retail loans (department stores, home furnishings,
gas, etc.), and unspecified "other" loans.



                                                                                                                                   20
         Figure A-9: Estimated Cash-out Amounts from Freddie Mac vs. in our CRISM data



                                   100


                                    80


                                    60
                        USD (bn)




                                    40


                                    20


                                        0
                                        q2




                                                          q4




                                                                             q2




                                                                                              q4




                                                                                                              q2




                                                                                                                               q4




                                                                                                                                                  q2
                                    07




                                                    07




                                                                         08




                                                                                          08




                                                                                                             09




                                                                                                                           09




                                                                                                                                              10
                                   20




                                               20




                                                                        20




                                                                                         20




                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                             20
                                             Estimated cash outs on prime conventional loans (from Freddie Mac)
                                             Estimated cash outs on all loans (based on CRISM)

Figure shows estimated quarterly cash-out volumes on prime conventional (non-government) mortgages estimated by Fred-
die Mac (obtained from http://www.freddiemac.com/finance/docs/q4_refinance_2014.xls), as well as those we obtain
based on the CRISM data (which also include FHA/VA loans) after scaling up as explained in Section A.2.3.




                    Figure A-10: 2008 Household Equity Distribution: Model vs. Data
                                                         1.8
                                                                                                                               Data
                                                                                                                               Model
                                                         1.6


                                                         1.4


                                                         1.2


                                                          1
                                               Density




                                                         0.8


                                                         0.6


                                                         0.4


                                                         0.2


                                                          0
                                                          -0.8   -0.6    -0.4     -0.2   0     0.2     0.4    0.6   0.8        1       1.2
                                                                                              Equity

This figure compares the household level density of equity in 2008 with no reduction in interest rates to the empirical
distribution just prior to QE1 in November 2008.




                                                                                              21
            Figure A-11: Relationship between Refinancing Threshold, Equity and Income




                                                     0.8
                          Equity Threshold to Refi
                                                     0.6


                                                     0.4


                                                     0.2


                                                       0
                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                      0.2                                       1.5
                                                                                                   1
                                                                    Assets       0    0.5              Income

Figure shows refinancing threshold for each asset and income value for low fixed cost.




        Figure A-12: Borrower and Lender Contribution to Aggregate Consumption Impulse


                                                            #10-3                Aggregate C IRF
                                                       10
                                                                                                                Borrower
                                                                                                                Lender




                                                        5




                                                        0




                                                       -5
                                                            0          1     2          3          4        5              6
                                                                                      Years
Figure shows the separate contributions of borrowers and lenders to the aggregate consumption impulse response in the
2008 baseline model shown in Figure 11.




                                                                                     22
                   Figure A-13: Importance of GE Effects from Lenders’ Consumption


                               #10-3                  Aggregate C IRF
                           7
                                                     Baseline: Foreign Share of Lenders=0.5
                           6                         Foreign Share of Lenders=1 (PEQ)
                                                     Foreign Share of Lenders=0 (Closed Economy)

                           5


                           4


                           3


                           2


                           1


                           0


                          -1


                          -2


                          -3
                               0       2   4    6      8     10     12     14     16     18        20
                                                           Years
This figure shows aggregate consumption IRFs for alternative assumptions on what share of mortgage debt is held by
domestic households, whose income will fall when interest rates decline.




                                                           23
                                                      Figure A-14: Effect of σ on ∆IRFf0 (µ,σ)


                                         60


                                         55


                                         50


                                         45
                            (%)




                                         40
                              ( 7, < )
                                    0
                            " IRFf




                                         35


                                         30


                                         25


                                         20


                                         15
                                              2        3         4        5         6     7     8    9     10    11   12
                                                                                        < (%)

Figure shows how much a 10% increase in equity changes the aggregate consumption response to a 1% decrease in r m , for
                                                                                         ∆C
different values of the cross-region standard deviation of equity. Let IRFf0 (µ,σ) = ∆r    m be the response on impact (in the
first year) of consumption to a 1% decline in interest rates given an initial equity distribution f 0 with mean µ and standard
                                                  IRFf0 (µ+10,σ) − IRFf0 (µ,σ)
deviation σ. Then let ∆IRFf0 (µ,σ) =                      IRFf0 (µ,σ)          .   ∆IRFf0 (µ,σ) measures how a 10 percentage point increase in the mean
of the equity distribution affects the impulse response of consumption to interest rates. This figure plots ∆IRFf0 (µ,σ) as we
change the cross-region standard deviation of equity σ. The leftmost point in the figure sets f 0 (µ, σ ) equal to the stochastic
steady-state distribution, and then we steadily increase the cross-region standard deviation of equity. In the stochastic steady-
state with σ = 2.5%, a 10% increase in house prices increases the aggregate consumption response to a 1% rate decline by
almost 60%. However, when σ is higher, this same mean increase in house prices has a smaller effect on the response of
consumption to a rate drop.




                                                                                        24
Figure A-15: Adjustable-Rate Mortgage Shares pre-QE1 and Payment Reductions over Nov 2008 –
June 2009

                                                           (a): ARM Shares vs. Median Equity                      (b): Sizeable ARM Payment Reductions vs. Median Equity

                                                .6                                                                                                                               .08
  ARM Share among Outstanding Loans, Nov 2008




                                                                                                                     reduction of 1 ppt or more between Nov 2008 and June 2009
                                                                                                                       Fraction of mortgages that are ARMs and experience rate
                                                                                                                                                                                 .06
                                                .4


                                                                                                                                                                                 .04


                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                 .02




                                                0                                                                                                                                 0
                                                     −.4         −.2                 0                 .2    .4                                                                        −.4   −.2                 0               .2   .4
                                                                       Median Equity Share, Nov 2008                                                                                               Median Equity Share, Nov 2008


Figure shows scatter plots of the balance-weighted fraction of adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) in a given MSA (panel a) or
the balance-weighted fraction that are ARMs and experience a rate reduction of 1 percentage point or more over November
2008 – June 2009 (panel b), as measured in the CRISM data, versus the median equity share (Emed ) within the MSA as of
November 2008. When computing the share with rate drops, we also require that the recorded required monthly payment
not increase over the same period (which may indicate that the loan’s IO period expired). The size of the circle represents the
2008 population of the MSA. The gray lines represent simple regression lines fitting the scatter plot (population weighted).
The regression line in panel (b) has a slope of -0.059 (s.e. = 0.009). Meanwhile, regressing the 6-month refinancing propensity
(from January-June 2009) on Emed
                             j,Nov2008 yields a coefficient of +0.147 (s.e. = 0.028).




                                                                                                            25
                                          Figure A-16: Accounting for Ex-Ante Heterogeneity

                               (a): Match ARM-Share                                (b): Spending responses of ARM vs. FRM borrowers

             #10-3                       Aggregate C IRF                                                    C IRF - 2008                                      C IRF - 2001
       15                                                                            0.015                                                 0.015
                                                                       2008                               Ave borrower response
       10                                                              2001                               FRM borrower response
                                                                                                          ARM borrower response

        5


        0
                                                                                      0.01                                                     0.01

        -5
             0             1         2          3          4       5          6
                                              Years
                               Regional Consumption Variance IRF
     0.15
                                                                       2008
      0.1                                                              2001          0.005                                                 0.005

     0.05

        0

     -0.05

      -0.1                                                                                   0                                                   0
             0             1         2          3          4       5          6                  0           2           4           6                0       2           4          6
                                              Years                                                              Years                                            Years



                        (c): Reduce Equity-Refi Elasticity                                                               (d): Boom-Bust

                 10-3                    Aggregate C IRF                                     #10
                                                                                                     -3                          Aggregate C IRF
        6                                                                              15
                                                                       2008                                                                                                   2008
                                                                       2001            10                                                                                     2001
        4

                                                                                        5

        2
                                                                                        0


        0                                                                               -5
             0             1         2          3          4       5          6              0               1               2             3              4           5              6
                                              Years                                                                                      Years
                               Regional Consumption Variance IRF                                                  Regional Consumption Variance IRF
     0.08                                                                             0.2
                                                                       2008                                                                                                   2008
     0.06                                                              2001          0.15                                                                                     2001

     0.04                                                                             0.1

     0.02                                                                            0.05

        0                                                                               0

     -0.02                                                                           -0.05
             0             1         2          3          4       5          6              0               1               2             3              4           5              6
                                              Years                                                                                      Years




Panel (a) repeats Figure 11 in a model with both FRM and ARMs calibrated to match the regional differences with house
prices in the data. Panel (b) shows the average spending response of ARM borrowers, FRM borrowers and their share-
weighted averages in 2008 compared to 2001. Note that the share-weighted average borrower average is not identical to the
aggregate spending response since it includes no lender responses. Panel (c) repeats Figure 11 in a model where fixed costs
are doubled. This roughly halves the relationship between regional equity and refinancing. Panel (d) repeats Figure 11 in a
model where regions with the largest house price declines experience a prior house price boom.




                                                                              26
                                                     Figure A-17: Robustness Results

             (a): Relaxing Full Cash-out Assumption                                                 (b): Stochastic Mortgage Rate

             #10-3                 Aggregate C IRF                                       #10-3                     Aggregate C IRF
       15                                                                          20
                                                                 2008                                                                            2008
                                                                 2001              15                                                            2001
       10
                                                                                   10
        5
                                                                                    5
        0
                                                                                    0

        -5                                                                          -5
             0       1         2          3          4       5          6                0           1         2          3          4       5          6
                                        Years                                                                           Years
                         Regional Consumption Variance IRF                                               Regional Consumption Variance IRF
      0.2                                                                         0.2
                                                                 2008                                                                            2008
     0.15                                                        2001                                                                            2001
                                                                                  0.1
      0.1

     0.05
                                                                                    0
        0

     -0.05                                                                        -0.1
             0       1         2          3          4       5          6                0           1         2          3          4       5          6
                                        Years                                                                           Years



                         (c): Reduce r and r m                                                             (d): Reduce only r

             #10-3                 Aggregate C IRF                                           10-4                  Aggregate C IRF
       15                                                                          10
                                                                 2008                                                                            2008
       10                                                        2001                                                                            2001
                                                                                    5

        5

                                                                                    0
        0


        -5                                                                          -5
             0       1         2          3          4       5          6                0           1         2          3          4       5          6
                                        Years                                                                           Years
                         Regional Consumption Variance IRF                                               Regional Consumption Variance IRF
      0.3                                                                        0.02
                                                                 2008                                                                            2008
      0.2                                                        2001            0.01                                                            2001


      0.1                                                                           0


        0                                                                        -0.01


      -0.1                                                                       -0.02
             0       1         2          3          4       5          6                0           1         2          3          4       5          6
                                        Years                                                                           Years




This figure repeats Figure 11 in several alternative models. In panel (a) households can choose between full cash-out and no
cash-out refinancing. In panel b) interest rate movements are stochastic instead of a one-time shock. In panel (c) r and r m
both decline, with a constant spread. In panel (d), only r declines.




                                                                            27
                                                      Figure A-18: More Robustness Results

                 (a): Include temporary income shocks                                                        (b): Correlated income and hp shocks

             #10-3                  Aggregate C IRF                                                                                 Aggregate C IRF
       15                                                                                         0.02
                                                                        2008                                                                                      2008
       10                                                               2001                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                  0.01

        5

                                                                                                    0
        0


       -5                                                                                     -0.01
             0        1         2          3              4        5           6                         0         1            2          3          4       5          6
                                         Years                                                                                           Years
                          Regional Consumption Variance IRF                                                               Regional Consumption Variance IRF
      0.2                                                                                          0.3
                                                                        2008                                                                                      2008
      0.1                                                               2001                       0.2                                                            2001


        0                                                                                          0.1


      -0.1                                                                                          0


      -0.2                                                                                        -0.1
             0        1         2          3              4        5           6                         0         1            2          3          4       5          6
                                         Years                                                                                           Years



                                                          (c): Double House Price Growth
                                                                            Aggregate C IRF
                                           0.03
                                                                                                                   2008
                                           0.02                                                                    2001


                                           0.01


                                                 0


                                           -0.01
                                                      0       1         2            3        4                5           6
                                                                                   Years
                                                                  Regional Consumption Variance IRF
                                               0.4
                                                                                                                   2008
                                               0.3                                                                 2001

                                               0.2

                                               0.1

                                                 0

                                               -0.1
                                                      0       1         2            3        4                5           6
                                                                                   Years




This figure repeats Figure 11 in several alternative models. In panel (a) households experience i.i.d. transitory income shocks.
In panel (b), regional house price and income shocks are perfectly correlated instead of uncorrelated. In panel (c) trend house
price growth is doubled.




                                                                                   28
