NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPETING FOR CAPITAL:
AUDITING AND CREDIBILITY IN FINANCIAL REPORTING
Raphael Boleslavsky
Bruce I. Carlin
Christopher Cotton
Working Paper 23273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23273

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

We are grateful to Daniel Andrei, Ana Babus, Gadi Barlevy, Ray Ball, Tony Bernardo, Taylor
Begley, Amil Dasgupta, Shaun Davies, Mike Fishman, Henry Friedman, Willie Fuchs, Simon
Gervais, Barney Hartman-Glaeser, Sam Hartzmark, David Hirshleifer, Jack Hughes, Peter
Kondor, Doron Levet, Stefan Lewellen, William Mann, Justin Murfin, Martin Oehmke, Stavros
Panageas, Daniel Paravisini, Kelly Shue, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants at the
University of Chicago, London Business School, London School of Economics, Chicago Federal
Reserve Bank, University of Maryland, University of Texas, University of Toronto, UCLA,
Arizona State University, University of Alberta, University of Pittsburgh, and participants at the
2016 Western Finance Association Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Raphael Boleslavsky, Bruce I. Carlin, and Christopher Cotton. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Competing for Capital: Auditing and Credibility in Financial Reporting
Raphael Boleslavsky, Bruce I. Carlin, and Christopher Cotton
NBER Working Paper No. 23273
March 2017
JEL No. D43,G3
ABSTRACT
When self-interested agents compete for scarce resources, they often exaggerate the promise of
their activities. As such, principals must consider both the quality of each opportunity and each
agent’s credibility. We show that principals are better off with less transparency because they
gain access to better investments. This is due to a complementarity between the agents’ effort
provision and their ability to exaggerate. As such, it is suboptimal for principals to prevent
misreporting, even if doing so is costless. This helps explain why exaggeration is ubiquitous
during allocation decisions: money management, analyst coverage, private equity fundraising,
and venture capital investments.
Raphael Boleslavsky
University of Miami
Department of Economics
School of Business Administration
5250 University Drive
Coral Gables, FL 33146
r.boleslavsky@miami.edu
Bruce I. Carlin
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu

Christopher Cotton
Queen's University
Department of Economics
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6
cotton@econ.queensu.ca

“Entrepreneurs tend to exaggerate. They exaggerate the success of their business when
talking to startup investors. They exaggerate the market potential of their products to
find distribution partners. They exaggerate the soundness of their strategy to recruit
employees.”
–Asheesh Advani, Founder of CircleLending and CEO of Covestor 1
“Valuations, while always important, take on greater significance during the period of
(interim private equity) fund marketing... Because investors and potential investors
often question the valuations of active holdings, managers may exaggerate the performance or quality of these holdings.”
–Bruce Karpati, Chief, SEC Enforcement Division Asset Management Unit 2

1

Introduction

Financial exaggeration is ubiquitous when individuals or organizations compete for scarce resources.
This is because the state of the art in financial reporting grants marked discretion to forecasters3
and every competitor has an incentive to put his best foot forward when trying to persuade a
decision-maker to choose his opportunity. Some examples include private equity firms competing
for interim funding, corporations attracting analyst coverage, divisions within a firm jockeying
for resources, and investment firms competing for capital flows. As such, any decision-maker is
rightfully skeptical because she needs to rely on agents for information who themselves are affected
by what is communicated (Milgrom and Roberts, 1986). In response, agents may benefit from
measures that enhance the credibility of reports, for example by allowing ex post auditing. However,
not all reports are equally credible - some agents may allow unfettered access to auditors, while
others obfuscate by allowing only partial access, or by hiring auditors that are biased in their favor.
Therefore, competition for resources occurs on two dimensions: the quality of the opportunity
that is developed and the credibility with which reporting reflects hidden information. In this
paper, we characterize the interaction of these considerations during resource allocation. We study
a model of endogenous credibility in which a decision-maker is tasked with allocating a scarce
resource, but has limited commitment ability4 and faces a conflict of interest when she receives
information from agents who realize a private benefit from acquiring the resource. We compare
settings in which the principal has access to a technology that allows her to perfectly audit agents
ex post to those in which the credibility of the reports are left to the discretion of the competing
agents. We show that when agents choose to have less credibility, they have higher incentives to
make better investments. This in fact makes the decision-maker better off: she would rather cope
1

See http://www.entrepreneur.com/howto/startyourbiz.html or http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/197224.
See Barber and Yasuda (2016), who study interim performance reporting during private equity fundraising.
3
For example, the discounted cash flow (DCF) method leaves its exact structure and its inputs unspecified: the
length of the forecast period, the discount factor, the terminal growth rate, and the forecasted inputs, to name a few.
4
For this reason, the Revelation Principle cannot be invoked in our analysis. Violations of the Revelation Principle
that are linked to managerial misreporting in practice may arise due to limited communication, limited ability to
contract, or limited commitment (Arya, Glover, and Sunder, 1998).
2

1

with less transparency because she gains access to better investment prospects. So, even if she could
costlessly monitor the value of projects before allocating the scarce resource, it may be optimal to
commit not to monitor. This may provide a rationale for why we often observe an empirical lack of
credibility in many settings and even a tolerance for it, especially when rational Bayesian financial
institutions are present.5
Critical to this result is a key difference between the information structure of allocation decisions
and standard agency theory: effort provision is observable6 and outcomes are unobservable, which
makes reporting necessary. When facing less trustworthy information, a decision-maker relies more
on her prior beliefs that a project has been successful and therefore puts more weight on observable
investments in quality when making her choice. Anticipating this, agents compete by increasing
their observable investments and the decision-maker is better off coping with less transparency
because she gains access to better investment prospects.
To see this simply, consider the following example. Suppose a decision-maker needs to allocate
a scarce, indivisible resource to one of two agents. Before making the allocation, each agent i can
q2
employ publicly observable effort qi ∈ [0, 1] at a cost 2i that affects the expected value of a project
that uses the resource as an input. A high-type project arises with probability qi . The decisionmaker values selecting a high-type project at V = 1 and other projects at zero. Each agent has a
private benefit of receiving the resource equal to one and no other source of revenue. Following their
effort choices, each agent privately observes his outcome and makes a report to the decision-maker.
In turn, the decision-maker allocates the resource to the agent with the highest likelihood of having
a high-type project and settles ties with random allocation. First, consider a setting in which
the agent’s reports always accurately reveal their realized type (i.e., full information). Each agent
q2
chooses an effort level to maximize his payoff qi (1 − qj ) + 12 (qi qj + (1 − qi)(1 − qj )) − 2i . Given this,
each agent employs effort qi = 21 and the decision-maker’s expected payoff is 1 − (1 − qi )(1 − qj ) = 43 .
Second, consider a setting in which the agents always exaggerate and claim their project is hightype, even when it is not. Because reports are unreliable, the decision-maker’s posterior belief
equals the expected value of the project given each agent’s observable investment qi . The decisionmaker awards the resource to the agent that undertakes the greatest investment. Internalizing
this, the agents compete to have a higher expected type than their opponent and choose qi = 1 in
equilibrium.7 The decision-maker is assured to receive a payoff equal to one and is better off with
less reliable information.
While this simple example illustrates the interaction between investment quality and transparency, it says nothing about endogenous credibility. We characterize this in several model varia5

For example, it is generally accepted that firms can rely on the more-subjective narrative portion of their
accounting reports to engage in impression management (e.g. Merkle-Davies and Brennan, 2007).
6
In the paper, we study publicly observable effort provision. As will be better appreciated later, these economic
forces are also likely to survive in settings where signals about effort are sufficiently precise.
7
Note that when both agents choose qi = 1, both agents payoffs are zero. Given that the other agent invests
qj = 1, any deviation 0 ≤ qi < 1, ensures that project i is not selected, and hence, generates a payoff that is weakly
negative. Thus no such deviation is profitable. Note further that no other symmetric pure strategy equilibrium exists
because an agent can always benefit by increasing his quality by a small amount. Also, no asymmetric pure strategy
equilibrium exists either because the agent with the higher quality can benefit by reducing his quality by a small
amount.

2

tions. In our base model, after two identical agents select the quality of their investment technology,
they each choose an auditor who determines the credibility associated with their reports. Without
an auditor, each agent would always report a good outcome and therefore, his report would have
no credibility whatsoever. But, with an auditor that has power to (partially) curb misreporting,
each agent can commit to be truthful, at least some of the time. The better the auditor, the more
credible the report that a decision-maker receives. As such, each agent’s credibility choice drives
how much exaggeration arises, which depends on an important tradeoff: exaggeration increases the
probability that the decision-maker receives a good report, but it also makes the decision-maker
treat a good report with greater skepticism.
In the base model, each agent selects the same quality in equilibrium, generating a valuable
project with the same probability. If the marginal cost of quality for the agents is low, they invest
more to develop high quality projects, so that projects are likely to be valuable. In this case,
agents are more concerned with avoiding the decision-maker’s skepticism than with concealing bad
outcomes, and the agents select reporting policies that perfectly reveal project value. However,
if the marginal cost of quality is high, then agents invest less. Here, concealing a bad outcome
becomes a more significant concern for the agents, and the degree of credibility is determined by a
mixed strategy.
If a less adept auditor is chosen and the reports are not perfectly credible, the decision-maker
may be persuaded to allocate the resource to a lower value project. The decision-maker could
eliminate this inefficiency by requiring that the agents report truthfully or by auditing all reports
perfectly ex post (full monitoring). However, this turns out to be suboptimal ex ante because it
induces the agents to invest less in developing a more productive technology. A complementarity
exists between investment quality and exaggerated reporting. Indeed, higher investment quality
reduces the decision-maker’s skepticism, which in turn allows agents to exaggerate more without
undermining the credibility of his good report. With a higher marginal cost of quality, the ability to
exaggerate is more valuable. Thus, the incentive to invest is stronger when exaggeration is allowed.
As such, we show that it is better for the decision-maker to cope with some ex post inefficiency
in order to increase the probability that a high-value project exists. Furthermore, because the
decision-maker is indifferent between monitoring and not when the marginal cost of quality is low,
we show that it is weakly suboptimal for the decision-maker to require truthful reporting (i.e., to
fully monitor the reports), even if doing so is costless.
Following this, we analyze an extension in Section 3 in which the conflict of interest between
the parties is not as severe. Here, each agent still prefers that the decision-maker invests in his
project, but if the decision-maker does so, the payoff to the decision-maker and agent are identical.
As we discuss in the paper, such preference alignment may arise with profit sharing and no private
benefits, or if reputational concerns are important to the agents. In this case, the equilibrium
financial reporting strategies perfectly reveal project values. Compared to full monitoring, there are
higher levels of quality and better expected payoffs to the decision-maker. However, the comparison
with the main model when exaggeration is allowed is equivocal. If the cost of quality is sufficiently
high, dealing with strongly biased agents and coping with exaggeration leads to higher investment
quality and superior expected payoffs to the decision-maker.
3

We then incorporate two extensions into the model in Section 4, in which agents are ex ante
asymmetric. First, with two agents competing, we allow one agent’s marginal cost of quality to be
higher than the other’s. This might arise in a corporation in which two divisions compete within
an internal capital market, but one division is stronger than the other. Not surprisingly, whether or
not the decision-maker monitors reports, equilibrium investment in quality is asymmetric, whereby
the stronger agent invests more in quality. Also, consistent with the complementarity described
above, when exaggeration is allowed the agent who chooses the higher quality technology exaggerates his project’s value more than his competitor.8 Thus, the agent with the more productive
technology is less likely to communicate that he has generated a low value project. However, while
the complementarity between exaggeration and quality increases both agents’ investments, the effect is actually stronger for the weaker agent. The relative increase in quality (compared to full
monitoring) is higher for the weaker agent: allowing financial exaggeration generates a relatively
larger increase in the weaker agent’s investment.
Subsequently, we consider a continuum of heterogeneous agents. This extension yields several novel implications. First, when the resource is very scarce, reporting by all agents is fullyinformative, even if exaggerated reporting is permitted. However, when the resource is in higher
supply, exaggeration becomes part of the equilibrium. Second, when exaggeration arises, the highest
skilled agents provide the least credible reports, whereas lower skilled agents produce less quality,
but compensate with more truthful reporting.9 This latter finding helps us understand the interaction of skill and transparency in investment markets. Ostensibly, higher skilled people work at
hedge funds. Indeed, hedge fund managers are known to use more sophisticated financial instruments and more complex securities than mutual fund managers (e.g., Fung and Hsieh, 1997; Koski
and Pontiff, 1999; Bookstaber, 2003). Hedge funds are also more opaque than mutual funds (Brown
and Goetzmann, 2003). Our analysis therefore provides insights into the industrial organization of
money management markets.10
The findings in our paper also apply to other empirical settings, including private equity
fundraising, venture capital allocation, investment in internal capital markets, and earnings management. We detail these applications in Section 5, along with a discussion of the related literature.

2

Model with Two Symmetric Agents

A decision-maker has an indivisible, scarce resource that she wishes to allocate to one of two agents.
Each agent invests in a production technology that yields a positive NPV project. As such, absent
any further information, the decision-maker prefers to participate rather than sit out. However,
8

Technically, this is because the stronger agent’s distribution function in the mixed strategy first-order stochastically dominates the weaker agent.
9
Interestingly, in equilibrium these effects exactly offset: the expected quality of projects run by highly able agents,
and the expected quality of projects run by less able agents—conditional on receiving the resource—is identical.
10
This is distinct from Gervais and Strobl (2012), who posit that money managers tradeoff between signaling their
skill versus giving away secrets via transparency. In their framework, high and low skill agents form hedge funds,
whereas medium skill agents for mutual funds. In our framework, there is a separation between two groups: high
skill agents with no transparency and lower skill agents with better reporting.

4

t=0
Agents choose
quality qi .

t=1
Agents
choose θi .

t=2
Agents make
report si .

t=3
Decision-maker
allocates capital.

Figure 1: At t = 0, each agent chooses the quality of their production technology, qi . At t = 1,
each agent chooses their reporting policy. Then, at t = 2, each agent realizes their type τi and
makes a report to the decision-maker si ∈ {G, B}. Finally, at t = 3, the decision-maker allocates
her capital to one of the projects.

her goal is to pick the better opportunity, whereas each agent strictly wishes to attract the resource
for his own use.
Figure 1 illustrates the timing of the game. At t = 0, each agent i ∈ {a, b} simultaneously
chooses the quality of his production technology, which we denote as qi ∈ [0, 1]. Given this investment, agent i’s eventual project will have a high value (τi = H) with probability qi and low value
(τi = L) with probability 1 − qi . Examples of investment in qi might be the intensity of an agent’s
R&D efforts or the skill of his management team. Investment in qi is associated with a convex cost
C(qi ) =

qi2
.
ρ

Investment is publicly observable, but unverifiable and therefore not contractible.11
At t = 1, each agent simultaneously chooses a reporting policy θi ∈ [0, 1], which determines
the credibility with which financial projections are communicated to the decision-maker. Define
si = H (si = L) to be a report by the agent that his project is high (low) type. Assume that each
agent always reports si = H when he has a valuable project (si = H whenever τi = H). However,
if an agent has a low-type project, he still reports si = H with probability θi . As such,
Pr(si = H|τi = H) = 1 and Pr(si = H|τi = L) = θi .

(1)

If θi = 0, then reporting is fully transparent. The greater the value of θi , the less informative is the
report.
The agents’ choice of θi is observable and chosen before the agent himself knows the value of his
project. It is meant to capture a commitment to verification by an auditor. Because each agent has
a private benefit to secure the scarce resource, they would like to report si = H as often as possible
after learning their type, even if they realized it was in fact a low-type project (i.e., exaggerate).
However, the choice of θi restricts how often an agent can get away with it. As such, if an agent
reports si = H and the project survives an audit by a monitor that is known to be more careful,
the decision-maker can be more confident about that opportunity.
A related interpretation of θ might be the degree to which financial information can obfuscated.
In an alternative model in which a decision-maker has a cost of sorting out financial projections,
11

For now, the agents are ex ante identical. In Section 4, we consider what happens when ρa > ρb .

5

θ = 0 makes it easy to contrast high- and low-type projects, whereas θ = 1 makes this impossible
and an intermediate value of θ obfuscates project quality in a way that induces suboptimal decisionmaking.
At t = 2 each agent privately observes the value of his project τi ∈ {H, L} and makes a report
si ∈ {H, L} consistent with (1). Finally, at t = 3, the decision-maker allocates the resource and
then learns the outcome.
Each agent’s project is worthless without the scarce resource. The agent who persuades the
decision-maker to choose his project receives a payoff normalized to one. The other agent receives
zero. If the decision-maker invests in a high value project, she receives a payoff normalized to
one. Otherwise, her payoff is zero. Given this, the decision-maker’s expected payoff of allocating
the resource to project i is equal to the posterior probability that τi = H, given the available
information—the investment qi , the level of credibility θi , and the report si . It is sequentially
rational for her to assign the resource to the project that she believes is more likely to be high. If
she holds the same beliefs about each project, then we assume that she randomizes fairly between
them. Once the allocation is made, the true type of the project is revealed and the payoffs are
realized.
This set-up focuses on an environment in which contracts are either infeasible or illegal, forcing
the decision-maker to rely on competition to generate both investment quality and transparency.
This type of limitation arises naturally when the underlying variables are observable by the decisionmaker, but unverifiable in court. Understanding the quality of the agent’s production technology or
the accuracy of the reporting technology may require specialized expertise that the court does not
possess. Furthermore, in a number of natural applications, contracts are explicitly prohibited. For
example, the decision-maker may be a money manager with a fiduciary duty to her client and the
two agents are mutual funds who would like to attract capital. The mutual funds can window-dress
the value of their investments, but it may be illegal for them to pay the money manager a side
payment in order to attract capital. The payoff to a fund is positive if it attracts capital and the
payoff is positive for the money manager if her client enjoys a high return. Another application
is the market for analyst coverage. Equity analysts choose which corporations to follow and enjoy
positive payoffs when they follow more successful firms. Likewise, corporations compete for this
coverage because they receive benefits from attention in financial markets. Contracts between
analysts and firms in this setting are not only infeasible, but also illegal.

3
3.1

Equilibrium Characterization
Monitoring Benchmark

Suppose that financial reporting must be truthful (i.e., θi = θj = 0) so that the decision-maker
is perfectly informed. When each agent selects his production technology, he anticipates that
Pr(τi = H) = qi and Pr(τi = L) = 1 − qi . For fixed investment levels (qa , qb ), the expected payoffs
are
q2
1
q2
1
ua (qa , qb ) = qa (1 − qb ) + (qa qb + (1 − qa )(1 − qb )) − a = (1 + qa − qb ) − a
2
ρ
2
ρ
6

ud (qa , qb ) = 1 − (1 − qa )(1 − qb ).
By inspection, the marginal benefit of improving quality for either agent is independent of the other
agent’s choice and each agent’s investment level satisfies the first order condition: 1/2 = 2qi /ρ.
Therefore, at t = 0, each agent has a dominant strategy to choose qi = ρ/4 and is equally likely to
receive the resource. The associated expected payoffs are
1
ρ
ρ
ρ ρ2
−
and ud = 1 − (1 − )2 = − .
2 16
4
2 16
In what follows, we will compare these quantities to when there is less transparency.
ui =

3.2

(2)

Equilibria with (Possibly) Less Transparency

We solve for the Perfect Bayesian Equilibria of the game and proceed by backward induction. We
first characterize the equilibrium choices of θi for each agent given the quality of investments (qi , qj )
made at t = 0. Following that, we analyze the symmetric Nash equilibrium in quality (q ∗ , q ∗ ).
If agent i chooses investment level qi at t = 0 and reporting policy θi at t = 1, then the
probability that a project is reported as high-type (si = H) is
ri = qi + θi (1 − qi ).
The decision-maker’s updated belief that a project with si = H is in fact τi = H is
qi
qi
gi =
= .
qi + θi (1 − qi )
ri

An agent’s choice of θi involves a simple tradeoff: increasing θi increases the probability that the
decision-maker gets a good report, but causes the decision-maker to view good signals with greater
skepticism.
If θi and θj are such that gi > gj , then the decision-maker will invest in project i whenever
both projects are reported to be high-types. In this case, agent i receives the resource whenever
he gets a good realization, regardless of the other agent’s draw, and will also receive the resource
with probability 21 when both agents report si = L. Therefore, following the investment decisions
(qi , qj ) at t = 0, agent i’s expected payoff as a function of (θi , θj ) is:

if gi < gj
 ri (1 − rj ) + 21 (1 − ri )(1 − rj )
ri + 12 (1 − ri )(1 − rj )
(3)
if gi > gj
ui (θi , θj |qi , qj ) =

1
1
ri (1 − 2 rj ) + 2 (1 − ri )(1 − rj ) if gi = gj .

We make two observations about best responses. First, given gj , agent i always prefers to select
a θi for which gi is marginally higher than gj , rather than for which gi = gj . This means that an
equilibrium involving gi = gj is possible only at gi = gj = 1 (i.e., θi = θj = 0). Second, notice
that among all financial reporting policies for which gi < gj , agent i prefers gi = qi (i.e., θi = 1).12

12
If gi < gj then project i will be selected for certain if and only if his reported type is high and j’s is low; otherwise
project i will either not be chosen, or the decision-maker will randomize. By choosing an uninformative reporting
policy, agent i assures that its reported type will be high, and therefore guarantees that its project will be selected if
the other agent’s reported type is low. Therefore, if an asymmetric pure strategy equilibrium exists, then one agent
must play an uninformative strategy. However, because of an open set issue, the best response to an uninformative
policy is undefined.

7

Taken together, these observations suggest that the equilibrium of the sub-game at t = 1 is either
a fully-revealing pure strategy equilibrium θi = θj = 0, or a mixed strategy equilibrium.13
Proposition 1. Suppose that qa + qb ≥ 1. Then, the unique Nash equilibrium is fully-revealing,
θa = θb = 0, with payoffs to agent i of
1
q2
ui (qi , qj ) = (1 + qi − qj ) − i .
2
ρ

(4)

If qa + qb < 1, a mixed strategy equilibrium exists in which there is financial exaggeration. In this
case, the expected payoffs to the agents are
ui (qi , qj ) =

qi
q2
− i
qi + qj
ρ

(5)

and the higher quality technology leads to more exaggeration (i.e., θa first-order stochastically dominates θb in the mixed strategies).
According to Proposition 1, if qa + qb ≥ 1, then θa = θb = 0. Otherwise, there is lower transparency and financial exaggeration is part of the equilibrium. This inequality can be understood as
follows. Suppose that agent b always tells the truth and consider agent a’s best response. If τb = L
and τa = H, then there is no gain to dishonesty. Agent a gets the resource anyway. If τb = H and
τa = L, dishonesty is futile: the decision-maker allocates the resource to agent b because his probability of having a high-type project is one. The only state in which exaggeration has a potential
benefit or cost is when τa = τb . If τa = τb = L, then exaggeration is beneficial to agent a; no matter
how much he exaggerates, a good report will ensure that his project looks better than project b
(which is surely type L). However, if τa = τb = H, then exaggeration hurts agent a. In this case,
θa > 0 causes the decision-maker to be skeptical of project a, and makes her more likely to allocate
the resource to project b.
The probability that τa = τb = H is qa qb and the probability that τa = τb = L is (1 − qa )(1 − qb ).
If qa + qb ≥ 1, then qa ≥ 1 − qb and qb ≥ 1 − qa . This means, in turn, that qa qb ≥ (1 − qa )(1 − qb ).
Therefore, qa + qb ≥ 1 implies that it is more likely for the agents to both get a high-type outcome
than for them to both get a low-type. In this case, the expected cost of exaggeration is higher
than its benefit, and the agents report truthfully. Intuitively, when good outcomes are likely, both
agents would rather avoid the skepticism of the decision-maker. In contrast, when qa + qb < 1, or
equivalently qa qb < (1 − qa )(1 − qb ), the expected benefit of exaggeration is higher than its cost. In
such case, bad outcomes are more likely and it is better for each agent to exaggerate in order to
maker his project look more attractive.
Lemmas A2-A3 in the appendix characterize the unique mixed strategy equilibrium with exaggeration that arises when qa + qb < 1. According to Proposition 1, the agent with a higher quality
production technology exaggerates more-aggressively. This implies that there is a complementarity
13

The mixed strategy equilibrium requires that agents select policies without perfectly anticipating the other agent’s
choices, and that adjusting one’s policy is infeasible after t = 1.

8

between investment in a production technology and financial exaggeration. The more an agent
invests in his production technology, the more optimistic the decision-maker is about his project’s
quality. Thus, the agent can exaggerate to a larger degree, while maintaining the decision-maker’s
perception that the project is higher quality. Exaggeration is valuable to the agent, because it
reduces the probability with which the decision-maker observes a bad report. Thus, the agent with
the more productive technology exaggerates more in equilibrium, and expects a higher equilibrium
payoff.
Based on Proposition 1, the payoff to each agent then depends on their relative investment in
quality:

 qi − qi2
if qi + qj ≤ 1
qi +qj
ρ
ui (qi , qj ) =
2
q
 1 (1 + qi − qj ) − i if qi + qj > 1
2
ρ

This payoff function is continuous everywhere and is differentiable everywhere except for possibly
qi = 1 − qj .14 The non-differentiability arises when the investment levels change the equilibrium
from one of full disclosure to one in which exaggeration is present. Despite this non-differentiability,
characterizing the symmetric equilibria of the game is straightforward.
Proposition 2. The symmetric Nash equilibrium of the investment game is as follows:
(i) Suppose that ρ > 2. Then, qa = qb =

ρ
4

at t = 0 and θa = θb = 0 at t = 1.

(ii) Suppose that ρ ≤ 2. Then, qa = qb =
exaggeration at t = 1.

√

2ρ
4

at t = 0 and the agents engage in financial

According to Proposition 2, the cost of investment affects the agents’ tendency to exaggerate if
given the opportunity to do so. When ρ is sufficiently high, C(qi ) is lower and less convex, making
it easier for the agents to invest in quality. In this case, the agents do not exaggerate because
they find it better to avoid the decision-maker’s skepticism. Given symmetry in equilibrium, the
inequality in Proposition 1 may be written as q ∗ + q ∗ ≥ 1, or q ∗ ≥ 21 . Substituting q ∗ = 4ρ yields
ρ ≥ 2, which is true by assumption. Therefore, when the marginal cost of quality is sufficiently
low, the decision-maker can rely on the agents to tell the truth.
When ρ is lower, making C(qi ) higher and more convex, the agents tend to exaggerate the
performance of their projects. In this case, the agents are more constrained and invest less. Revisiting the inequality in Proposition 1, q ∗ < 12 , which means that exaggeration is part of the
equilibrium. In this case, the agents are more concerned with concealing bad outcomes than with
the decision-maker’s skepticism. However, as we show in the next corollary, investment by the
agents is higher with exaggeration than without it. In essence, the ability to exaggerate relaxes the
constraint imposed by the high cost function and introduces a complementarity between investment
and misreporting.
14
While it is not the focus of our paper, it is interesting to note that the mixed strategy equilibrium of the financial
reporting stage generates a payoff function of the “ratio-form” commonly used in the study of contests (Tullock 1980).

9

Corollary 1. Suppose that ρ ≤ 2. Then, in a symmetric equilibrium, there is more investment in
quality when exaggeration is allowed than in the fully-informative benchmark.
This result can be appreciated by comparing the quality choices in Proposition 2 to those in
the fully-revealing benchmark. Indeed, exaggeration leads to higher quality if
√
ρ
2ρ
≥ ,
4
4
or ρ ≤ 2. This implies that the ability to exaggerate allows for a complementarity between investment in project quality and future financial exaggeration. If the marginal cost of investment
in quality is sufficiently high, then it might be preferable for a decision-maker to allow agents to
misreport. We explore this formally in the next proposition.
Proposition 3. (Decision-maker’s Payoff ) Suppose that ρ < 2. If no exaggeration is allowed, the
payoff to the decision-maker is
ρ ρ2
E
uN
=
− .
(6)
p
2 16
If exaggeration is allowed, the payoff to the decision-maker is

√
 19 2ρ
if
ρ ≤ 98
12 4
√
√
√
EX
(7)
up =
2ρ
1
√
+ 27( 42ρ )2 − 8( 42ρ )3 ) if 98 ≤ ρ ≤ 2.

2ρ 2 (1 − 9 4
12(

4

)

E
For all values of ρ < 2, uEX
> uN
p
p .

According to Proposition 3, the decision-maker is strictly better off allowing the agents to
exaggerate for ρ < 2. For ρ > 2 there is truth-telling anyway, so monitoring is irrelevant. Hence,
monitoring the agents is always weakly worse for the decision-maker.

3.3

Preference Alignment

So far, we have only considered a setting in which there is a strong conflict of interest between
the agents and the decision-maker. The agent who is chosen receives a fixed payoff, irrespective of
whether the outcome is high or low. Now, let us reconsider the analysis when the agent receives
a payoff if the decision-maker accepts his project and it turns out to be a high type. This type
of payoff might might reflect the agent’s reputational concerns, or a split of surplus between the
decision-maker and agent if the project is successful.
The set-up is unchanged from Section 2 except that an agent receives a benefit only when his
project is funded and τ = H. It is easy to show that θi = 0 is a weakly dominant strategy for each
agent. This is because the agent’s payoff when τ = L is zero, no matter what type of reporting
strategy is chosen. Given this, calculating the equilibrium investment levels is straightforward. The
expected payoff to each agent is
ui (qi , qj ) = qi (1 −
10

q2
qj
)− i .
2
ρ

Since this function is strictly concave in qi , the best response for agent i is defined by the following
first order condition that is linear in the choices of each agent:
(1 −

qj
2qi
)−
= 0.
2
ρ

2ρ
Solving yields q = ρ+4
.
Now, we can compare this level of investment to those in the base model. First, consider the
case of full monitoring. The agents always invest more when the conflict of interest is mild:

2ρ
ρ
>
⇐⇒ ρ < 4.
ρ+4
4
This is not surprising because in both scenarios, the agents tell the truth. However, when a lowtype project does not generate a payoff for the agent, there is an additional incentive to avoid bad
realizations15 .
We can now contrast this when exaggeration is allowed, which introduces a tradeoff for the
decision-maker. On one hand, as we showed before, financial exaggeration increases the incentives
to invest in quality because prior beliefs play a role in evaluation. At the same time, in the base
case, the agent may benefit even when his project is low value, which lowers the incentive to invest
in quality. It turns out that for small values of ρ, investment is higher in the base case with
exaggeration. To see this,
√
√
2ρ
2ρ
<
⇐⇒ ρ < 12 − 8 2 ≈ 0.69.
ρ+4
4
This increase in investment can also generate a higher payoff to the decision-maker. To make the
comparison, note that exaggeration in the base case can only be better if investment is higher,
which happens when ρ < 0.69 < 8/9. Hence, we need only compare the payoffs for low values of ρ.
Comparing these payoffs yields that exaggeration with a more severe conflict of interest is preferred
whenever:
√
2ρ 2 19 2ρ
) <
⇐⇒ ρ < ρ̂ ≈ 0.504.
1 − (1 −
ρ+4
12 4
Given this, if ρ is sufficiently small, the payoff to the decision-maker is higher when there is no
monitoring and there exists a more severe conflict of interest. In this case, preference alignment
actually decreases the decision-maker’s surplus.

3.4

Uninformative Reporting

One assumption that may appear critical to the results in this paper is whether the agents can
actually commit to a particular reporting technology without changing it once they observe the
outcome τi . In what follows, we relax this assumption. Not surprisingly, this leads to a cheap talk
scenario in which both agents have a weakly dominant strategy to lie when they get a low value.
The decision-maker internalizes this and realizes that the reports are uninformative. However, as
15

The cost parameter ρ is bounded by 4, assuring that the probability qi is maximized at one.

11

we show shortly, this leads to an even higher investment in quality. Indeed, the results in the
paper imply that the decision-maker typically prefers less information, not more. In the limit, if
the decision-maker were to ignore reports altogether, she is strictly better off.16 Given this, the
results in the paper are robust to different timing and modeling assumptions.
Suppose that the reports given by the agents are completely uninformative. Then, the game
between the agents is essentially a full-information, all-pay auction with a symmetric, convex cost
of bidding, and a bid cap. Each agent simultaneously chooses qi ∈ [0, 1]. The agent with the higher
q2
value of q receives a payoff of one, but both agents lose their investments, Ci (qi ) = ρii .
Proposition 4. (Uninformative Reporting)
i. Suppose that ρ ≥ 2. Then qi = qj = 1 is the unique equilibrium.
ii. If 1 < ρ < 2, then there exists a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which
(
x2
2
Q ∼ F (x) = 2−ρ
with probability
ρ −1
qi =
1
with probability 2(1 − 1ρ )
iii. If ρ ≤ 1, there exists a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which
qi ∼ F (x) =

x2
.
ρ

For all ρ, the payoff to the decision-maker is higher with uninformative reporting than with strategic
exaggeration or with full monitoring.
This result arises because q is publicly observable and there is no other information to judge the
situation. However, it does alleviate the concern that the main findings of this paper are simply
special to the specifics of the posed model.

4

Asymmetric Agents

Now, we consider heterogeneous agents. We first start by considering our base model with two
agents that have different marginal costs of investing in quality. Following that, we extend the
analysis to consider a continuum of types.
16
We show below that uninformative reporting generates a higher payoff for the decision-maker than the equilibrium
with exaggerated (but informative) reports when the agents are symmetric. This ranking may reverse when the agents
are asymmetric. Analytical results that support this latter finding are available from the authors.

12

4.1

Two Heterogenous Agents

Let us suppose that the cost of quality for the two agents is such that
Ra < ρb < ρa < 2,

(8)

where Ra is a constant that is defined analytically in the Appendix.17 Thus, while one agent has
a higher investment cost, the weaker agent’s cost is still above a certain threshold, so that the
asymmetry is not too large. The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium of the game.
Proposition 5. (Asymmetric Agents) Suppose that (8) holds. Then, there exists an equilibrium
with exaggeration and
p
r
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb
ρb ∗
∗
∗
qa =
qb =
q .
(9)
2(ρa − ρb )
ρa a
Further,

qb∗
q∗
> a.
ρb
ρa

(10)

According to Proposition 5, qb∗ < qa∗ , which is not surprising given that ρ∗b < ρ∗a . Based on
our characterization in Proposition 1, agent a will be more inclined than the weaker agent b to
exaggerate his performance at t = 1. However, this has an interesting effect on both agents at
t = 0. Higher expected exaggeration leads agent a to invest more in quality at t = 0, which is
consistent with our previous results. However, agent b has an even higher relative incentive to
increase quality due to this heightened competition when exaggeration is present.
To see this, lets us compare the ratio of each agent’s quality choice with exaggeration qi∗ to their
choice under full monitoring ρ4i .
q
ρb ∗
r
∗
∗
∗
ρa qa
qb
qa
ρb
qa
ρb
⇒
<
<
,
(11)
ρa < ρb ⇒
ρa
ρb
ρa
ρa
4
4
which is always the case. Given this, there is a spill-over effect of exaggeration. When the stronger
agent will be expected to invest more in quality and exaggerate, this causes the weaker one to work
harder. Monitoring may not only be suboptimal because it lowers effort provision, but it may also
remove a complementarity between asymmetric agents.

4.2

Continuum of Heterogeneous Agents

Now, consider a continuum of agents who have a marginal cost of quality ρi that is distributed
according to a continuously differentiable distribution function F (·) on the support [0, 1] with
q2
µ ≡ E[ρi ] ≤ 12 . Assume that each agent’s cost of quality is 2ρii . The decision-maker has the
capacity to allocate the resource to a fraction x of the projects from the population.
17
Setting this lower bound on ρb implies an upper bound on the cost of quality for agent b and assures that a pure
strategy equilibrium exists.

13

4.2.1

Fully Informative Benchmark

Depending on the size of x, there are two cases to consider. For small x, the decision-maker chooses
a fraction of projects with good reports (i.e., rations the scarce resource to a subset). For larger x,
the decision-maker allocates the resource to all high-quality projects and a fraction of lower quality
projects.
Proposition 6. (Full Information)
i. Suppose that x < µ. Then,
the decision-makers’s expected payoff is x and each agent’s
q
investment in quality is µx ρi . Both are increasing in x.

ii. Suppose that x > µ. The decision-maker’s payoff is


p
1 
2µ − 1 + 1 − 4µ (1 − x)
ud = 1 −
µ
2µ

(12)

and each agent’s investment in quality is

h
i
p
1 
2µ − 1 + 1 − 4µ (1 − x) ρi .
qi = 1 −
2µ

(13)

Both are decreasing in x.

Figure 2 plots the decision-maker payoff as a function of x for µ = 31 and µ = 12 . For x < µ,
the agents compete vigorously for the scarce resource. As the decision-maker has more capacity,
the probability of receiving the resource increases. Given this, agent investment increases and the
expected payoff to the decision-maker rises. However, once the resource becomes sufficiently less
scarce and lower quality projects will be picked as well, the incentives for the agents to compete
relax. As x gets large, agent investment decreases and the expected payoff to the decision-maker
decreases. In what follows, we compare this outcome under full information to what arises under
decreased transparency.
4.2.2

Equilibria with (Possibly) Less Transparency

The decision-maker is still willing to allocate resources to a fraction x of the agents. But, since there
is imperfect information, there will now exist a threshold belief G such that each agent only receives
i
surpasses the
the resource if the decision-maker’s posterior belief about his quality gi = qi +θiq(1−q
i)
threshold. In any equilibrium, the measure of projects at or above G equals x. Note that at G, all
projects must also be accepted, because otherwise an epsilon deviation would generate a posterior
belief marginally above G and lead to acceptance with probability one. Hence, rationing can occur
in equilibrium only if G = 1, which reduces to the previous case.
The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium for ρi ∼ U [0, 1].
Proposition 7. Uniform Distribution and Exaggeration

14

Figure 2: The decision maker’s payoff for µ = 1/2 (red) and µ = 1/3 (black) as a
function of the resource’s abundance, x.
i. Suppose that x < 21 . Then, there is fully-informative reporting, decision-makers’s payoff is x,
q
and each agent’s investment in quality is µx ρi .

ii. Suppose that x > 12 . Then, there is exaggeration and the decision-maker’s payoff is
p
x 2 (1 − x),

(14)

which is strictly higher than with the fully-informative benchmark. Agents with ρi < 2(1 − x)
p
whereas the remainder invest qi = 2(1 − x).
invest qi = √ ρi
2(1−x)

According to Proposition 7, when resources are sufficiently scarce (i.e., x < 12 ), truth-telling is
part of the equilibrium. The decision-maker’s payoff and the investment in quality is the same as
in the fully informative benchmark. However, when the resource is less scarce, the decision-maker’s
payoff is higher without monitoring. As in Section 3, this arises because of a complementarity
between exaggeration and quality. In Figure 3, we superimpose the decision-maker’s payoff on the
graph in Figure 2 with µ = 12 . Below x = 12 , the decision-maker’s payoff is the same. Above x = 12 ,
the decision-maker’s payoff is larger with exaggeration.
Equally as interesting is the optimal behavior of the agents when resources are less scarce. Highability agents put in sufficient effort, but give completely uninformative reports to the decisionmaker. Lower ability agents exert less effort, but offer more honesty to compensate. This equilibrium outcome has implications for the industrial organization of financial markets. For example,
15

Figure 3: The decision maker’s payoff as a function of the resource’s abundance, x
under full information and financial exaggeration. For x < 1/2, these are identical. For x > 1/2 the payoff with financial exaggeration (blue) is higher than under
full information (red).
consider skill and transparency in the investment management industry. The model would predict
that high skill agents would form less transparent funds, whereas lower skilled agents would work at
more transparent funds. Indeed, this is consistent with the co-existence of hedge funds and mutual
funds.

5

Applications and Related Literature

There are many empirical settings in which decision-makers are faced with the challenge that we
study in this paper and need to be skeptical about the information that they receive from people
who themselves are affected by this information (Milgrom and Roberts, 1986). For example, this
arises when private equity (PE) fund managers compete for capital from investors. Some PE fund
managers have been shown to manipulate their reported net asset values (NAV’s) when they market
their funds to investors. Brown, Gredil, and Kaplan (2015) find that some PE fund managers inflate
NAV’s when investors choose whether to commit funds to subsequent funds managed by the same
firm. Likewise, Barber and Yasuda (2016) show that some general partners time interim fundraising
to coincide with periods in which NAV’s have been artificially managed. The authors show that
these GP’s report performance peaks during fundraising and experience erosions in performance
afterwards.
The economic forces in our paper also apply to agency conflicts when entrepreneurs compete
16

for venture capital (e.g., Sahlman, 1990). These may be managed strategically with sequential
investments (Gompers, 1995), syndication (Lerner, 1994), or convertible securities. However, this
literature has focused on conflicts that arise after an entrepreneur develops an opportunity and on
conflicts that involve two parties: an investor and an entrepreneur. Our paper adds to this literature
because we address the conflicts that may arise before development occurs, and also analyze how
a venture capitalist optimally chooses among multiple opportunities. As we show, surprisingly,
in some cases a venture capitalist may wish to commit to forego some future control in order to
increase the competition from potential suitors. To our knowledge, we are the first to consider this
implication.
Our analysis also applies to internal capital markets in corporations. Starting with Williamson
(1975) and Donaldson (1984) and then later with Stein (1997), it has long been recognized that
agents who run divisions within firms compete for resources as top management seeks to allocate
them to the best opportunities.18 As Stein (1997) points out, “there is a tendency for these agents
to overstate their investment prospects”. In turn, this may lead to efficiency losses as in Scharfstein
and Stein (2000) who analyze divisional rent-seeking. Our paper contributes to this literature by
taking a step back and considering the level of competition that takes place in the first place. As
we show, allowing exaggeration actually heightens the intensity of competition. So, if the CEO of
a firm were to fully monitor his divisional managers, which may be reasonable in some cases, his
allocation decisions would be more accurate and efficient, but his own personal payoff would be
lower. Further, if the CEO were faced with the problem of getting a weaker division to not give up
because of their relative inferiority, allowing exaggeration may help to improve effort provision.
Last, our work applies to a large literature on earnings management and reporting quality. As
Beyer, Cohen, Lys and Walther (2010) note, accounting reporting plays two roles: it allows capital
providers to evaluate return potential before they invest and it allows them to monitor the use
of their capital ex post. Accordingly, reporting quality takes a central role because information
asymmetry and agency problems frequently arise in corporate settings. For example, CEO pay is
directly linked to earnings management (e.g., Bergstresser and Philippon, 2006): earnings management is more pronounced when more of the CEO’s pay is tied to stock performance and during
years of high accruals, CEO’s exercise unusually large numbers of options and sell large quantities
of stock. When earnings reporting takes place, the Revelation Principle frequently fails to hold
(Arya, Glover, and Sunder, 1998) and reporting quality may vary cross-sectionally as well as in the
time series (Dechow, Ge, and Schrand, 2010).
Our paper is related to theoretical work on information production and disclosure. However,
our approach is distinct from what is typically considered in the literature on Bayesian persuasion
(Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011; Boleslavsky and Cotton, 2015). Typically in that literature, agents
choose the process by which public evidence is generated, with minimal restrictions on the structure
of possible signals. In contrast, in our model agents choose the level of access to auditors, whose
sole role is to detect financial exaggeration, whereby a low quality project is reported as good.
As such, our setting is more natural for studying issues related to credibility and reporting in a
18

As such, the investment of the divisions is strongly related to the cash flows generated by the rest of the firm
(Lamont, 1996; Shin and Stulz, 1996).

17

financial context. 19
A theoretical contribution of our paper is that we simultaneously consider two types of incentives
faced by agents in a competitive environment: the incentive for agents to invest in improving the
distribution of project quality and the incentive to make exaggerated reports of realized project
quality. This distinguishes our work from several existing, but related papers. For example, it is
well established in the career concerns literature that more monitoring can discourage effort (e.g.
Dewatripont, et al 1999 and Holmstrom 1999). Similarly, Taylor and Yildirim (2011) and Coate
and Loury (1993) consider how decision maker access to information about an agents type affects
the agents decision to invest in quality. In the contracting literature, it is also well established that
a principal may want to commit to imperfect monitoring technologies, as doing so leads to more
favorable actions taken by agents (e.g. Cremer 1995, Sappington 1986, 1991). Along this same line,
our work contributes to a large body of work that implies that people may be better off ignoring
information or by committing not to collect it (e.g. Hirshleifer 1971; Morris and Shin 2002).20
Another large literature has focused on a biased agents incentive to report a verifiable state that
has already been realized – for example, product quality or a firms fundamental value - without
explicitly considering incentives for agents to invest ex ante to improve the state. The early strand
of literature (Grossman and Hart 1980; Grossman 1981; Milgrom 1981; Milgrom and Roberts
1986) argues that that those with relatively good news will always prefer to disclose it, inducing
a cascade in which all news is revealed. Subsequent literature (e.g. Verrechia 1983; Dye 1985;
Matthews and Postlewaite 1985) establishes a variety of conditions under which full disclosure
fails. Incentives to disclose information in a competitive environment are analyzed by Carlin,
Davies, and Iannacone (2012), who find that competition may, paradoxically, reduce incentives for
agents to disclose relevant information. Che and Kartik (2009) consider an agent’s incentive to
search for verifiable information, which he may subsequently report or withhold. In addition to
the difference mentioned previously, this literature also assumes that information is verifiable: the
agent may withhold a report of the state, but if he sends one it must be true. In contrast, our
analysis is built around the idea of exaggerated reporting: the agent always reports good news in
the good state, but he may choose a reporting policy that sometimes reports good news in the bad
state.

6

Conclusion

For decades, financial economists have focused on ways to mitigate the agency problems that
arise between shareholders and managers, investors and entrepreneurs, and lenders and borrowers.
19

Boleslavsky and Cotton (2015) develop a general Bayesian persuasion model of school competition. Like our
model, Boleslavsky and Cotton (2015) offers the opportunity for schools to invest in quality and then choose grading
policies. But, schools are given much more discretion in altering signals, while in the current paper auditors only have
one role: to curb exaggeration. This simplification allows for analysis beyond work by Boleslavsky and Cotton (2015).
In particular, we consider limited conflict of interest between the agents and the decision-maker, heterogeneous agents,
and an industry structure where a continuum of agents compete for resources.
20
See Bikhchandani, Hirschleifer, and Welch (1992), Teoh (1997), Burguet and Vives (2000), Angeletos and Pavan
(2007), and Amador and Weill (2012), among others.

18

Whether due to adverse selection or moral hazard, agency conflicts are ubiquitous in corporate
finance as an important determinant of firm size, capital structure, corporate governance, and firm
value. Generally, the field has viewed perfect monitoring as a panacea, as long as it is not too
costly.
In this paper, we show that this is not the complete story. If agents forecast that they will
have the opportunity to hide information or act in their own self-interest, it is possible that they
will invest more effort to develop strong projects when they anticipate this. In our model, agents
compete for resources, which in some cases leads them to exaggerate the outcome of their projects.
Knowing this, they work harder to win, which benefits the decision-maker who allocates the capital.
In such cases, having less information may benefit the decision-maker.
Our findings, then, can be viewed as a more general contribution. Indeed, one can think of many
settings to apply this analysis besides financial markets: marriage markets, education, litigation,
and elections, to name a few. Investigating these settings is the subject of future research.

19

References
Alonso, Ricardo and Odilon Camara 2014. Bayesian Persuasion With Heterogeneous Priors. Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Theory.
Alonso, Ricardo and Odilon Camara 2015. Persuading Voters. Forthcoming, American Economic
Review.
Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2012. Learning from Private and Public Observations
of Others Actions. Journal of Economic Theory 147: 910-940.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan. 2007. Efficient Use of Information and Social
Value of Information. Econometrica 75: 1103-1142.
Arya, Anil, Glover, Jonathan, and Sunder, Shyam. 1998. Earnings Management and the Revelation
Principle. Review of Accounting Studies 3: 7-34.
Barber, Brad, and Yasuda, Ayako. 2016. Interim Fund Performance and Fundraising in Private
Equity. Working paper, University of California at Davis.
Bergstresser, Daniel, and Thomas Philippon. 2006. CFO Incentives and Earnings Management.
Journal of Financial Economics 80: 511-529.
Beyer, Anne, Daniel A. Cohen, Thomas Z. Lys, and Beverly R. Walther. 1992. The Financial
Reporting Environment: Review of the Recent Literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics
50: 296-343.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. 1992. A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom,
and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100: 992-1026.
Boleslavsky, Raphael, and Christopher Cotton. 2015. Grading Standards and Education Quality.
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7: 248-279.
Boleslavsky, Raphael, and Christopher Cotton. 2014. Limited Capacity in Project Selection:
Competition Through Evidence Production. mimeo, University of Miami.
Bookstaber, Richard. 2003. Hedge Fund Existential. Financial Analysts Journal 59: 19-23.
Brocas, I. and Carrillo, J.D. 2007. Influence through Ignorance. RAND Journal of Economics 38:
931-947.
Brocas, I., Carrillo, J.D., and Palfrey, T. 2012. Information Gatekeepers: Theory and Experimental
Evidence. Economic Theory 51: 649-676.

20

Brown, Greg, Gredil, Oleg, and Steven Kaplan. 2015. Do Private Equity Funds Game Returns?.
Working paper, University of Chicago.
Brown, Stephen, and William Goetzmann. 2003. Hedge Funds with Style. Journal of Portfolio
Management 29: 101-112.
Burguet, Roberto, and Xavier Vives. 2000. Social Learning and Costly Information Acquisition.
Economic Theory 15: 185-205.
Carlin, Bruce, Davies, Shaun, and Iannacone, Andrew. 2012. Competition, Comparative Performance, and Market Transparency. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 4: 202-237,
2012.
Che, Yeon-Koo, and Kartik, Navin. 2009. Opinions as Incentives. Journal of Political Economy
117:815-860.
Coate, Stephen, and Loury, Glenn. 1993. Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Negative
Stereotypes?. American Economic Review 83: 1220-1240.
Cremer, J. 1995 Arms Length Relationships. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110: 275-295.
Dechow, Patricia, Weili Ge, and Catherine Schrand. 2010. Understanding Earnings Quality: A
Review of the Proxies, Their Determinants, and Their Consequences. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 50: 344-401.
Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I. and Tirole, J. 1999. The economics of career concerns, Part I: Comparing information structures. Review of Economic Studies 66: 183-198.
Donaldson, Gordon. 1984. Managing Corporate Wealth. Praeger Publishers, New York.
Dye, Ronald A. (1985). Disclosure of Nonproprietary Information. Journal of Accounting Research 23, 123-145.
Fung, William, and David Hsieh, 1997. Empirical Characteristics of Dynamic Trading Strategies:
The Case of Hedge Funds. Review of Financial Studies 10: 275-302.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Emir Kamenica. 2015. Competition in Persuasion. Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
Gervais, Simon, and Gunter, Strobl. 2016. The Industrial Organization of Money Management.
Working paper, Duke University.
Gompers, Paul. 1995. Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital.
Journal of Finance 50: 1461-1489.
21

Grossman, Sanford J. (1981). The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about
Product Quality. Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461-483.
Grossman, S. J. and Hart, O. D. (1980). Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids. Journal of Finance 35,
323-334.
Gul, Faruk and Pesendorfer, Wolfgang. (2012). The War of Information. Review of Economic
Studies 79, 707-734.
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
Activity. American Economic Review 61: 561-574.
Holmstrom, B. 1999. Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective. Review of Economic
Studies 66: 169-182.
Kamenica, Emir, and Gentzkow, Matthew. 2011. Bayesian Persuasion. American Economic
Review 101: 2590-2615.
Kolotin, Anton, and Ming Li and Tymofiy Mylovanov and Andriy Zapechelnyuk. 2015. Persuasion
of a Privately Informed Receiver. Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh.
Koski, Jennifer Lynch, and Jeffrey Pontiff. 1999. How Are Derivatives Used? Evidence from the
Mutual Fund Industry. Journal of Finance 54: 791-816.
Lerner, Josh. 1994. The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments. Financial Management 23:
16-27.
Matthews, Steven, and Postlewaite, Andrew. 1985. Quality Testing and Disclosure. RAND Journal
of Economics 16: 328-340.
McCloskey, Donald, and Klamer, Arjo. 1995. One Quarter of GDP is Persuasion. American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundredth and Seventh Annual Meeting of the
American Economic Association pp. 191-195.
Merkl-Davies, Doris and Brennan, Niamh. 2007. Discretionary Disclosure Strategies in Corporate
Narratives: Incremental Information or Impression Management?. Journal of Accounting Literature
27: 116-196.
Milgrom, Paul R. (1981). Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications.
The Bell Journal of Economics 12, 380-391.
Milgrom, Paul, and Roberts, John. 1986. Relying on the Information of Interested Parties. RAND
Journal of Economics 17: 18-32.

22

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. Social Value of Public Information. American
Economic Review 92: 1521-1534.
Sahlman, W. 1990. The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations. Journal of
Financial Economics 27: 473-524.
Scharfstein, David, and Stein, Jeremy. 2000. The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets: Divisional
Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment. Journal of Finance 55: 2537-2564.
Sappington, David. 1986. Commitment to Regulatory Bureaucracy. Information Economics and
Policy 2: 243-258.
Sappington, David. 1991. Incentives in principal-agent relationships. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 5: 45-66.
Stein, Jeremy. 1997. Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources.
Journal of Finance 52: 111-133.
Taneva, Ina. 2015. Information Design. Working Paper, University of Edinburgh.
Taylor, Curtis, and Yildirim, Huseyin. 2011. Subjective Performance and the Value of Blind
Evaluation. Review of Economic Studies 78: 762-794.
Teoh, Siew Hong. 1997. Information Disclosure and Voluntary Contributions to Public Goods.
RAND Journal of Economics 28: 385-406.
Tullock, G. 1980. Efficient Rent Seeking. In: Buchanan, J., Tollison, R., Tullock, G. (eds.) Toward
a Theory of the Rent-Seeking Society. College Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Verrecchia, Robert. 1983. Discretionary Disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 5:
179-194.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Collier
Macmillan Publishers, Inc. New York.

23

Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1.
The proof follows from Lemmas A1-A3. At the reporting stage, investments (qa , qb ) with qa ≥ qb
are taken as given, because these were chosen in the previous stage. Agents simultaneously choose
(θa , θb ), their level of exaggeration. The posterior belief that a project with a bad report is high
quality is 0, since no high quality projects receive bad reports. The posterior belief, gi , that project
i is high quality given a good report ranges from gi = qi when θi = 1 to gi = 1 when θi = 0. For
all levels of report inflation θi ∈ [0, 1], Bayes’ rule provides a one-to-one mapping between θi and
gi , with gi = qi /(qi + (1 − qi )θi ), and ∂gi /∂θi < 0. When characterizing the equilibrium of the
reporting stage, we work with the choice of gi directly for convenience. If an agent chooses gi , the
probability with which the posterior is equal to gi is equal to qi /gi . Therefore the expected payoff
of agent i is given by:

ui (gi , gj ) =







qj
qj
qi
qi
1
gi (1 − gj ) + 2 (1 − gi )(1 − gj )
qj
qi
qi
1
gi + 2 (1 − gi )(1 − gj )
qj
qi
qi
1 qj
1
gi (1 − 2 gj ) + 2 (1 − gi )(1 − gj )

if gi < gj
if gi > gj
if gi = gj

Lemma A1. If qb ≥ 1 − qa then the unique Nash equilibrium of the second stage game is ga =
gb = 1.
Proof. If agent j chooses gj =1, then the best possible deviation from gi = 1 is gi = qi . By choosing
this deviation, agent i assures that if the other agent’s project receives an L and is thus revealed
to be low-type, agent i payoff is 1. Thus, ga = gb = 1 is a Nash equilibrium if and only if for each
agent i
qi (1 −

qj
1
) + (1 − qi )(1 − qj ) ≥ 1 − qj ↔ qi + qj ≥ 1
2
2

Thus, the equilibrium of the second stage is fully revealing if and only if qb ≥ 1 − qj



Lemma A2. If 12 (1 − qa ) < qb < 1 − qa then the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is as follows:
ga =







qa
G ∼ F (x) =

x2 −qa2
4(1−qb )(1−qa −qb )

1

2qb
qb +qa
qa +2qb −1
b
( qb2q
+qa )(1 − qb (qa +qb ) )
qa +2qb −1
b
( qb2q
+qa ) qb (qa +qb )

with prob 1 − φ1 − φ2 = 1 −

with prob φ1 =
with prob φ2 =

24

gb =

(

G ∼ F (x) =

x2 −qa2
4(1−qb )(1−qa −qb )

with prob λ = 1 −
with prob 1 − λ =

1

qa +2qb −1
qb (qa +qb )
qa +2qb −1
qb (qa +qb )

Proof. Note, all probabilities are positive and sum to one, and the density of G is given by f (x) =
x/(2(1 − qb )(1 − qa − qb )). The support of G is [qa , 2 − qa − 2qb ], and for the parameters of the
proposition, the top of the support is in [0, 1]. To show that the proposed strategies constitute a
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, we verify that each agent is indifferent among all pure strategies
inside the support and that no pure strategy outside the support delivers a better expected payoff
against the mixed strategy of the other player.21
Agent b’s expected payoff from pure strategy p in the support of its mixed strategy:
(
R 2−qa −2qb
qb
(1
−
φ
f (s) qsa ds − φ2 qa ) + 21 (1 − E[ gqaa ])(1 − qpb ) if p ∈ [qa , 2 − qa − 2qb ]
1
p
p
ub =
qb (1 − φ22qa ) + 21 (1 − E[ qgaa ])(1 − qb )
if
p=1
Substitution and simplification gives:

 qb qb2 +pqa + 1 ( 2qb2 )(1 − qb )
p (qa +qb )2
2 (qa +qb )2
p
ub =
2
2q
q
a
 qb (1 − ( b ) qa +2qb −1 ) + 1 ( 2qb
2 qb +qa qb (qa +qb )
2 (qa +q

2
b)

if p ∈ [qa , 2 − qa − 2qb ]
)(1 − qb ) if

p=1

Further simplification gives ub = qb /(qa + qb ) in both cases. Thus all pure strategies in the support
of b’s mixed strategy give the same expected payoff. Choosing any pure strategy ĝ ∈ (2−qa −2qb , 1)
is dominated by choosing g = 2 − qa − 2qb , because the probability of winning is the same for both
pure strategies, but g is more likely to generate a good realization. It is also straightforward to
verify that choosing qb is dominated by the equilibrium mixed strategy. Thus all pure strategies in
the support of b’s mixed strategy give the same expected payoff against a’s mixed strategy, and no
strategy outside the support gives b a higher payoff. Thus, b’s mixed strategy is a best response to
a’s mixed strategy.
A symmetric analysis applies to agent a. Simplifying the utility function gives ua = qa /(qa +qb ),
and by a symmetric argument as above, one can show that a mixed strategy is a best response to
b’s mixed strategy.



21

We follow a similar approach in the proof to the next lemma as well. Alternative derivation of the equilibrium
from the indifference conditions, which also shows uniqueness, is available for both equilibrium cases upon request.

25

Lemma A3. If qb ≤ 21 (1 − qa ) then the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is as follows:
(
b
qa
with probability 1 − φ = 1 − qb2q
+qa
ga =
x2 −qa2
b
G ∼ F (x) = 4qb (qa +qb ) with probability
φ = qb2q
+qa
gb = G ∼ F (x) =

x2 −qa2
4qb (qa +qb )

Proof. Note, all probabilities are positive and sum to one, and the density of G is given by f (x) =
x/(2qb (qa + qb )) . The support of G is [qa , qa + 2qb ], and for the parameters of the proposition, the
top of the support is in [0, 1]. As before, we establish indifference between all pure strategies played
with positive probability, and show that no pure strategy outside of the mixing distribution results
in higher expected payoffs.
Consider agent b’s expected payoff from a pure strategy p ∈ [qa , qa + 2qb ] in the support of its
mixed strategy:
ub =

qb
p (1

−φ

R qa +2qb
p

f (s) qsa ds) + 12 (1 − E[ qgaa ])(1 −

qb
p)

Substitution and simplification gives:
ub =

qb
p (1

−

qa +2qb −p
2qb
qa +qb qa 2qb (qa +qb ) )

+ 12 (1 −

qa
2qb
qa +qb (qa +qb )

− (1 −

2qa
qa +qb ))(1

−

qb
p)

Further simplification gives ub = qb /(qa + qb ). Following the same argument as in the proof to the
previous lemma, one can show that b mixed strategy is a best response to a’s mixed strategy.
Consider agent a’s expected payoff from a pure strategy p in the support of its mixed strategy:
ua =

qa
p (1

−

R qa +2qb
p

f (s) qsb ds) + 21 (1 − E[ gqab ])(1 −

qa
p)

if p ∈ [qa , qa + 2qb ]

Substitution and simplification gives ua = qb /(qa + qb ). Following the same argument as before,
one can show that a mixed strategy is a best response to b’s mixed strategy.



Proof of Proposition 2.
Proof. Consider a symmetric pure strategy Nash equilibrium qi = qj = q ≤ 1/2. Because q ≤ 1/2,
q ≤ 1 − q. Therefore, over the region qi ≤ 1 − q, selecting qi = q must be optimal. Hence,
26

a necessary condition for (q, q) to constitute a Nash equilibrium with q ≤ 1/2 is the following
stationarity condition:
i
d  qi
q 2 i
= 0 ⇐⇒ 2qi3 + 4qqi2 + 2q 2 qi − qρ
− i
= 0 ⇐⇒ 8q 3 − qρ = 0
dqi qi + q
ρ qi =q
qi =q

(A1)

Note that over the region qi < 1 − q the payoff function is strictly concave in qi , and thus this first
order condition defines a maximum over this region. Because q = 0 cannot be an equilibrium, the
only positive value of q satisfying this necessary condition that could arise in equilibrium is
√
2ρ
q∗ =
4
To be consistent with the initial assumption that q ≤ 1/2, it must be that ρ ≤ 2. Thus, for ρ ≤ 2
selecting q ∗ as a response to q ∗ dominates any other possible value of qi < 1 − q ∗ . To show that
investment level q ∗ constitutes the unique symmetric equilibrium, profitable deviations above 1− q ∗
must be ruled out. Note that for qi > 1 − q ∗ , the derivative of agent i’s payoff function is
d 1
q 2  1 2qi
(1 + qi − q ∗ ) − i = −
dqi 2
ρ
2
ρ
For qi > 1 − q ∗

√
1 2(1 − q ∗ )
ρ + 2ρ − 4
1 2qi
−
< −
=
≤ 0 for ρ ≤ 2
2
ρ
2
ρ
2ρ

Hence, when ρ ≤ 2, no deviations above 1 − q ∗ are profitable.
Next, consider a symmetric pure strategy equilibrium qi = qj = q > 1/2. Because q > 1/2,
q > 1 − q. Therefore, over the region qi > 1 − q, selecting qi = q must be optimal. Hence, a necessary condition for (q, q) to constitute a Nash equilibrium with q > 1/2 is the following stationarity
condition:
d 1
1
q 2 i
2q
= 0 ⇐⇒
(1 + qi − qj ) − i
=
dqi 2
ρ qi =q
2
ρ

(A2)

Note that over the region qi > 1 − q the payoff function is strictly concave in qi , and thus this first
order condition defines a maximum over this region. Thus, the only positive value of q satisfying
this necessary condition that could arise in equilibrium is
q∗ =
27

ρ
4

To be consistent with the initial assumption that q > 1/2, it must be that ρ > 2. Thus, for ρ > 2
selecting q ∗ as a response to q ∗ dominates any other possible value of qi > 1 − q ∗ . To show that
investment level q ∗ constitutes the unique symmetric equilibrium, profitable deviations below 1− q ∗
must be ruled out. Note that for qi < 1 − q ∗ , the agent’s payoff function is strictly concave, and
thus has no more than one peak. The derivative of agent i’s payoff function is
q∗
d  qi
qi2 
2qi
=
−
−
∗
∗
2
dqi qi + q
ρ
(qi + q )
ρ
For qi < 1 − q ∗ the derivative is larger than at qi = 1 − q ∗ . Hence, for qi < 1 − q ∗ ,
q∗
2qi
2(1 − q ∗ )
∗
−
>
q
−
> 0 for ρ > 2
(qi + q ∗ )2
ρ
ρ
Hence, when ρ > 2, no deviations below 1 − q ∗ are profitable.



Proof of Corollary 1.

Proof. In the fully-revealing benchmark, q∗ = ρ4 . When exaggeration is allowed, q ∗ =

√
ρ
√ .
2 2

√
ρ
ρ
q = √ > q∗ = ,
4
2 2
∗

iff
ρ < 2.


Proof of Proposition 3.
Proof. First, we begin with the decision-maker’s payoff for symmetric investments qa = qb =
q. Because we consider symmetric agents, the equilibrium of the investment stage will also be
symmetric. This calculation will therefore facilitate the comparison of decision-maker payoff under
exaggeration to the decision-maker payoff in the no exaggeration benchmark. Given the posterior
belief realizations of (ga , gb ) generated by the equilibrium mixed strategies, define gm = max[ga , gb ]
28

and gn = min[ga , gb ]. The decision-maker’s expected payoff for a particular combination of (gm , gn )
is given by
up (gm , gn ) = gm

q
q
q
q
+ (1 −
)gn
= q(2 −
)
gm
gm
gn
gm

(A3)

If the agent with the less-inflated disclosure policy, and higher posterior gm , generates a good
report, then the decision-maker will accept that project, giving the decision-maker a payoff of gm .
This event occurs with probability

q
gm

(the first term in expression (A3)). If the project with higher

gi generates a bad report, then the decision-maker knows for sure that the project is low quality.
In this instance, if the more-inflated project generates a good report, (probability

q
gn )

the decision-

maker accepts it, giving the decision-maker an expected payoff of gn . Thus, the decision-maker’s
ex ante expected payoff in this equilibrium is equal to
u∗p = E[q(2 −

q
1
)] = q(2 − qE[ ])
gm
gm

(A4)

In order to calculate the decision-maker’s ex ante expected payoff in this equilibrium, we need to
determine the expected value of the inverse of the maximum order statistic from the equilibrium
mixed strategies, E[ g1m ]. We consider three cases in turn:

Case I : q ≤

1
3.

When qa = qb = q ≤

1
3,

the equilibrium mixed strategy of each agent is to

randomize over support [q, 3q] using distribution function F (x) =
sity f (x) =

x
.
4q 2

x2 −q 2
8q 2

with corresponding den-

The expectation in question, E[ g1m ], is therefore22
Z

3q
q

5
1 x2 − q 2 x
) 2 dx =
2( )(
2
x
8q
4q
12q

Thus, when q ≤ 1/3 the decision-maker’s ex ante equilibrium expected payoff is
q(2 − q

Case II :

1
3

≤ q ≤

probability φ =
22

1
2.

3q−1
2q 2

5
19
) = ( )q
12q
12

Here, the equilibrium mixed strategy of each agent is as follows. With
choose g = 1. With probability 1 − φ randomize over support [q, 2 − 3q]

The density of the maximum order statistic gm is 2f (x)F (x)

29

using distribution function F (x) = (x2 − q 2 )/(4(1 − q)(1 − 2q)) with corresponding density f (x) =
x/(2(1 − q)(1 − 2q)). Thus, E[ g1m ] equals
Z 2−3q
1
x2 − q 2
x
1
2
2
1−(1−φ) +(1−φ)
2( )(
)(
)dx =
(32q 3 −27q 2 +9q−1).
x 4(1 − q)(1 − 2q) 2(1 − q)(1 − 2q)
12q 4
q
Thus for

1
3

≤q≤

1
2

the decision-maker expected payoff simplifies to
(1 − 9q + 27q 2 − 8q 3 )/(12q 2 )

Case III : q ≥ 12 . In this case, agents use fully revealing grading strategies in the second stage and
the decision-maker’s ex ante equilibrium expected payoff is
2q − q 2

Summarizing, in a subgame in which qa = qb = q, the decision-maker’s ex ante expected payoff
when financial exaggeration is possible is equal to:

19
if q ≤ 31

12 q
∗
2
3
2
up =
(1 − 9q + 27q − 8q )/(12q ) if 13 ≤ q ≤

2q − q 2
if q > 21

1
2

(A5)

Now, we can consider the payoff to the decision-maker for different values of ρ < 2. Substituting

into (A5) yields (7). Taking the difference between (6) and (7) yields
1 − (1 − ρ4 )2 −
1 − (1 − ρ4 )2 −

19
12

√

12(

2ρ
4
1
√

2ρ 2
)
4

(1 − 9

√

2ρ
4

if
2ρ 2
2ρ 3
+ 27( 4 ) − 8( 4 ) ) if
√

√

8
9

ρ ≤ 98
≤ρ≤2

Plotting these payoff functions clearly shows that when investment is endogenous, the decisionmaker’s evaluator payoff is higher when exaggeration is allowed.



Proof of Proposition 4.
Proof. First consider that ρ ≥ 2. Suppose that agent j chooses qj = 1. All pure strategies qi ∈ (0, 1)
lead to payoff zero. Because investment is costly, and given agent j’s strategy, the best deviation
from qi = 1 is qi = 0. Thus, provided
1 1
− ≥0↔ρ≥2
2 ρ
30

qi = 1 is a best response to qj = 1, and full investment is the unique equilibrium.

Now, consider that 1 < ρ < 2. Under the parameter range in the proposition, all values we claim
are probabilities are in [0, 1] and sum to one. Also, F (x) is increasing on the support of Q which
√
is [0, 2 − ρ]. To show that the proposed strategies constitute a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
we verify that each agent is indifferent among all pure strategies inside the support and that no
pure strategy outside the support delivers a better expected payoff against the mixed strategy of
the other player. A derivation of the equilibrium from the indifference conditions, which also shows
uniqueness, is available upon request.
Consider agent i’s expected payoff from a pure strategy p in the support of its mixed strategy:

0

 2
2
( ρ − 1)F (p) − pρ
u=

2(1− 1 )

1 − 2 ρ − ρ1

if
p=0
√
if p ∈ [0, 2 − ρ]
if

p=1

Substituting and simplifying gives:


0
if
p=0

 2
√
p2
p2
( ρ − 1) 2−ρ − ρ = 0 if p ∈ [0, 2 − ρ]
uβ =

2(1− 1 )

if
p=1
1 − 2 ρ − 1ρ = 0

Thus all pure strategies in the support of agent i’s mixed strategy give the agent expected payoff
√
√
zero. Choosing any pure strategy q̂ ∈ ( 2 − ρ, 1) is dominated by choosing q = 2 − ρ, because
the probability of winning is the same for both pure strategies, but q is less costly. Thus all pure
strategies in the support of i’s mixed strategy give the same expected payoff against j’s mixed
strategy, and no strategy outside the support gives i a higher payoff.

Now, consider that ρ ≤ 1. To show that the proposed strategies constitute a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium, we verify that each agent is indifferent among all pure strategies inside the support
and that no pure strategy outside the support delivers a better expected payoff against the mixed
strategy of the other player. A derivation of the equilibrium from the indifference conditions, which
also shows uniqueness, is available upon request.

31

Consider agent i’s expected payoff from a pure strategy p in the support of its mixed strategy:
(
0
if
p=0
u=
√
p2
F (p) − ρ if p ∈ [0, ρ]
Substituting and simplifying gives that in both cases u = 0. Thus all pure strategies in the
support of agent i mixed strategy give the agent expected payoff zero. Choosing any pure strategy
√
q̂ ∈ ( ρ, 1) is dominated by choosing q = ρ, because the probability of winning is the same for both
pure strategies, but q is less costly. Thus all pure strategies in the support of i mixed strategy give
the same expected payoff against j mixed strategy, and no strategy outside the support gives i a
higher payoff.

Finally, we can compare payoff comparisons for all three cases. If ρ > 2, uninformative reporting
is clearly optimal since the unique equilibrium involves qi = qj = 1. We consider the other two
cases in turn and show that uninformative reporting is preferred to either strategic reporting or
fully-revealing reporting. In order to make this calculation, we need to know the evaluator payoff
in the absence of reporting.

Case: 1 ≤ ρ ≤ 2 Observe that
E[Q(2) ] = 2

Z

√
2−ρ

(
0

2x
x2
4p
)(
)(x)dx =
2−ρ
2−ρ 2−ρ
5

Where Q(2) represents the maximum of two draws of Q. The decision-maker’s expected payoff is
therefore
5
2
2
4
1 − ( − 1)2 + ( − 1)2 E[Q(2) ] = 2 ((2 − ρ) 2 − 5(1 − ρ))
ρ
ρ
5ρ

Case: ρ ≤ 1 Observe that the decision-maker’s expected payoff is given by:
Z √ρ
4√
2x x2
(2)
ρ
E[Q ] = 2
( )( )(x)dx =
ρ
ρ
5
0
A simple plot reveals that both of these payoffs dominate both fully-revealing and strategic reporting
derived earlier in the paper.


32

Proof of Proposition 5.
Proof. Here we consider the model in which the agents’ development costs are not identical, where
ρa > ρb . If ρa < 2 and ρb is not too small, then a pure strategy equilibrium exists in the investment
stage, which can be explicitly characterized. Consider the possibility of an equilibrium in which
i
h
qa + qb < 1. Ruling out profitable deviations for agent i that are inside 0, 1 − qj requires that the
following system of first order conditions holds:
2qa
qb
−
=0
2
ρa
(qa + qb )

2qb
qa
−
=0
2
ρb
(qa + qb )

The only solution of this system in which both investments are positive is
p
r
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb
ρb
qa =
qb =
qa
2(ρa − ρb )
ρa
and these are local maxima. The term inside the radical is always positive:
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb > 0 ⇐⇒ (ρa + ρb )2 ρ3a ρb − 4ρ4a ρ2b > 0 ⇐⇒ ρ31 ρ2 (ρ1 − ρ2 )2 > 0
Next note that if ρa < 2 then qa < 1/2 and therefore qa + qb < 1. Indeed,
p
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb
1
<
⇐⇒
2(ρa − ρb )
2
q
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb < (ρa − ρb ) ⇐⇒
√
2ρa (ρa + ρb ) ρa ρb − 4ρ2a ρb < (ρa − ρb )2 ⇐⇒
4(ρa + ρb )2 ρ3a ρb < (4ρ2a ρb + (ρa − ρb )2 )2 ⇐⇒
4(ρa + ρb )2 ρ3a ρb − (4ρ2a ρb + (ρa − ρb )2 )2 < 0 ⇐⇒
−(ρa − ρb )2 ((ρa − ρb )2 + 4ρ2a ρb (2 − ρa )) < 0 ⇐⇒
To complete the characterization, we show that when qb is sufficiently close to qa , no deviations in
h
i
the range 1 − qj , 1 are optimal for player i. In this region, each player’s payoff function is
q2
1
(1 + qi − qj ) − i
2
ρi
33

with derivative
4( ρ4i − qi )
1 2qi
−
=
2
ρi
2ρi
Hence if qi > ρi /4 for both i = a, b, then each player’s payoff function is decreasing in this region
(when the other player plays his part of the strategy) and therefore no deviation in this interval
could be beneficial. Observe first that if qa > ρa /4 then qb > ρb /4. Indeed,
qa > ρa /4 ⇒ qa

r

ρb
>
ρa

r

ρb
ρa /4 ⇒ qb >
ρa

√

ρa ρb
ρb
>
4
4

Hence, qa > ρa /4 is sufficient to rule out global deviations. For ρa < 2, this condition is satisfied
whenever

√
√ √
ρ2a − 16ρa + 32 + (4 2ρa − 16 2) 2 − ρa
ρb > Ra ≡
ρa

Ra < ρa for ρa < 2. Hence for Ra < ρb < ρa < 2, the investment levels above constitute an
equilibrium.


Proof of Proposition 6.
Proof. Let us start with the case in which there is rationing among high-type projects. Conditional
on being τi = H, define φ < 1 to be the probability of being accepted. Each agent’s optimal quality
choice is calculated as
φqi −

qi2
→ qi = φρi .
2ρ

Given this, the overall measure of good projects developed is
Z

1

φρi f (ρi ) dρi = φµ.
0

For consistency φ must be the share of acceptable projects among those that are good
x
→φ=
φ=
φµ

r

x
µ

and to be consistent with rationing, it must be that x ≤ µ. Hence, actual measure of good projects
√
in this case is φµ = xµ. Since only x are accepted, the decision-maker’s payoff equals x. Each
34

agent’s investment in quality is calculated as
qi = φρi =

r

x
ρi .
µ

By inspection, each agent’s effort is increasing in the x.
Now, suppose that the decision-maker accepts all projects with τi = H and a φ fraction of the
projects with τi = L. Each agent’s optimal quality choice is calculated as
qi + φ (1 − qi ) −

qi2
→ qi = (1 − φ) ρi .
2ρ

Given this, the overall measure of good projects developed is
Z 1
(1 − φ) ρi f (ρi ) dρi = (1 − φ) µ.
0

and overall measure of bad projects developed is
1 − (1 − φ) µ.
For consistency φ must be the share of projects accepted among those that are bad
φ =

φ1 =
φ2 =

x − (1 − φ) µ
→
1 − (1 − φ) µ

p
1 
2µ − 1 + 1 − 4µ (1 − x)
2µ

p
1 
2µ − 1 − 1 − 4µ (1 − x)
2µ

Since µ < 12 , φ = φ1 . Since all good projects are accepted, the decision-maker payoff is equal to the
measure of good projects:
(1 − φ) µ =



p
1 
2µ − 1 + 1 − 4µ (1 − x)
1−
µ.
2µ

Each agent’s investment in quality is calculated as
h
i
p
1 
2µ − 1 + 1 − 4µ (1 − x) ρi .
qi = 1 −
2µ
By inspection, both the decision-maker’s payoff and each agent’s quality choice is decreasing in x.

35

Proof of Proposition 7.
Proof. Suppose G < 1 and no rationing at G. An agent with ρi has a payoff payoff
q2
qi
− i
G 2ρ
G2
2ρ

from choosing qi < G and payoff 1 −

from choosing qi = G. The former case is equivalent to

putting in less effort, but making up for it by exaggerating less. The latter case is equivalent to
choosing θ = 1 (i.e., an uninformative signal), but investing sufficient quality to get the resource.
Among the agents who choose qi < G,
ρi
G

qi =

ρi
G

ui =

G

−

ρi 2
G

2ρi

=

ρi
.
2G2

Since qi < G, it follows that ρi < G2 . Note it is easy to check that for ρi < G2 , investing ρi /G is
preferred to deviating:
G2
ρi
>
1
−
2G2
2ρi
2

ρi
G
1
2 2
−
(1
−
)
=
ρ
−
G
>0
i
2G2
2ρi
2G2 ρi

If ρi > G2 , then the optimal quality is G. Hence, all types with ρi < G2 prefer to exert effort
less than G and then give a more informative signal, whereas types with ρi > G2 exert effort G
and always claim to have a good outcome. Hence, mass of agents with projects that exactly hit
threshold G is equal to
Z

G2

ρL

ρi 
G

G

f (ρi ) dρi + 1 − F G2



.

Because no rationing is possible at G, unless G is 1, it must be that if there is no rationing in
equilibrium, then :
Z

G2
ρL


ρi
2
f
(ρ
)
dρ
+
1
−
F
G
= x,
i
i
G2

and if rationing, then G = 1, and hence,
Z
µ<

min{ρH ,1}

ρi f (ρi ) dρi .

ρL

36

Now, let us consider that ρ ∼ U [0, 1]. In that case x <
revealing, but x >

1
2

1
2

implies that the equilibrium is fully

implies that G solves
Z

G2
0

p

ρi
dρi + 1 − G2 = x → G = 2 (1 − x)
2
G

The decision-maker’s expected payoff is therefore the measure of projects that attain threshold G,
i.e. x, multiplied by the expected payoff of each project, G i.e. decision-maker payoff is
x

p

2 (1 − x).

(A6)

Now, let us compare the decision-maker’s payoff with full revelation versus exaggeration when
x > 12 . Substituting E[ρi ] =

1
2

into (12) yields
ud =

p
1
[1 − (2x − 1)].
2

Comparing that to (A6) for E[ρi ] = 21 , the decision-maker’s payoff is higher with exaggeration if
p
p
1
F (x) = x 2 (1 − x) − [1 − (2x − 1)] > 0.
2
It is easy to show that F (x) = 0 for x =

1
2

(A7)

and x = 1. Further, F ′ (x) > 0 for x ∈ [ 21 , 23 ] and

F ′′ (x) < 0 for all x ≥ 12 . Therefore, (A7) holds.



37

