NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STUDENTS IN DISTRESS:
LABOR MARKET SHOCKS, STUDENT LOAN DEFAULT, AND FEDERAL INSURANCE PROGRAMS
Holger M. Mueller
Constantine Yannelis
Working Paper 23284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23284

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

We thank David Berger, Jan Eberly, Caroline Hoxby, Amir Kermani, Theresa Kuchler, Andres
Liberman, Adam Looney, Johannes Stroebel, Jeremy Tobacman, Eric Zwick, and seminar
participants at NYU, Berkeley, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau for helpful
comments. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Treasury or any other organization. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Holger M. Mueller and Constantine Yannelis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Students in Distress: Labor Market Shocks, Student Loan Default, and Federal Insurance Programs
Holger M. Mueller and Constantine Yannelis
NBER Working Paper No. 23284
March 2017
JEL No. H81,I22,I26,J24
ABSTRACT
The collapse in home prices during the Great Recession triggered a sharp drop in consumer
demand by households, leading to massive employment losses. This paper examines the
implications of these labor market shocks for the dramatic rise in student loan defaults, which
originated during this time period. Linking administrative student loan data at the individual
borrower level to de-identified tax records and exploiting Zip code level variation in home price
changes, we show that the drop in home prices during the Great Recession accounts for
approximately 24 to 32 percent of the increase in student loan defaults. Consistent with a labor
market channel, we find a strong relationship between home prices, employment losses, and
student loan defaults at the individual borrower level, which is concentrated among low income
jobs. Comparing the default responses of home owners and renters, we find no evidence of a direct
liquidity effect of home prices on student loan defaults. Lastly, we show that the Income Based
Repayment (IBR) program introduced by the federal government in the wake of the Great
Recession reduced both student loan defaults and their sensitivity to home price fluctuations, thus
providing student loan borrowers with valuable insurance against adverse income shocks.

Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
Constantine Yannelis
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
cyanneli@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Student loans constitute the largest source of non-mortgage household debt in the United
States, with an outstanding balance of $1.4 trillion. Given the significance of student loans
for the financing of higher education, the recent surge in student loan defaults is alarming.
Since the beginning of the Great Recession, student loan default rates have nearly doubled.
Between 2007 and 2010 alone, two-year cohort default rates increased from 6.7 percent
to 9.1 percent (U.S. Department of Education). The sharp rise in student loan defaults
has important consequences not only for the federal budget–more than 92 percent of
all student loans are federal loans–but also for the defaulting student loan borrowers.1
Unlike other types of loans, student loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy, and wages
can be garnished for the rest of a borrower’s lifetime. Thus, besides the usual stigma
associated with loan defaults, such as tainted credit scores and limited future access to
credit markets, the expectation of wages being garnished may aﬀect borrowers’ job search
and incentives to work, while the fact that loan defaults can be observed by employers
may aﬀect their prospects of finding a job in the first place.2
As prior research has shown, the massive collapse in home prices during the Great
Recession triggered a sharp drop in consumer spending by households (Mian, Rao and
Sufi 2013; Stroebel and Vavra 2016; Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante 2016). This drop in
consumer spending, in turn, led to a worsening of labor market outcomes: across diﬀerent
U.S. regions, those experiencing larger drops in home prices experienced significantly
larger declines in employment (Mian and Sufi 2014; Giroud and Mueller 2017). Linking
administrative student loan data from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to individual
tax return data from IRS records, we examine the implications of these labor market
1

Student loans are the largest financial asset held by the federal government, accounting for 45.6
percent of all federally owned financial assets (Financial Accounts of the United States, 2016 Q3).
2

Using panel data from the NLSY97, Ji (2016) finds that student loan borrrowers spend 8.3 percent
less time on their job search relative to non-borrowers. As a result, they earn 4.2 percent less annually in
their first ten years after graduation. These findings are supported by survey evidence showing that 55
percent of student loan borrowers age 18 to 34 “accepted a job quicker to have income sooner” because of
their student debt, while about 30 percent said that they “considered diﬀerent industries or companies”
(Earnest 2016). Other survey evidence shows that 47 percent of U.S. employers use credit checks to
screen applicants, suggesting that loan defaults are likely to impact hiring decisions (SHRM 2010).

2

shocks for the rise in student loan defaults. Our student loan data represent a four
percent random sample of all student loans that are either disbursed or guaranteed by
the federal government. Our final sample consists of over one million annual observations
of student borrowers who were in repayment during the Great Recession.
Our focus on the massive collapse in home prices and worsening of labor market
outcomes informs the academic debate on the rise in student loan defaults. In that
debate, a leading explanation is that the increase in defaults is largely driven by shifts
in the composition of student borrowers toward “non-traditional” borrowers attending
community colleges and, especially, for-profit institutions (Deming, Goldin, and Katz
2012; Looney and Yannelis 2015).3 These borrowers tend to be older, come from less
aﬄuent family backgrounds, have lower completion rates, and experience weaker labor
market outcomes. As Looney and Yannelis (2015) argue, all of these factors contribute
to higher default rates. As the share of non-traditional borrowers increases over time,
aggregate default rates have risen, mechanically, so to speak. Much recent research has
been devoted to understanding better the for-profit education sector, reflecting its rising
importance within the overall U.S. education system.4
Figure 1 provides suggestive evidence of a link between home prices and student loan
defaults based on aggregated time series data. As home prices began to plummet at
the onset of the Great Recession, student loan default rates began to rise. While the
evidence in Figure 1 is suggestive, our empirical analysis exploits detailed variation in
home price changes at the Zip code level during the Great Recession. Prior literature
has argued that the massive collapse in home prices during the Great Recession has a
causal eﬀect on changes in consumer spending and local labor market outcomes (Mian,
Rao and Sufi 2013; Mian and Sufi 2014; Stroebel and Vavra 2016; Kaplan, Mitman, and
Violante 2016; Giroud and Mueller 2017). But even if the association between home
price changes and local labor market outcomes were not causal, this would only mildly
3

“Repayment outcomes tend to be worse among borrowers who attend for-profit or community colleges; those who are low-income or independent; those who attend part time; and, especially, those who
do not complete their degrees. Many of these types of borrowers accounted for a disproportionate share
of the increase in student borrowing during the Great Recession” (CEA 2016, pp. 4-5).
4

See, e.g., Turner 2006; Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012; Cellini and Goldin 2014.

3

change our interpretation. From our perspective, what matters is that changes in home
prices constitute a first-order, and highly salient, source of cross sectional variation in
local economic conditions during the Great Recession.
Cross sectional evidence based on variation in home price changes across Zip codes
suggests that falling home prices during the Great Recession account for approximately
32 percent of the increase in student loan defaults. A potential concern with this cross
sectional evidence is that Zip codes experiencing larger declines in home prices may be
associated with larger shares of “non-traditional,” or otherwise riskier, student borrowers,
which could explain their higher default rates. To ensure that our estimates are not
confounded by fundamental diﬀerences in borrower composition across Zip codes, we
exploit the rich panel dimension of our data and include Zip code fixed eﬀects in all our
specifications. Our panel evidence suggests that declining home prices during the Great
Recession account for approximately 24 percent of the increase in student loan defaults.
While this is a lower magnitude than our cross sectional estimate, one must keep in mind
that it reflects the relationship between home prices and student loan defaults based
entirely on within Zip code level variation.
Another important concern is that the composition of student borrowers within a
Zip code may have shifted over time. If such compositional shifts are correlated with
home price changes, this could potentially confound our estimates. For example, if older
repayment cohorts–which tend to have lower default rates–out-migrate in response to
falling home prices, this could induce a negative correlation between home price changes
and student loan defaults. To address this concern, we include Zip code × cohort year
fixed eﬀects. As it turns out, our estimates remain very similar. They also remain similar
if we include individual borrower fixed eﬀects, thereby absorbing any unobserved time
invariant heterogeneity across student borrowers, such as schools attended, major choice,
family background, and credit history, among others.
Consistent with a labor market channel, we find that the eﬀect of home prices on
student loan defaults is declining across income groups. In fact, for student borrowers
with an annual income of $60,000 or more, there is no significant relationship between
home prices and student loan defaults. We show that low income borrowers are more
4

sensitive to home price changes for two reasons. First, low income jobs are more likely
to be aﬀected by a decline in home prices: while falling home prices are associated with
substantial employment losses at the individual borrower level–defined as an earnings
drop of 50 percent or more–this relationship is declining across income groups and only
significant among low income borrowers.5 Second, large earnings drops are more likely to
trigger student loan defaults when student borrowers’ income is low: while employment
losses at the individual borrower level are highly predictive of subsequent student loan
defaults, this relationship is monotonically declining across income groups, and it is only
significant among low income borrowers. Intuitively, high income borrowers may have
significant discretionary earnings even after facing a large earnings drop, or they may
have accumulated savings in the past due to their higher earnings, allowing them to
continue making repayments on their student loans.
The estimated eﬀect of employment losses on student loan defaults is economically
highly significant: student borrowers facing an earnings drop of 50 percent or more are
32 percent more likely to default in the following year. A potential concern with this
estimate is that student borrowers facing a large earnings drop may be unobservably
diﬀerent from other student borrowers. To account for confounding factors, we conduct
an event study around the date of the employment loss. If the relationship between
employment losses and student loan defaults was driven by unobserved heterogeneity
among student borrowers, we should see an “eﬀect” already prior to the employment loss.
We find no diﬀerences in pretrends, suggesting that employment losses play a major role
in explaining student loan defaults in the Great Recession.
The drop in home prices during the Great Recession may have directly impacted
student borrowers through a liquidity channel. Precisely, falling home prices may have
impaired student borrowers’ ability to borrow against home equity (Mian and Sufi 2011;
Bhutta and Keys 2016), limiting their access to liquidity and consequently their ability
5

This result both confirms and extends results in prior literature based on aggregated (establishment
or county level) data (Mian and Sufi 2014; Giroud and Mueller 2017). In our case, the relationship
between home prices and employment losses is based on within ZIP code level variation and observed at
the individual borrower level. Importantly, we find that this relationship depends crucially on the level of
borrower income: it is decreasing across income groups and only significant among low income borrowers.

5

to make student loan repayments. To test for a liquidity channel, we compare the default
responses of home owners and renters to changes in home prices.6 Intuitively, while
a drop in home prices may have impaired home owners’ ability to borrow against home
equity, there should be no corresponding liquidity eﬀect for renters. We find no significant
diﬀerences in the default responses of home owners and renters to changes in home prices,
suggesting that our results are primarily driven by a labor market channel, not a liquidity
channel. We obtain similar results if we control for individual labor earnings and their
interaction with home prices, or if we replace the Zip code fixed eﬀects with individual
borrower fixed eﬀects.
We conclude our study by performing an evaluation of the Income Based Repayment
(IBR) program rolled out by the federal government in 2009, in the wake of the Great
Recession. Under this program, student loan repayments are capped at 15 percent of
discretionary income, and repayment terms are extended to up to 25 years. Eligibility
is based on a means test, which eﬀectively requires that the student debt be suﬃciently
large relative to discretionary income. The purpose of income driven repayment plans,
such as IBR, is to provide student borrowers with valuable insurance against income
shocks by making their loan repayments contingent on discretionary income. To assess
the eﬃcacy of the IBR program, we conduct a triple diﬀerence analysis by examining the
default responses of IBR eligible versus ineligible student borrowers to home price changes
before and after the program’s introduction. We find that the introduction of the IBR
plan reduced both student loan defaults and their sensitivity to home price fluctuations,
thus providing student borrowers with valuable insurance against adverse income shocks.
Importantly, this eﬀect is entirely driven by IBR eligible student borrowers who actually
took up the IBR repayment option. In contrast, IBR eligible student borrowers who did
not take up the IBR repayment option continue to exhibit high student loan default rates
after 2009. Lastly, we find no diﬀerential trends between IBR eligible and ineligible student
borrowers prior to the plan’s introduction, strenghtening a key identifying assumption of
our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis.
6

Our sample includes all student borrowers in repayment, many of which are in their 30s, 40s, and
even 50s. The average homeownership rate in our sample is 39 percent.

6

The surge in student loan volume and default rates since the beginning of the Great
Recession has prompted an active debate in the media and academic circles (e.g., Avery
and Turner 2012; Looney and Yannelis 2015).7 A leading explanation for the dramatic
rise in student loan defaults is that the composition of student borrowers has shifted
toward “non-traditional” borrowers attending community colleges and, especially, forprofit institutions, which tend to have higher default rates. Our empirical study informs
this debate by placing the focus on the massive collapse in home prices and worsening
of labor market outcomes during the Great Recession, showing that it accounts for a
significant fraction of the rise in student loan defaults.
More generally, our work is related to papers studying the eﬀect of home prices on
college enrollment and household debt, in particular, student loan debt. Mian and Sufi
(2011) show that rising home equity values during the housing boom lead to a significant
increase in household leverage. Brown, Stein, and Zafar (2015) extend these results to a
larger sample period and analyze the eﬀect of home prices on diﬀerent categories of household debt, including home equity loans and student loans. The authors find no evidence of
a substitution between home equity borrowing and student loan debt. Amromin, Eberly,
and Mondragon (2016) examine the interaction between home prices, home equity loans,
and student loans. Unlike Brown, Stein, and Zafar (2015), the authors find a significant
substitution eﬀect between home equity borrowing and student loan debt. Lovenheim
(2011) finds a positive relation between home price growth and college enrollment, and
Lovenheim and Reynolds (2013) find that home price growth is positively associated with
attending a higher quality college. Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigo (2016) find that the
housing boom leads to a decline in college enrollment. Similar to what we find in the
context of student loans, the authors conclude that the eﬀect of home prices on college
enrollment operates primarily through a labor market channel.8
In light of these empirical studies, we should note that our results are orthogonal to
7

Some commentators argue that student loan debt is “the most obvious candidate for the next bubble”
(Chicago Tribune, August 24, 2016).
8

Consistent with a substitution eﬀect between labor market conditions and college enrollment, Barr
and Turner (2013, 2015) find that the worsening of labor market outcomes during the Great Recession
leads to an increase in college enrollment.

7

any variation in college enrollment or student borrowing induced by changes in home
prices. Our sample consists of student borrowers who are already in repayment, meaning
they have made their college enrollment and student borrowing decisions many years
ago. Accordingly, while current home price changes may aﬀect the default decisions of
borrowers in our sample, they cannot, by construction, aﬀect their college enrollment
and student borrowing decisions. In addition, the inclusion of Zip code fixed eﬀects
accounts for any fixed compositional diﬀerences across Zip codes due to past home price
changes (e.g., diﬀerences in college enrollment or student borrowing), while the inclusion
of Zip code × cohort year fixed eﬀects accounts for the possibility that past home price
experiences may be “time varying” during our sample period due to the in- and outmigration of repayment cohorts across Zip codes. Finally, the inclusion of individual
borrower fixed eﬀects–in conjunction with the fact that borrowers in our sample are
already in repayment–naturally accounts for any decisions made before entering the
sample, such as college enrollment and student borrowing decisions.
Lastly, our paper contributes to a large existing literature which studies the risks
and returns of financing higher education (see Avery and Turner (2012) for a review).
On the return side, there is broad consensus that the returns to college education have
increased over the past decades (e.g., Katz and Murphy 1992; Autor, Katz, and Kearney
2008; Goldin and Katz 2008). Our paper focuses on the risk side. Linking administrative
student loan data to de-identified tax data and exploiting Zip code level variation in home
price changes during the Great Recession, we document that home price fluctuations
constitute an important source of student loan default risk, operating primarily through
an aggregate labor market channel.9
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data, variables,
and summary statistics. Section 3 contains our main results. This section also examines
the interaction between home prices, employment losses, and student loan defaults, and
tests for a direct liquidity channel by comparing the default responses of home owners
9

Another important source of student loan default risk is college dropout risk. Comparing cohorts
from the high school classes of 1972 and 1992, Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2010) document that
college completion rates have declined nationally, and this decline is most pronounced among students
attending less selective public four-year colleges and community colleges.

8

and renters to home price changes. Section 4 performs an evaluation of the Income
Based Repayment program introduced by the federal government in the wake of the
Great Recession. Section 5 concludes.

2

Data, Variables, and Summary Statistics

2.1

Data

Our student loan data are from the National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS), which
is the main data source used by the U.S. Department of Education to administer federal
student loan programs. The NSLDS contains information on all federal student loans,
accounting for more than 92 percent of the student loan market in the United States.
Our analysis sample constitutes a four percent random sample of the NSLDS used by
the U.S. Department of the Treasury for policy analysis and budgeting purposes, drawn
using permutations of the last three digits of an individual’s social security number. The
sample is constructed as a panel, tracking individual student borrowers over time. For the
purpose of our analysis, we focus on student borrowers who are in repayment. Student
borrowers typically enter into repayment within six months after leaving their degree
granting institution.
The NSLDS provides detailed information on student loan disbursements, balances,
and repayment. It also contains information on the institutions where student borrowers
enrolled, such as name and institutional control type. Private non-profit, public nonprofit, and four-year for-profit institutions are included in our sample. In addition, the
NSLDS contains demographic information on student borrowers and their parents from
the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form, which recipients of federal
student loans are required to complete. The NSLDS has been linked to de-identified tax
data from the IRS Compliance Data Warehouse (CDW). The CDW sources data from
W-2s and other tax returns, such as Schedule C (Form 1040), which business owners
and sole proprietors are required to file. Besides earnings and total income, the tax data
also include information on marital status, mortgage interest deduction, and number of
9

individuals in a household. The latter information is needed to calculate the poverty
level of individuals when evaluating the Income Based Repayment program. Earnings
are defined as Medicare wages plus self-employment earnings. Total income additionally
includes non-labor income.
We match student borrowers to home prices at the Zip code level using home price data
from Zillow.10 Since our focus is on the Great Recession, we use (with few exceptions)
home price data from 2006 to 2009. Changes in home prices from 2006 to 2009 based on
Zillow data are highly correlated with the “housing net worth shock” in Mian, Rao and Sufi
(2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014), “∆ Housing Net Worth, 2006—2009.” The correlation
at the MSA level is 86.3 percent. They are also highly correlated with changes in home
prices from 2006 to 2009 using home price data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency
(FHFA). The correlation at the MSA level is 96.4 percent. In line with prior research, we
measure home prices in December unless otherwise noted.

2.2

Variables and Empirical Specification

The primary outcome variable is an indicator of whether a student borrower defaults on
her student loan for the first time (“new default”). A student loan goes into default within
270 days of a payment being missed. When a student loan goes into default, the loan
servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the NSLDS. Hence, it takes about one
year between when a payment is missed and when a default is recorded in administrative
data. To account for this time lag, we always use student loan defaults in year  + 1
Thus, our focus is on home prices from 2006 to 2009 and student loan defaults from 2007
to 2010. Our main empirical specification is:
+1 =  +  +  Home Price + X +  

(1)

where  +1 is an indicator of whether individual  defaults in year  + 1, HomePrice
is the home price (in logs) in Zip code  in year  X is a vector of controls, which
10

Zillow home price data have been used by, e.g., Keys et al. (2014), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante
(2016), Bailey et al. (2016), and Giroud and Mueller (2017).

10

includes loan balance, borrowing duration, family income, school type, and Pell grant
aid, and  and  are year and Zip code fixed eﬀects, respectively. The year fixed eﬀect
capture any economy wide factors, such as aggregate economic conditions. The Zip code
fixed eﬀects absorb any time invariant heterogeneity across Zip codes during the sample
period, including any given diﬀerences in borrower composition, college enrollment, and
student loan volume arising from diﬀerent labor market outcomes during the preceding
housing boom. In some of our specifications, we also include cohort year, Zip code ×
cohort year, or individual borrower fixed eﬀects. Cohort year indicates the year in which
the student borrower enters into repayment. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code
level. In robustness checks, we alternatively cluster standard errors at the county level.
Observations are weighted by individual loan balances.
Two further variables that play an important role are employment losses and home
ownership. Both variables are constructed from IRS tax data. Employment losses are
defined as large earnings drops of 50 percent or more relative to the previous year’s
earnings. Home ownership is a dummy indicating whether an individual took the mortgage
interest deduction. Individuals who are not home owners are classified as renters.

2.3

Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents basic summary statistics. All variables are measured over the 2006
to 2009 sample period. The only exception is student loan default, which is measured
over the 2007 to 2010 period. There are 1,071,049 annual borrower-level observations
associated with 298,003 individual student borrowers. The average student borrower has
$23,757 in student debt and earns $44,930 during the sample period. Total income,
which includes non-labor earnings, is $62,369 on average. About eight percent of student
borrowers experience a significant earnings drop of 50 percent or more in any given year
(“employment loss”). By comparison, the average annual layoﬀ rate during the Great
Recession was about seven percent (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger 2012). Student
borrowers in our sample enter into repayment between 1970 and 2009. The average
repayment cohort is 2002. In any given year, about four percent of student borrowers

11

in repayment default on their student loans for the first time. When comparing this
number to two- and three-year cohort default rates used by the U.S. Department of
Education, one must keep in mind that these diﬀer from our student loan default rates
along two important dimensions. First, our student loan default rates measure the annual
flow of student borrowers defaulting for the first time in any given year. Second, twoand three-year cohort default rates measure student loan defaults during the first two or
three years after student borrowers enter into repayment–a time period during which a
disproportionately large share of student borrowers tends to default. By contrast, our
student loan default rates measure defaults across all repayment years.11
About 39 percent of student borrowers own a home, which is significantly less than
the national average of 68 percent during the sample period. This discrepancy is likely
because student borrowers are younger than the national average and earlier in their
life-cycle, and also because they are often saddled with large amounts of student debt.
The average Zip code level home price during the sample period is $244,882. There
is significant dispersion in home prices, though, ranging from $26,800 in Youngstown,
Ohio, to $3,799,801 in Atherton, California. To reduce the sensitivity of our estimates to
outliers, we use the natural logarithm of home prices in all our regressions.
Figure 2 shows the age distribution of student borrowers. As is shown in Panel A,
most student borrowers enter into repayment in their early to mid 20s. However, a large
fraction of student borrowers enter into repayment in their late 20s, 30s, and even 40s,
reflecting the prominent role of “non-traditional” borrowers–those attending for-profit
and other non-selective institutions–in our administrative data. Panel B shows the age
distribution of all student borrowers in repayment. The average student borrower in our
sample is 37 years old. While the typical student debt repayment plan has a duration of
ten years, student borrrowers often have the choice among alternative repayment options,
which can significantly increase the duration of their loans (Avery and Turner 2012).
For instance, by consolidating their loans, student borrowers can extend their repayment

11

Cohort default rates have been historically used by the U.S. Department of Education at the cohort
by school level to penalize schools with high student loan default rates. In contrast, our analysis focuses
on student loan default at the individual borrower level, not at the cohort by school level.

12

term to up to 30 years, depending on the amount of their total indebtedness. This, in
conjunction with the fact that many student borrowers enter into repayment in their 30s
and even 40s, explains why the age distribution in Panel B has a big right tail.

3

Labor Market Shocks and Student Loan Defaults

3.1

Main Results

The time series evidence in Figure 1 based on aggregated data shows a strong inverse
relationship between home prices and student loan defaults during the Great Recession.
This relationship becomes even stronger if one accounts for the fact that there is a oneyear time lag between when a payment is missed and when a loan default is recorded
in administrative data. Figure 3 provides cross sectional evidence. Panel A shows the
relationship between the percentage change in student loan defaults during the Great
Recession, ∆ Log Default07−10 , and the percentage change in home prices at the Zip code
level, ∆ Log Home Price06−09 . Zip codes are weighted by total student loan balances. For
each percentile of ∆ Log Home Price06−09 , the plot shows the mean values of ∆ Log Home
Price06−09 and ∆ Log Default07−10  respectively. As can be seen, the inverse relationship
between home prices and student loan defaults documented in the time series is also
present in the cross section.
Table 2 shows results from a cross sectional regression in the spirit of Mian and Sufi
(2014) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013). Zip codes are weighted by total student loan
balances. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code level. In column (1), we regress
the change in student loan defaults at the Zip code level from 2007 to 2010, ∆ Default07−10 
on the percentage change in home prices at the Zip code level from 2006 to 2009, ∆ Log
Home Price06−09 . As can be seen, a one percent decline in home prices at the Zip code
level is associated with a 0.009 percentage point increase in student loan defaults. This
result is significant at the one percent level. In column (2), we measure the change in
home prices from their peak in July 2006 to their trough in March 2009. As is shown, our
estimates become slightly larger, and they remain highly significant. In column (3), home
13

prices and student loan defaults are both measured in logs, implying that the coeﬃcient
associated with ∆ Log Home Price06−09 indicates the elasticity of student loan defaults
with respect to home prices. This elasticity is -0.4179 and significant at the one percent
level. To assess its economic significance, we note that new student loan defaults rose
from 3.59 percent to 4.27 percent between 2007 and 2010, which represents an increase
of 18.9 percent. Home prices at the Zip code level fell by 14.4 percent between 2006 and
2009.12 Accordingly, the estimated relationship in column (3) accounts for approximately
31.8 percent (= (144 × (−04179))189) of the increase in new student loan defaults
during the Great Recession.
A potential concern is that Zip codes experiencing larger declines in home prices
during the Great Recession may be unobservably diﬀerent from other Zip codes. For
instance, they may be associated with a higher share of “non-traditional,” or otherwise
riskier, student borrowers. To address potentially confounding eﬀects due to unobserved
heterogeneity at the Zip code level, we exploit the panel dimension of our data and
estimate the relationship between home prices and student loan defaults at the individual
student borrower level, as described in equation (1), which includes year and Zip code
fixed eﬀects. The year fixed eﬀects capture any economy wide factors, such as aggregate
economic conditions. The Zip code fixed eﬀects absorb any time invariant heterogeneity
across Zip codes during the sample period, including any given diﬀerences in borrower
composition, college enrollment, and student loan volume arising from diﬀerent labor
market outcomes during the preceding housing boom. Observations are weighted by
individual loan balances. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code level.
Table 3 presents the results. In column (1), which is our main specification, a one
percent decline in home prices is associated with a 0.0113 percentage point increase in
student loan defaults. This result, like all the results in Table 3, is significant at the one
percent level. As previously in our cross sectional analysis, we can assess the economic
significance of this relationship. Accordingly, the estimated relationship in column (1)

12

The drop in home prices of 14.4 percent between December 2006 and December 2009 is similar to
the 14.5 percent quoted in Giroud and Mueller (2017), also based on Zillow data, and the 14.9 percent
quoted by the St. Louis Fed based on FHFA data (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/HPIPONM226S).

14

accounts for approximately 23.9 percent (= (144 × 00113)(427 − 359)) of the rise in
new student loan defaults during the Great Recession. While this is a lower number
than our cross sectional estimate, one must keep in mind that it reflects the relationship
between home prices and student loan defaults based entirely on within Zip code level
variation. In column (2), we cluster standard errors at the county level. Surprisingly,
they become only slightly larger. In column (3), we include the full vector of controls
X from equation (1), which includes loan balance, borrowing duration, family income,
school type, and Pell grant aid. As can be seen, both the coeﬃcient on home prices and
the standard errors remains virtually unchanged. As it makes little diﬀerence whether
these controls are included, we drop them from our further analysis.
While the inclusion of Zip code fixed eﬀects accounts for any fixed diﬀerences in
borrower composition across Zip codes, it is conceivable that the composition of student
borrowers within a Zip code may have shifted over time. If such compositional shifts
are correlated with home price changes, this could potentially confound our estimates.
For instance, student borrowers are more likely to default within the first few years after
entering into repayment. If older repayment cohorts out-migrate in response to falling
home prices, this could induce a negative correlation between home price changes and
default likelihood. In columns (4) and (5), we rule out such confounding factors by
including either cohort year or Zip code × cohort year fixed eﬀects. As can be seen, our
estimates remain ver similar. In column (6), we include individual borrower fixed eﬀects,
thereby absorbing any unobserved time invariant heterogeneity across student borrowers,
such as schools attended, major choice, family background, and credit history, among
others. Our estimates again remain similar.
Table 4 breaks down our main results by individual loan balances. Larger balances
typically imply larger monthly repayments, and therefore a higher likelihood of nonrepayment in response to any given income shock. On the other hand, however, larger
balances are associated with safer student borrowers. During the 2006 to 2009 period,
the median student borrower at for-profit institutions (two-year colleges) entered into
repayment with $7,689 to $8,567 ($7,277 to $7,956) in student debt. By contrast, over
the same time period, the median student borrower at selective four-year colleges entered
15

into repayment with $19,128 to $20,494 in student debt (Looney and Yannelis 2015).
As we have discussed earlier, student borrowers at for-profit institutions and two-year
colleges exhibit significantly higher default rates than those at selective four-year colleges
(Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012; Looney and Yannelis 2015).
The results in Table 4 show that the relationship between home prices and student
loan defaults is monotonically increasing across loan balances. For balances below the
25th percentile of the sample distribution, this relationship is insignificant, suggesting
that students borrowers with small loan balances are able to avoid default in response to
falling home prices during the Great Recession. That student borrowers with large loan
balances are more sensitive to home price fluctuations underscores the important role
of federal insurance programs, such as the Income Based Repayment (IBR) plan, which
explicitly targets student borrowers with large loan balances relative to discretionary
income. In Section 4, we show that the introduction of the IBR plan in 2009 reduced
both student loan defaults and their sensitivity to home price fluctuations.

3.2

Labor Market Channel

One of the main narratives of the Great Recession is that the collapse in home prices
triggered a sharp drop in consumer spending by households, leading to massive employment losses (Mian, Rao and Sufi 2013; Mian and Sufi 2014; Stroebel and Vavra 2016;
Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante 2016; Giroud and Mueller 2017).13 Layoﬀs and earnings
declines, in turn, may have impaired student borrowers’ ability to make loan repayments,
especially if their labor earnings were low to begin with. In this section, we examine
the implications of this labor market channel by studying the relationship between home
prices, labor earnings, employment losses, and student loan defaults at the individual
student borrower level.
Panel B of Figure 3 shows the relationship between changes in labor earnings during
the Great Recession, ∆ Log Earnings06−09  and changes in home prices at the Zip code

13

Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Baker (2016), and Kaplan, Mitman, and Vilolante (2016) emphasize
the role of household leverage in amplifying the consumption responses of households.

16

level, ∆ Log Home Price06−09 . The figure is constructed analogously to that in Panel A.
As is shown, labor earnings declined relatively more in Zip codes that experienced larger
reductions in home prices. Labor earnings, in turn, strongly predict subsequent student
loan defaults. Figure 4 depicts the relationship between individual labor earnings, in
deciles of the earnings distribution, and student loan defaults in the following year. As
can be seen, there is a negative and monotonic relationship between individual labor
earnings and subsequent student loan defaults.
Tables 5 to 7 confirm these visual impressions. All regressions include year and Zip
code fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code level. Table 5 examines
the relationship between home prices and student loan defaults at the individual borrower
level, stratified by borrower income. As can be seen, this relationship is monotonically
declining across income groups and only significant among low income borrowers. Tables
6 and 7 show that low income borrowers are more sensitive to home price changes for
two reasons. First, Table 6 shows that low income jobs are more likely to be aﬀected
by a decline in home prices. Specifically, we examine the relationship between home
prices and employment losses–defined as an earnings drop of 50 percent or more–at the
individual borrower level, stratified by borrower income. As is shown, this relationship
is monotonically declining across income groups and only significant among low income
jobs. This both confirms and extends results in prior literature based on aggregated
(establishment or county level) data (Mian and Sufi 2014; Giroud and Mueller 2017). In
our case, the relationship between home prices and employment losses is based on within
Zip code level variation and observed at the individual level. Importantly, our results
show that this relationship is primarily concentrated among low income jobs.
Second, Table 7 shows that low income borrowers are more likely to default on their
student loans in response to a loss of employment. On average, student borrowers who
experience a large earnings drop are 1.23 percentage points more likely to default in
the following year. Given an average default rate of 3.87 percent, this implies a 31.8
percent higher default likelihood. That being said, there is substantial heterogeneity
across student borrowers. As can be seen, the relationship between employment losses
and student loan defaults at the individual borrower level is monotonically declining across
17

income groups and only significant among low income borrowers. Intuitively, high income
borrowers may have significant discretionary earnings even after facing a large earnings
drop, or they may have accumulated savings in the past due to their higher earnings,
allowing them to continue making repayments on their student loans.
A potential concern with this evidence is that student borrowers who experience a
large earnings drop may be unobservably diﬀerent from other student borrowers. To
further analyze the relationship between employment losses and student loan defaults,
we present an event study in Figure 5. If this relationship was driven by unobserved
diﬀerences between student borrowers who experience a large earnings drop and those
who do not, we should see an “eﬀect” on loan defaults already prior to the employment
loss. Let  be the event date in which a student borrower experiences a 50 percent or
more earnings drop. Figure 5 plots the coeﬃcients   from the following specification:

 +1 =  +  +  +

 +4
X

  1[ = ] + X +  

(2)

= −4

where +1 is an indicator of whether individual  defaults in year  + 1, 1[ = ] denotes
the number of years before or after the employment loss event, X is a vector of controls,
which includes labor earnings and school type, and     and  are year, Zip code,
and cohort year fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code level. Given
that there is a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a default
is recorded in the NSLDS, the coeﬃcient associated with a given year  is plotted in the
following year,  + 1. The dashed lines represent a 95 percent confidence interval.
As can be seen, there is a significant jump in student loan defaults one year after the
event, consistent with there being a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed
and when a loan default is recorded. The eﬀect begins to attenuate three years after
the event, suggesting that student borrowers who manage to avoid default in the first
three years after losing their employment are increasingly able to also do so in subsequent
years. Lastly, and most important, the coeﬃcients are not significantly diﬀerent from
zero in the years prior to the event, mitigating concerns that the relationship between

18

employment losses and student loan defaults may be driven by unobserved heterogeneity
across student borrowers.

3.3

Direct Liquidity Channel

Under a labor market channel, the collapse in home prices during the Great Recession
may have aﬀected student loan defaults through its impact on aggregate labor market
outcomes. We provided evidence for this channel in the previous section. Alternatively,
falling home prices may have directly impacted student loan defaults through a liquidity
channel. Precisely, they may have impaired student borrowers’ ability to borrow against
home equity (Mian and Sufi 2011; Bhutta and Keys 2016), limiting their access to liquidity
and consequently their ability to make student loan repayments.
While the collapse in home prices may have directly aﬀected mortgage defaults, it is
not obvious whether it also should directly aﬀect student loan defaults. Unlike mortgages,
where underwater home owners have strong strategic incentives to default, there are no
strategic default incentives in the student loan market. Further, unlike mortgages, student
loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy, and wages–even social security benefits–can
be garnished for the rest of a borrower’s lifetime. Indeed, Mian and Sufi (2011) find that
rising home equity based borrowing during the housing boom is not used to pay down
expensive credit card balances–even for households with a heavy dependence on credit
card borrowing–suggesting that repayment spillovers toward other forms of household
debt are not a priori obvious.
To test for a liquidity channel, we compare the default responses of home owners
and renters to changes in home prices. Intuitively, while a drop in home prices may
have impaired home owners’ ability to borrow against home equity, there should be no
corresponding liquidity eﬀect for renters.14 We measure home ownership through the
mortgage interest deduction. The home ownership rate in our sample is 39 percent,
which is considerably less than the national average of 68 percent during the sample
14

Renters’ liquidity may have improved if falling home prices are passed through to renters in the form
of lower rents. However, this would only strenghten the argument that, under a liquidity channel, home
owners should be more impaired than renters. See Rosen (1979) and Poterba (1984) for classic references.

19

period. While our sample includes all student loan borrowers in repayment–many of
which are in their 30s, 40s, and even 50s (see Panel B of Figure 2)–they are still younger
than the national average and hence earlier in their life-cycle.
Table 8 examines whether home owners respond more strongly to changes in home
prices than renters, as predicted by the liquidity channel. As is shown, the coeﬃcient
associated with Home Price × Owner is always small and insignificant. This is true
regardless of whether we add controls, how we cluster standard errors, or which fixed
eﬀects we include. On the other hand, with the exception of column (5), the direct eﬀect
of home ownership is significant and has the predicted sign: absent home price changes,
home owners are significantly less likely to default than renters.15 Hence, while home
owners and renters may diﬀer in their basic default likelihood, they respond similarly to
changes in home prices. This is inconsistent with a direct liquidity channel of home prices
on student loan defaults.
A potential concern is that home owners may have higher labor earnings, and this
could mask liquidity eﬀects. We address this concern in Table 9 by including labor
earnings or total income and the respective interaction with home prices as additional
controls. While these controls have the predicted sign–individuals with higher earnings
or total income default less and are less sensitive to home price changes (see also Table
5)–the coeﬃcient associated with Home Price × Owner remains highly insignificant.
Another possible concern is that we do not measure home ownership directly but only
through the mortgage interest deduction. Accordingy, home owners who have paid oﬀ
their mortgage in full may be misclassified as renters. This could induce measurement
error and attenuate the eﬀect of home ownership in our regressions. To address this
concern, we re-estimate the specification in column (1) of Table 8 separately for the pre
2000, 2000 to 2005, and post 2005 cohorts. The idea is that misclassification is unlikely to
aﬀect younger repayment cohorts, as these are unlikely to have paid oﬀ their mortgage in
full. The results are shown in Table 10. Consistent with attenuation bias, the direct eﬀect

15

That the direct eﬀect of home ownership becomes insignificant in column (5)–which includes Zip
code × cohort year fixed eﬀects–suggests that it may be driven by cohort and regional eﬀects, e.g., home
owners tend to be older and live in diﬀerent neighborhoods than renters.

20

of home ownership is insignificant among the pre 2000 cohort. Importantly, however, the
coeﬃcient associated with Home Price × Owner is insignificant among all repayment
cohorts, including younger cohorts.

4

Income Based Repayment Program

Our previous results show that low income borrowers and those with high loan balances
are particulary aﬀected by adverse labor market shocks. Under the standard ten-year
repayment plan, student borrowers facing adverse income shocks can apply for a loan
deferment (if they are unemployed) or a forbearance (if the amount owed exceeds 20
percent of their gross income). In addition, prior to 2009, student borrowers may have
had the option to enroll in alternative repayment plans, but take-up rates have been
historically low, in part due to lack of information, and in part because loan servicers
may have had inadequate incentives to enroll students.
In the wake of the Great Recession, in 2009, the U.S. Department of Education rolled
out the Income Based Repayment (IBR) program, accompanied by a significant push
to enroll student borrowers.1617 The purpose of income driven repayment plans, such
as IBR, is to provide student borrowers with valuable insurance against income shocks
by making their loan repayments contingent on discretionary income. Under the IBR
plan, repayments are capped at 15 percent of discretionary income, and repayment terms
are extended to up to 25 years, after which all remaining student debt is forgiven.18
Eligibility is based on a means test, which requires that 15 percent of the borrower’s
discretionary income be less than her payment under the standard ten-year repayment
plan. Discretionary income is any income above 150 percent of the federal poverty level.
16

“To achieve this increase, the Administration has used tools such as behavioral “nudges,” improved
loan servicer contract requirements, eﬀorts associated with the President’s Student Aid Bill of Rights, a
student debt challenge to gather commitments from external stakeholders, and increased and improved
targeted outreach to key borrower segments” (CEA 2016, pp. 63-64).
17

Despite theoretical interest, income driven repayment plans have been relatively understudied by
empirical researchers in the U.S. See Chapman (2014) for an overview of income contingent student loan
schemes in an international context.
18

The 15 percent cap was later reduced to 10 percent for new borrowers on or after July 1, 2014.

21

Essentially, student borrowers are eligible for the IBR repayment option if their student
debt is suﬃciently large relative to their discretionary income.
To assess the eﬃcacy of the IBR program, we classify student borrowers as IBR eligible
and ineligible based on the means test. That is, we do not assign treatment status based
on whether an individual enrolled in the IBR program, which is an endogenous choice,
but based on whether she was eligible for enrollment. We later provide graphical evidence
showing that changes in student loan defaults attributed to the IBR program come from
those (eligible) student borrowers that actually took up the IBR repayment option. We
calculate IBR eligibility as 015 × ( −  )    where  is individual ’s earnings
in year   is the federal poverty level–which varies from year to year and depends
on household size–and  is the annual payment faced by individual  in year  under
the standard ten-year repayment plan. Household size, including marital status and
number of dependent children, is obtained from IRS records. Annual payments under
the standard ten-year repayment plan,   are computed using the amortization formula
 = 0 × ( + (1+) −1 ), where 0 is the initial loan balance,  is the borrowing rate,
and  = 10 is the number of years. Notice that IBR eligibility–which is based on the
means test–is well defined for any given year, including years prior to the introduction
of the IBR plan. Accordingly, we can compare student loan defaults by IBR eligible and
ineligible student borrowers before and after the plan’s introduction.
Given that the IBR program was introduced in 2009, we extend our sample period
to include student loan defaults up until 2012.19 Thus, we focus on home prices between
2006 and 2011 and student loan defaults between 2007 and 2012. Extending the sample
period increases the number of annual observations to 1,556,296. To gauge the insurance
value of the IBR plan, we conduct a triple diﬀerence analysis by examining the default
responses of IBR eligible versus ineligible student borrowers to home price changes before
and after the plan’s introduction. We estimate the following specification:

19

We choose 2012 as the ending date year since a new insurance program, the PAYE program, was
introduced in December 2012.

22

 +1 =  +  +  1 Home Price +  2 IBR Eligible +  3 Home Price × Post
+ 4 IBR Eligible × Post +  5 Home Price × IBR Eligible +

(3)

+ 6 Home Price × IBR Eligible × Post +  
where  +1 is an indicator of whether individual  defaults in year  + 1, Home Price
is the home price (in logs) in Zip code  in year  IBR Eligible is a dummy indicating
whether individual  passes the means test 015 × ( −  )   in year , Post is a
dummy that equals one beginning in 2009, and  and  are year and Zip code fixed
eﬀects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the Zip code level. Observations are
weighted by individual loan balances.
The main coeﬃcients of interest are  2   4   5  and  6  Given our previous results, we
would expect  2 to be positive: IBR eligible student borrowers–those with high ratios of
student debt to income–are more likely to default on their student loans. The coeﬃcient
 4 indicates the relative change in student loan defaults of IBR eligible versus ineligible
student borrowers after the plan’s introduction. If the IBR plan is eﬀective at reducing
student loan defaults, we would expect  4 to be negative. The coeﬃcient  5 indicates
whether student borrowers with high ratios of student debt to income are more sensitive
to changes in home prices. Given our previous results, we would expect this coeﬃcient
to be negative. Lastly, the coeﬃcient  6 indicates whether the relatively stronger default
sensitivity of IBR eligible student borrowers to home price changes is mitigated after
2009. If the introduction of the IBR plan provides student borrowers with insurance
against income shocks, then  6 should be positive.
Table 11 presents the results. As column (1) shows, home prices continue to be
negatively associated with student loan defaults also during the extended sample period.
Furthermore, IBR eligible student borrowers–those with high ratios of student debt to
income–are more likely to default on their student loans. In column (2), we estimate the
triple diﬀerence specification described in equation (3). As is shown, the coeﬃcient on
IBR Eligible,  2 , is positive, and the coeﬃcient on IBR Eligible × Post,  4 , is negative.
23

Both coeﬃcients are significant at the ten percent level or higher. Together, these results
imply that student borrowers with high ratios of student debt to income are more likely
to default on their student loans, and that this eﬀect is mitigated after the introduction
of the IBR plan in 2009. Further, the coeﬃcient on Home Price × IBR Eligible,  5 , is
negative, while the coeﬃcient on Home Price × IBR Eligible × Post,  6 , is positive. Both
coeﬃcients are significant at the ten percent level. Accordingly, while student borrowers
with high ratios of student debt to income are more sensitive to home price changes,
this eﬀect is attenuated after 2009, suggesting that the IBR pogram is, at least partially,
sucessful at insuring student borrowers against income shocks. Overall, the results in
Table 11 show that the IBR program has led to a significant reduction in student loan
defaults as well as their sensitivity to home price fluctuations.
The coeﬃcients  4 and  6 indicate how student loan defaults and their sensitivity
to home price fluctuations change after the introduction of the IBR plan in 2009. Both
coeﬃcients have the predicted sign, but they are only marginally significant. A potential
concern is that student borrowers with high ratios of student debt to income may be
unobservably diﬀerent from student borrowers with low ratios. We address this concern
in column (3) by dropping student borrowers with low ratios from our sample, thereby
reducing the sample size by more than half. Eﬀectively, we are thus comparing student
borrowers who all exhibit a high degree of illiquidity, some of which are eligible for the
IBR plan, while others are not.20 As can be seen, all results are qualitatively similar to
those in column (2). Notably, the two main coeﬃcients of interest,  4 and  6 , are now
significant at the five percent level. In column (4), we account for unobserved heterogeneity among IBR eligible and ineligible student borrrowers by including individual borrower
fixed eﬀects. While some of the coeﬃcients are now insignificant due to lack of within
borrower variation, the two main coeﬃcients of interest,  4 and  6 , are highly significant,
at the one and five percent level, respectively.
The main identifying assumption underlying our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis is

20

Under the means test, student borrowers are eligible for the IBR plan if 015 × ( −  )   
The sample restriction imposed in column (3) requires that 0075 × ( −  )    thus eliminating
all student borrowers with low ratios of student debt to discretionary income.

24

that IBR eligible and ineligible student borrowers exhibit parallel trends prior to the
introduction of the IBR program in 2009. In columns (3) and (4), we have addressed
potential unobserved heterogeneity among IBR eligible and ineligible student borrowers
by narrowing down the sample to borrowers with a relatively high degree of illiquidity
and including individual borrower fixed eﬀects, respectively. Figure 6 provides further
evidence. The white bars show student loan default rates of IBR ineligible borrowers.
The gray bars show student loan default rates of IBR eligible borrowers. Eligiblity is
based on the means test, 015 × ( −  )    which implies that it can be computed
in any given year, including years prior to the introduction of the IBR plan. Indeed, the
purpose of Figure 6 is to compare the default rates of student borrowers with high and
low ratios of student debt to income prior to the plan’s introduction. Given that there is
a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a default is recorded in
the NSLDS, student loan default rates in year  + 1 reflect eligibility (or take-up) status
in year  Beginning in 2009–showing up as 2010 in the figure due to the one-year time
lag–we furthermore distinguish between IBR eligible student borrrowers who took up
the IBR repayment option (in black) and IBR eligible student borrowers who did not
take up the IBR repayment option (in gray). Thus, prior to the introduction of the IBR
plan, the gray bars pertain to IBR eligible student borrowers in general, while after the
introduction of the IBR plan, they pertain to IBR eligible student borrowers who did not
take up the IBR repayment option.
Figure 6 provides three main results. First, and most important, IBR eligible and
ineligible student borrowers are on similar trends prior to 2009. Second, IBR eligible
student borrowers who did not take up the IBR repayment option (gray) continue on
this trend after 2009. Consequently, our results are not explained by IBR eligible student
borrowers suddenly experiencing a positive shock in 2009, which happens to coincide
with the introduction of the IBR program. Third, default rates of IBR eligible student
borrowers who took up the IBR repayment option (black) are very low, suggesting that
the IBR program has been successful at reducing student loan defaults for those student
borrowers who enrolled in the program.
To provide further evidence that IBR eligible and ineligible student borrowers are on
25

similar trends prior to the introduction of the IBR program, we estimate a variant of
the specification in column (2) in which Home Price × IBR Eligible × Post is replaced
with Home Price × IBR Eligible ×  where  = 2007  2011 The yearly coeﬃcients
 6 indicate the extent to which the (higher) default sensitivity of IBR eligible student
borrowers to home price changes is mitigated in a given year relative to the baseline year
of 2006. The coeﬃcients are plotted in Panel A of Figure 7 along with a 95 percent
confidence interval. Given that there is a one-year time lag between when a payment is
missed and when a default is recorded in the NSLDS, the coeﬃcient associated with a
given year  is plotted in the following year,  + 1.
There are three main results. First, IBR eligible and ineligible student borrowers are
on similar trends before the introduction of the IBR program: the coeﬃcients associated
with 2007 and 2008 are statistically indistinguishable from the 2006 baseline coeﬃcient.
Second, when the IBR plan is introduced, there is a significant jump in the coeﬃcient.
Third, the coeﬃcients continue to rise after 2009, suggesting that the impact of the IBR
plan has gradually increased over time. To understand this pattern, Panel B of Figure
7 shows the take-up rate of the IBR plan, as a percentage of all student borrowers in
repayment. As can be seen, the take-up rate is slow initially, but then gradually increases
over time, consistent with the gradual pattern shown in Panel A of Figure 7.

5

Conclusion

Student loan default rates have been soaring since the onset of the Great Recession. A
leading explanation is that the rise in student loan defaults is largely driven by compositional shifts toward “non-traditional” student borrowers attending community colleges
and, especially, for-profit institutions. Our paper informs this debate by focusing on
adverse labor market shocks. As prior research has shown, the collapse in home prices
during the Great Recession triggered a sharp drop in consumer demand by households,
leading to massive employment losses. Our estimates suggest that the collapse in home
prices accounts for approximately 24 to 32 percent of the rise in student loan defaults,
operating primarily through an aggregate labor market channel.
26

In the wake of the Great Recession, the federal government rolled out the Income
Based Repayment (IBR) program to reduce student loan defaults and insure student borrowers against income shocks by making their loan repayments contingent on discretionary
income. To assess the eﬃcacy of the IBR program, we compare the default responses of
IBR eligible versus ineligible student borrowers to home price changes before and after
the program’s introduction. We find that the IBR plan was successful at reducing both
student loan defaults and their sensitivity to home price fluctuations, and that this result
is driven by IBR eligible student borrowers who actually enrolled in the IBR program.

6

References

Amromin, Gene, Janice Eberly, and John Mondragon, 2016, The Housing Crisis and the
Rise in Student Loans, mimeo, Northwestern University.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney, 2008, Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists, Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 300—323.
Avery, Christopher, and Sarah Turner, 2012, Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too Much–or Not Enough? Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, 165—192.
Baker, Scott, 2016, Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,
forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Barr, Andrew, and Sarah Turner, 2013, Expanding Enrollments and Contracting State
Budgets: The Eﬀect of the Great Recession on Higher Education, Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 650, 168-193.
Barr, Andrew, and Sarah Turner, 2015, Out of Work and into School: Labor Market
Policies and College Enrollment during the Great Recession, Journal of Public Economics 124, 63—73.
Bhutta, Neil, and Benjamin Keys, 2016, Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During
the Housing Boom, American Economic Review 106, 1742—1774.
Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner, 2010, Why Have College Completion Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate
Resources, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, 129—157.
27

Brown, Meta, Sarah Stein, and Basit Zafar, 2015, The Impact of Housing Markets on
Consumer Debt: Credit Report Evidence from 1999 to 2012, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 47, 175—213.
Cellini, Stephanie, and Claudia Goldin, 2014, Does Federal Student Aid Raise Tuition?
New Evidence on For-Profit Colleges, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
6, 174—206.
Chapman, Bruce, 2014, Income Contingent Loans: Background, in: Bruce Chapman,
Timothy Higgins, and Joseph Stiglitz (eds.), Income Contingent Loans: Theory,
Practice and Prospects. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Matthew Notowidigdo, 2016, Housing Booms and
Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance, mimeo, University of
Chicago.
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), 2016, Investing in Higher Education: Benefits,
Challenges, and the State of Student Debt. Damascus, MD: Penny Hill Press.
Davis, Steven, R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, 2012, Labor Market Flows in
the Cross Section and Over Time, Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 1—18.
Deming, David, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz, 2012, The For-Profit Post Secondary School Sector, Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, 139—164.
Earnest Operations LLC, 2016, Student Loans Are Changing the Job Hunt for Recent
Grads.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2017, Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and
Employment Losses during the Great Recession, Quarterly Journal of Economics
132, 271—316.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz, 2008, The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universiy Press.
Ji, Yan, 2016, Job Search under Debt: Aggregate Implications of Student Loans, mimeo,
MIT.

28

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni Violante, 2016, Non-Durable Consumption
and Housing Net Worth in the Great Recession: Evidence from Easily Accessible
Data, NBER Working Paper No. 22232.
Katz, Lawrence, and Kevin Murphy, 1992, Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987:
Supply and Demand Factors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35—78.
Keys, Benjamin, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao, 2014, Mortgage Rates,
Household Balance Sheets, and the Real Economy, NBER Working Paper No.
20561.
Looney, Adam, and Constantine Yannelis, 2015, A Crisis in Student Loans? How
Changes in the Characteristics of Borrowers and in the Institutions They Attended
Contributed to Rising Loan Defaults, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall,
1—68.
Lovenheim, Michael, 2011, The Eﬀect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment,
Journal of Labor Economics 29, 741—771.
Lovenheim, Michael, and C. Lockwood Reynolds, 2013, The Eﬀect of Housing Wealth
on College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom, Journal of Human Resources
48, 1—35.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132—2156.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?
Econometrica 82, 2197—2223.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2013, Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1—40.
Poterba, James, 1984, Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market
Approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 729—752.
Rosen, Harvey, 1979, Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax: An Econometric
Analysis, Journal of Public Economics 11, 1—23.
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), 2010, Background Checking: The
Implications of Credit Background Checks on the Decision to Hire or Not to Hire.
29

Stroebel, Johannes, and Joseph Vavra, 2016, House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
Prices, mimeo, New York University.
Turner, Sarah, 2006, For-Profit Colleges in the Context of the Market for Higher Education, in: David Breneman, Brian Pusser, and Sarah Turner (eds.), Earnings from
Learning: The Rise of For-Profit Universities. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.

30

Figure 1
Time Series Evidence
This figure shows the relationship between home prices and student loan defaults based on aggregated U.S. time series data. The
solid line depicts the Zillow Home Value Index, which is normalized to one in 1996. The dashed line depicts the two-year cohort
default rate, defined by the last year in which the cohort has been in repayment for two years. A student loan goes into default if
it is more than 270 days past due. When a loan goes into default, the loan servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the
NSLDS. Accordingly, there is approximately a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a default is
recorded in the NSLDS. Cohort default rates are based on a four percent random sample of the NSLDS.

Figure 2
Age Distribution of Student Borrowers
Panel A shows the age distribution of student borrowers when they enter into repayment. Student borrowers typically enter into
repayment within six months after leaving their degree granting institution. Panel B shows the age distribution of all student
borrowers in repayment. The sample constitutes a four percent random sample of the NSLDS.

Panel A: Age of student borrowers when entering into repayment

Panel B: Age of student borrowers in repayment

Figure 3
Cross Sectional Evidence
Panel A shows the relationship between the percentage change in student loan defaults at the Zip code level, Δ Log Default07-10,
and the percentage change in home prices at the Zip code level, Δ Log Home Price06-09. Zip codes are weighted by total student
loan balances. For each percentile of Δ Log Home Price06-09, the plot shows the mean values of Δ Log Home Price06-09 and
Δ Log Default07-10, respectively. Panel B shows the relationship between the percentage change in individual labor earnings at the
Zip code level, Δ Log Earnings06-09, and the percentage change in home prices at the Zip code level, Δ Log Home Price06-09.
Home price data are from Zillow. Default and earnings data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to deidentified IRS tax data.

Panel A: Changes in home prices and changes in student loan default rates

Panel B: Changes in home prices and changes in labor earnings

Figure 4
Labor Earnings and Student Loan Defaults
Figure 3: Earnings and Loan Default

This figure shows the relationship between individual labor earnings, grouped into earnings deciles, and student loan defaults in
the following year. A student loan goes into default if it is more than 270 days past due. When a loan goes into default, the loan
Notes: This figure shows the fraction of borrowers who default in a given year, broken down by earnings
servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the NSLDS. Accordingly, there is approximately a one-year time lag between
deciles.
The sample
is restricted
in repayment
with non-zero
Earnings
are defined
as
when a payment
is missed
and whentoa borrowers
default is recorded
in the NSLDS.
Earnings earnings.
are Medicare
wages plus
self-employment
earnings. Default
earnings
data are from a four
percentand
random
of the
NSLDS Cohort
matched default
to de-identified
IRS tax
Medicare
wagesandplus
self-employment
earnings,
are sample
in 2014
dollars.
rate data
anddata.

Default Rate

earnings comes from a 4% random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified tax data.

!

!

Earnings Deciles
Earnings Decile

Figure 5

Figure 4: Earnings Declines and Employment
Loan Default Loss Event Study
Notes: This figure shows results from an event study, in which the event is unemployment. Unemployment

This figure plots the coefficients 𝛽𝑗 from equation (2) showing the differential student loan default rates of individuals who face
is defined as a greater than 50% drop in earnings. Each estimate is the coefficient on an indicator of the
an employment loss in year T relative to those who do not, both before and after the event. Employment loss is a drop in earnings
period
before
or to
after
earnings
shock.
The Given
thick that
linethere
shows
estimates,
a 95%
confidence
of 50 time
percent
or more
relative
the an
previous
year’s
earnings.
is apoint
one-year
time lagwith
between
when
a payment is
depicted
with
the dashed
lines.
The vertical
line denotes
thewith
unemployment
Theintime
missedinterval
and when
a default
is recorded
in the
NSLDS,
the coefficient
associated
a given year event.
t is plotted
the period
following
before
after the employment
shock
is noted
the horizontal
Standard
errors
areyear
clustered
by
year, t+1.
Theor
specification
includes earnings
and school
typeoncontrols
as well as axis.
year, Zip
code, and
cohort
fixed effects.
Standard
errorsAll
arespecifications
clustered at theinclude
Zip code
lines
represent year
a 95 percent
confidence
cohort.
ziplevel.
codeThe
anddashed
year in
repayment
fixed effects,
and interval.
controlsDefault
for theand
earnings
data earnings
are from a level
four percent
randomtype.
sample
of the NSLDS
to de-identified
IRScomes
tax data.
initial
and school
Cohort
default matched
rate data
and earnings
from a 4% random

ChangeininDefault
DefaultRates
Rate
Change

sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified tax data.

!!

T-4

T-3

T-2

!

T-1 Employment
Employmentt Los
Loss T+1
Loss

T+2

T+3

T+4

Figure 6
IBR Eligibility, Take-Up, and Student Loan Defaults
This figure shows student loan default rates of IBR eligible and ineligible student borrowers. The white bars show student loan
default rates of IBR ineligible student borrowers. The gray bars show student loan default rates of IBR eligible student borrowers
(before the introduction of the IBR plan) and IBR eligible student borrowers who did not take up the IBR repayment option (after
the introduction of the IBR plan), respectively. The black bars show student loan default rates of IBR eligible student borrowers
who took up the IBR repayment option. Given that there is a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a
default is recorded in the NSLDS, student loan default rates in year t+1 reflect eligibility (or take-up) status in year t. The IBR
plan was introduced in 2009, meaning its impact on student loan defaults shows up for the first time in 2010. IBR eligibility in a
given year is based on the means test and described in Section 4. Default and earnings data are from a four percent random
sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data.

Figure 7
IBR Insurance Value and Take-Up Rate
Panel A plots the yearly coefficients 𝛽6,𝑡 from a variant of equation (3) in which Home Price × IBR Eligible × Post is replaced
with Home Price × IBR Eligible × t, where t = 2007, ... ,2011. The yearly coefficients indicate the extent to which the default
sensitivity of IBR eligible student borrowers to home price changes is mitigated in a given year relative to the baseline year of
2006. Given that there is a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a default is recorded in the NSLDS,
the coefficient associated with a given year t is plotted in the following year, t+1. The IBR program was introduced in 2009,
meaning its impact on student loan defaults shows up for the first time in 2010. IBR eligibility in a given year is based on the
means test and described in Section 4. The specification includes year and Zip code fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the Zip code level. The dashed lines represent a 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B plots the take-up rate of the IBR
program, as a percentage of all student borrowers in repayment. Home price data are from Zillow. Default and earnings data are
fromB:
a four
percent random
sample
of theTake-Up
NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data.
Panel
Insurance
Value
of IBR

!

!

Home
Price
x IBR
Home
Price
X IBR
Eligible

Panel A: IBR insurance value

Figure 6: Income Based Repayment, Home Prices and Loan Default
Notes: The top panel shows the fraction of individuals who take up IBR between 2007 and 2012. Panel B
shows presents the coefficients from a difference-in-difference in analysis, interacting the treatment with
each year, where 2007 is the baseline. The thick line shows point estimates, with a 95% confidence interval
depicted with the dashed lines. The vertical line indicates the introduction of IBR in 2009. Standard errors
are clustered at the zip code level, and the specification includes zip code and year fixed effects. The
sample is restricted to borrowers in repayment. A loan enters into default if it has not been in repayment for
more than 270 days. Individuals are eligible for IBR if their fifteen percent of their disposable income is
less than payment under a standard ten year repayment plan. Results are weighted by loan balances.
Disposable income is defined as income above 150% of the poverty line. Home price data is obtained from
Zillow. Cohort default rate data comes from a 4% random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified
tax data.
Panel B: IBR take-up rate

IBR
IBRTake-Up
T
Ta
Takeup
keup Rate
Rate
Rate
IBR
Takeup

Panel A: IBR Take-Up 2007-2014

Panel B: Insurance Value of IBR Take-Up

!

!

Table 1
Summary Statistics
This table shows basic summary statistics. Means and standard deviations are based on 1,071,048 annual observations at the
individual borrower level. Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Labor Earnings are Medicare wages plus
self-employment earnings. Total Income additionally includes non-labor income. Employment loss is a drop in labor
earnings of 50 percent or more relative to the previous year’s earnings. Repayment Cohort is the year in which a student
borrower enters into repayment. Default is an indicator of whether a student borrower defaults on her student loans for the
first time. A student loan goes into default if it is more than 270 days past due. When a loan goes into default, the loan
servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the NSLDS. Accordingly, there is approximately a one-year time lag
between when a payment is missed and when a default is recorded in the NSLDS. Home prices are measured at the Zip code
level. All variables are measured over the 2006 to 2009 period, except default, which is measured over the 2007 to 2010
period. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to
de-identified IRS tax data.

Mean

SD

Loan Balance

23,757

31,520

Labor Earnings

44,930

54,254

Family Income

42,675

54,394

Total Income

62,369

98,345

Employment Loss

0.08

0.27

Repayment Cohort

2002

6

Default

0.04

0.19

Home Owner

0.39

0.49

Home Prices

244,882

171,694

Table 2
Cross Sectional Evidence
In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is the change in the student loan default rate at the Zip code level from 2007 to
2010, Δ Default07-10. In column (3), the dependent variable is the percentage change in the student loan default rate at the Zip
code level from 2007 to 2010, Δ Log Default07-10. A student loan goes into default if it is more than 270 days past due. When a
loan goes into default, the loan servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the NSLDS. Accordingly, there is approximately
a one-year time lag between when a payment is missed and when a default is recorded in the NSLDS. Δ Log Home Price06-09 is
the percentage change in home prices at the Zip code level from 2006 to 2009. Changes in home prices are measured from
December to December, except in column (2), where they are measured from July 2006 to March 2009. Zip codes are weighted
by total loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS
matched to de-identified IRS tax data. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Default07-10

Δ Log Home Price06-09

Observations

Δ Log Default07-10

Main
(1)

Peak to Trough
(2)

(3)

-0.0090***

-0.0110***

-0.4179***

(0.00420)

(0.00510)

(0.11669)

12,749

12,749

12,749

Table 3
Main Results
The dependent variable is an indicator of whether an individual student borrower defaults in year t+1, Defaultt+1. A student loan goes into default if it is more than 270 days past
due. When a loan goes into default, the loan servicer has up to 90 days to report the default to the NSLDS. Accordingly, there is approximately a one-year time lag between when a
payment is missed and when a default is recorded in the NSLDS. Home Pricet is the home price (in logs) in year t at the Zip code level. Columns (1) to (3) include Zip code fixed
effects, column (4) includes Zip code and cohort year fixed effects, column (5) includes Zip code × cohort year fixed effects, and column (6) includes individual borrower fixed
effects. All columns include year fixed effects. Column (3) additionally includes loan balance, borrowing duration, family income, school type, and Pell grant aid as controls.
Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to deidentified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level, except in column (2), where they are clustered at the county level. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1

Main

County Cluster

Controls

Cohort Year FE

Zip Code x
Cohort Year FE

Individual FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0113***

-0.0113***

-0.0114***

-0.0105***

-0.0114***

-0.0107***

(0.00280)

(0.00287)

(0.00280)

(0.00281)

(0.00309)

(0.00352)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Unit Fixed Effects

Zip Code

Zip Code

Zip Code

Zip Code,
Cohort Year

Zip Code x
Cohort Year

Individual

Observations

1,071,049

1,071,049

1,071,049

1,071,049

1,071,049

1,071,049

Home Pricet

Table 4
Main Results by Individual Loan Balances
This table presents variants of the specification in column (1) of Table 3 in which the sample is divided into subsamples based on percentiles of individual loan balances.
Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to deidentified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1
Full
(1)

≤ 25th Pctl
(2)

25th-75th Pctl
(3)

75th-90th Pctl
(4)

≥ 90th Pctl
(5)

-0.0113***

-0.00426

-0.00516*

-0.0112**

-0.0168***

(0.00280)

(0.00531)

(0.00273)

(0.00473)

(0.00570)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,071,049

252,340

520,524

170,928

127,257

Home Pricet

Observations

Table 5
Main Results by Individual Labor Earnings
This table presents variants of the specification in column (1) of Table 3 in which the sample is divided into subsamples based on individual labor earnings. Observations are
weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1
Full
(1)

≤ $20,000
(2)

$20-$40,000
(3)

$40-$60,000
(4)

≥ $60,000
(5)

-0.0113***

-0.0176**

-0.0129**

-0.0113**

-0.00498

(0.00280)

(0.00687)

(0.00536)

(0.00538)

(0.00396)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,071,049

353,771

341,299

197,294

178,685

Home Pricet

Observations

Table 6
Home Prices and Employment Losses
This table presents variants of the specifications in Table 5 in which the dependent variable is Employment Losst. Employment loss is a drop in individual labor earnings of 50
percent or more relative to the previous year’s earnings. Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four
percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Employment Losst
Full
(1)

≤ $20,000
(2)

$20-$40,000
(3)

$40-$60,000
(4)

≥ $60,000
(5)

-0.00690**

-0.0135**

-0.0108**

0.00682

-0.000485

(0.00289)

(0.00662)

(0.00466)

(0.00423)

(0.00397)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,071,049

353,771

341,299

197,294

178,685

Home Pricet

Observations

Table 7
Employment Losses and Student Loan Defaults
This table presents variants of the specifications in Table 5 in which the main independent variable is Employment Losst. Employment loss is a drop in individual labor earnings of
50 percent or more relative to the previous year’s earnings. Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four
percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1
Full
(1)

≤ $20,000
(2)

$20-$40,000
(3)

$40-$60,000
(4)

≥ $60,000
(5)

0.0123***

0.00884***

0.00559***

0.00357

0.00337

(0.00124)

(0.00178)

(0.00202)

(0.00341)

(0.00465)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,094,737

361,747

348,840

201,540

182,610

Employment Losst

Observations

Table 8
Direct Liquidity Channel
This table presents variants of the specifications in Table 3 in which Ownert and Home Pricet × Ownert are included as regressors. Owner is an indicator of whether an individual
took the mortgage interest deduction in a given year. Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four
percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level, except in column (2), where they
are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1

Main

County Cluster

Controls

Cohort Year FE

Zip Code x
Cohort Year FE

Individual FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0112***

-0.0112***

-0.0113***

-0.0105***

-0.0109***

-0.0107***

(0.00285)

(0.00297)

(0.00285)

(0.00286)

(0.00318)

(0.00354)

0.000972

0.000972

0.00101

0.000832

-0.000479

0.0000859

(0.000882)

(0.000896)

(0.000885)

(0.000881)

(0.00120)

(0.000140)

-0.0439***

-0.0439***

-0.0431***

-0.0390***

-0.0225

-

(0.0108)

(0.0110)

(0.0109)

(0.0108)

(0.0148)

-

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Unit Fixed Effects

Zip Code

Zip Code

Zip Code

Zip Code,
Cohort Year

Zip Code x
Cohort Year

Individual

Observations

1,062,914

1,062,914

1,062,914

1,062,914

1,062,914

1,062,914

Home Pricet

Home Pricet ⨯ Ownert

Ownert

Table 9
Home Ownership, Labor Earnings, and Total Income
This table presents variants of the specification in column (1) of Table 8 in which Earningst and Home Pricet × Earningst
(column (1)) or Incomet and Home Pricet × Incomet (column (2)) are included as regressors. (Labor) Earnings are Medicare
wages plus self-employment earnings. (Total) Income additionally includes non-labor income. Observations are weighted by
individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS
matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1

Home Pricet

Home Pricet ⨯ Ownert

Ownert

Home Pricet ⨯ Earningst

Labor Earnings

Total Income

(1)

(2)

-0.0109***

-0.0111***

(0.00285)

(0.00285)

-0.00104

-0.0000870

(0.000902)

(0.000915)

-0.0279***

-0.0345***

(0.0108)

(0.0109)

0.000211***
(0.0000181)

Earningst

-0.00325***
(0.000219)

Home Pricet ⨯ Incomet

0.0000889***
(0.0000171)

Incomet

-0.00142***
(0.000202)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

1,062,914

1,062,914

Observations

Table 10
Home Ownership Results by Repayment Cohort
This table presents variants of the specification in column (1) of Table 8 in which the sample is divided into subsamples based on
repayment cohorts. Repayment Cohort is the year in which a student borrower enters into repayment. Observations are weighted
by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other data are from a four percent random sample of the
NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1
< 2000
(4)

2000-2005
(5)

> 2005
(6)

-0.0142**

-0.00898**

-0.0107**

(0.00606)

(0.00397)

(0.00449)

-0.00167

0.000619

0.000887

(0.00208)

(0.00118)

(0.00149)

0.00370

-0.0350**

-0.0513***

(0.0257)

(0.0144)

(0.0182)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

283,557

470,889

423,021

Home Pricet

Home Pricet ⨯ Ownert

Ownert

Observations

Table 11
Income Based Repayment Pogram
This table presents variants of the specification in column (1) of Table 3 in which the sample is extended to include student loan
defaults up until 2012, and in which IBR Eligiblet, Home Pricet × Post, IBR Eligiblet × Post, Home Pricet × IBR Eligiblet, and
Home Pricet × IBR Eligiblet × Post are included as regressors. IBR Eligiblet is a dummy indicating whether an individual student
borrower passes the means test in a given year. The means test is described in Section 4. Post is a dummy that equals one
beginning in 2009. In column (3), the sample is restricted to student borrowers with relatively high ratios of student debt to
income. Columns (1) to (3) include Zip code fixed effects. Column (4) includes individual borrower fixed effects. All columns
include year fixed effects. Observations are weighted by individual loan balances. Home price data are from Zillow. All other
data are from a four percent random sample of the NSLDS matched to de-identified IRS tax data. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the Zip code level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Defaultt+1

Home Pricet

IBR Eligiblet

Full
(1)

Full
(2)

Restricted
(3)

Full
(4)

-0.00419**

-0.00338

-0.00439

-0.00441*

(0.00209)

(0.00209)

(0.00326)

(0.00231)

0.0256***

0.0425**

0.0510**

0.0274

(0.000531)

(0.0183)

(0.0235)

(0.0229)

-0.000366

-0.00168

-0.000967

(0.000816)

(0.00138)

(0.000928)

-0.0404*

-0.0594**

-0.0707***

(0.0215)

(0.0269)

(0.0258)

-0.00259*

-0.00345*

-0.00157

(0.00146)

(0.00188)

(0.00184)

0.00314*

0.00467**

0.00513**

(0.00173)

(0.00217)

(0.00209)

Home Pricet ⨯ Post

IBR Eligiblet ⨯ Post

Home Pricet ⨯ IBR Eligiblet

Home Pricet ⨯ IBR Eligiblet ⨯ Post

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Unit Fixed Effects

Zip Code

Zip Code

Zip Code

Individual

Observations

1,556,296

1,556,296

658,504

1,556,296

