                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FINTECH, REGULATORY ARBITRAGE, AND THE RISE OF SHADOW BANKS

                                         Greg Buchak
                                        Gregor Matvos
                                       Tomasz Piskorski
                                          Amit Seru

                                      Working Paper 23288
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23288


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 2017, Revised September 2018

Seru is the corresponding author. We thank Sumit Agarwal, Mark Carey, Michael Cembalest,
Stijn Claessens, John Cochrane, Darrell Duffie, Douglas Diamond, Andreas Fuster, Radha
Gopalan, Holger Mueller, Chris Palmer, Thomas Philippon, Raghuram Rajan, Philipp Schnabl,
John Sedunov, Hyun Shin, Johannes Stroebel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Nancy Wallace, Toni
Whited (the editor), Ariel Zetlin-Jones, Luigi Zingales and seminar participants at Baruch
College, Bank for International Settlements, Chicago Fed, Cleveland Fed, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Housing Finance Policy Center, New York
University, Rutgers, Stanford University, University of Wisconsin and conference participants at
Conference for Empirical Legal Studies, CFAR and JFI Conference, ECB conference on
monetary policy and financial intermediation, FDIC 17th Annual Fall Research Conference,
Kellogg Fintech Conference, NBER Summer Institute, NBER Financial Market Regulation, OFR
FRBC Financial Stability and FINTech Conference, Philadelphia Fed Fintech Conference: The
Impact on Consumers, Banking, and Regulatory Policy, and SITE conference on Financial
Regulation for helpful comments. We thank Monica Clodius and Sam Liu for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 23288
March 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. G2,L5

                                          ABSTRACT

Shadow bank market share in residential mortgage origination nearly doubled from 2007-2015,
with particularly dramatic growth among online “fintech” lenders. We study how two forces,
regulatory differences and technological advantages, contributed to this growth. Difference in
difference tests exploiting geographical heterogeneity induced by four specific increases in
regulatory burden–capital requirements, mortgage servicing rights, mortgage-related lawsuits,
and the movement of supervision to Office of Comptroller and Currency following closure of the
Office of Thrift Supervision--all reveal that traditional banks contracted in markets where they
faced more regulatory constraints; shadow banks partially filled these gaps. Fintech lenders
appear to offer a higher quality product and charge a premium of 14-16 basis points. Relative to
other lenders, they seem to use different information to set interest rates. A quantitative model of
mortgage lending suggests that regulation accounts for roughly 60% of shadow bank growth,
while technology accounts for roughly 30%.

Greg Buchak                                      Tomasz Piskorski
University of Chicago                            Columbia Business School
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              3022 Broadway
Chicago, IL 60637                                Uris Hall 810
buchak@uchicago.edu                              New York, NY 10027
                                                 and NBER
Gregor Matvos                                    tp2252@columbia.edu
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas, Austin                      Amit Seru
2110 Speedway, Stop B6600                        Stanford Graduate School of Business
CBA 6.724                                        Stanford University
Austin, TX 78712                                 655 Knight Way
and NBER                                         ¸˛Stanford, CA 94305
Gregor.Matvos@mccombs.utexas.edu                   and NBER
                                                   aseru@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

        In the last decade, the consumer finance market has undergone a dramatic change.
Intermediation has shifted from traditional banks to shadow banks: non-depository institutions
falling outside the scope of traditional banking regulation.1 This change has coincided with a shift
away from “brick and mortar” originators to online intermediaries. 2 Despite the scarcity of
systematic evidence, regulators, policymakers, and academics have been engaged in an intense
debate over the potential consequences of these developments.3 In this paper, we undertake a
systematic examination of the evolution of shadow banking in the largest consumer loan market
in the US, the ten trillion dollar consumer mortgage market. We seek to explore the economic
forces that could explain the drastic change in the nature of intermediation.

        We show that shadow banks’ market share in mortgage origination has nearly doubled
from roughly 30% in 2007 to 50% in 2015 (see Fig. 1-3). This growth has been particularly robust
in the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) market, which serves less creditworthy borrowers,
with shadow banks holding 75% market share in 2015. An important segment of growth in shadow
banks were fintech lenders that primarily originate mortgages online. These lenders expanded
rapidly since 2007 and accounted for a quarter of shadow bank origination in 2015.

        Two broad hypotheses have attempted to explain the decline in traditional banking:
increased regulatory burden on traditional banks and disruptive technology. The regulation
hypothesis contends that following the financial crisis, traditional banks have been subject to
increasing legal and regulatory burdens. These burdens have raised costs and limited the scope of
products that traditional banks can provide, reducing lending. Shadow banks, which do not face
these burdens, have gained market share by stepping into the gaps left by traditional banks.

        The technology hypothesis contends that improving lending technology, particularly
among new shadow bank entrants, has driven the shift away from traditional banks. Fintech
shadow banks have gained market share because their technology allows them to lend more
cheaply or to provide better products. For example, Quicken Loans, the third largest mortgage
lender in 2015, offers the “Rocket Mortgage” product, whose application is almost entirely online
and involves no human loan officer. This innovation saves labor and office space costs and is
significantly more convenient according to consumer reviews.4 Additionally, fintech lenders may


1
  We use the term “shadow bank” to refer to nonbank (nondepository) lenders, consistent with the definition of the
Financial Stability Board (FSB), whose members cover G20 national regulators, the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, and the Bank of International Settlements. See also Adrian and Ashcraft (2016).
2
  Goldman Sachs Report, March 3, 2015: “The future of finance: the rise of the new shadow bank.”
3
  Bank of International Settlements, 2017: “FinTech credit. Market structure, business models and financial stability
implications.” http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs_fsb1.pdf
4
  https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/mortgages/quickenloansandrocketmortgagereview/ [accessed on 11/8/2016]

                                                         2
be better able to screen potential borrowers, leveraging alternative sources of information and the
big data approaches inherent in technology-based lending.

        Our paper tests both explanations and then digs more deeply to understand the specific
regulatory and technology forces at work. Our first approach to examining whether an increased
regulatory burden is a driving force behind the decline of traditional mortgage banking is to
compare lending of banks to all shadow banks, irrespective of their fintech affiliation. We find that
shadow banks are more likely to serve riskier, less creditworthy FHA borrowers and areas with
larger minority populations. Given that several enforcement actions and lawsuits had specifically
targeted banks’ treatment of less creditworthy and minority borrowers, this evidence is consistent
with shadow banks expanding in segments where regulatory burden has risen substantially.

        Shadow banks and traditional banks also differ dramatically in mortgage financing. While
traditional banks continue to hold between 30% and 50% of their originated loans on balance sheet,
shadow banks finance their originations almost entirely through securitization and the originate-
to-distribute model. While the private securitization market dried up following the crisis,
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have come to play a
dominant role in guaranteeing shadow bank originations. These implicit government guarantees
that shadow banks overwhelmingly rely on is another example though which regulatory activity
has advantaged shadow banks.

        With respect to loan pricing, we find negligible differences in traditional and shadow bank
interest rates. This finding hides important heterogeneity within shadow banks, with non-fintech
shadow banks offering slightly lower interest rates and fintech shadow banks offering substantially
higher interest rates. We explore this heterogeneity when studying technology but conclude that
that while non-fintech shadow banks pass some regulatory cost savings to borrowers, given the
concurrent increase in market share of fintech shadow banks, cost advantages alone cannot explain
shadow bank growth.

       Finally, to link regulation and shadow bank growth more explicitly, we study the impact
of four specific increases in regulatory burden: capital requirements, mortgage servicing rights
(MSRs), mortgage-related lawsuits, and the movement of supervision to Office of Comptroller
and Currency (OCC) following closure of the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), widely
considered to be a lax regulator (Agarwal et al., 2014; Granja and Leuz, 2017). To avoid confounds
related to credit demand differences across counties, such as differences in economic
fundamentals, we exploit changes in the regulatory burden within a differences in differences
framework. Our tests reveal that shadow banks gained market share and expanded lending in
counties whose banks were more exposed to increases in regulatory burdens. Moreover, the timing
of specific regulatory changes is closely linked to the rise of shadow banks in exposed counties.

                                                 3
        Concerning technology, fintech firms accounted for roughly a quarter of shadow bank loan
originations in 2015. This aggregate fact suggests that online origination technology may have
played an important role in the decline of traditional banks during the last decade. To assess the
role of this technology, we focus on technology differences between shadow banks, which allows
us to hold regulatory differences between lenders fixed. We first show that fintech lenders serve
different segments of the mortgage market than non-fintech shadow banks: fintech lenders’
origination activity overwhelmingly focuses on refinancing, which we speculate is a comparative
advantage of online origination. Additionally, fintech lenders are less likely to serve less
creditworthy FHA borrowers and higher unemployment geographies.

        Importantly, we find that fintech shadow banks charge significantly higher interest rates
than both non-fintech shadow banks and traditional banks. The combination of high interest rates
and growing market shares suggests an increasing consumer demand for fintech services as the
technology improves. These results suggest that fintech entry in this market is not only driven by
cost saving technology. We also find significant differences in information used to set mortgage
interest rates between fintech and non-fintech lenders. Standard variables for predicting interest
rates, such as FICO and loan-to-value ratio (LTV), explain substantially less variation in interest
rates of fintech lenders relative to non-fintech lenders. In other words, technology-based lending
uses different information, potentially based on big data, in addition to standard pricing variables.

        Taken together, our results suggest that both increased regulatory burdens and
technological improvements have contributed to the decline of traditional banks’ market share. To
decompose their relative contributions, we calibrate a simple quantitative model of mortgage
origination. In the model, traditional banks, non-fintech shadow banks, and fintech shadow banks
compete for borrowers. To capture the conventional facts that we document, these lenders differ
on three dimensions: regulatory burden, convenience, and costs of making loans. Pricing, firm
entry, and markups are determined endogenously for each type of lender. We interpret the variation
in mortgage rates and market shares using the model to identify the relative importance of different
factors in the decline of traditional banking.

        Our estimates imply that traditional banks have slightly lower shadow cost of funding and
provide higher quality products than shadow banks. Despite these advantages, they lose market
share during this period because of increasing regulatory burdens after 2010. This period coincides
with the adoption of a number of new regulatory initiatives concerning bank capital requirements
and stricter regulatory oversight. We also estimate a substantial increase in perceived quality of
online origination platforms by borrowers occurring between 2009 and 2012. Putting these effects
together, we find that increasing regulatory burden can account for about 60% of shadow bank
growth during 2008-2015 period, advancement in online lending technology accounting for
another 30%, and the balance coming from other sources.

                                                 4
2. Related literature

       Our paper ties together separate strands of the literature relating to residential mortgage
lending, banking regulation, and the growing role of financial technology.

2.1. The structure of the residential mortgage market

        Many papers have studied the structure of the mortgage origination chain, with particular
attention paid to the originate-to-distribute model and the costs and benefits thereof (e.g., Berndt
and Gupta, 2009; Piskorski, Seru, and Vig, 2010;Keys et al., 2010, 2013; Purnanandam, 2011).
The focus has primarily been on the run-up to the financial crisis rather than on the immediate
aftermath and recovery following the crisis.

         Bank-like activities taking place outside of traditional deposit-taking institutions have
attracted considerable attention in the literature and at federal banking regulators (see Adrian and
Ashcraft, 2016 for an exhaustive summary). The literature (e.g., Bord and Santos, 2012) has
primarily focused on the maturity transformation role of banks taking place outside of banks. Our
paper instead focuses on mortgage origination taking place outside the traditional banking system
and its accompanying regulatory structure. In this regard our paper is also related to the recent
literature investigating the industrial organization of the residential mortgage market (e.g., Stanton,
Wallace, and Walden, 2014, 2018).

2.2. Banking regulation and GSEs

       Our paper relates to a large literature examining the role of government programs
undertaken during the financial crisis (e.g., Mayer et al., 2014; Haughwout, Okah, and Tracy
(2016); Agarwal et al., 2015, 2017). Like Agarwal et al. (2014), Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi (2014),
Granja, Matvos, and Seru (2017), Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2015), Fligstein and Roehrkasse
(2016), Granja and Leuz (2017), we study lawsuits arising out of the financial crisis, capital
constraints, and the closure of the OTS. We make use of geographical heterogeneity in regulatory
burden to show that shadow banks, facing relatively lower regulatory pressure in heavily regulated
markets, gain market share.

         Because shadow banks rely heavily on GSEs and FHA guarantees, our paper relates to
literature studying GSEs and their role in mortgage lending. GSEs were established to promote
housing ownership, particularly in underserved areas, and a number of papers (e.g., Elenev,
Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016; Hurst et al., 2015; Bhutta, 2012; Acharya et al., 2011)
have studied their role in income redistribution and house ownership, finding mixed results. Our
paper suggests that increased regulatory burden of traditional banks combined with GSEs and FHA
guarantees may have contributed greatly to the rise of the shadow banking sector.


                                                  5
2.3. Financial technology

         Our paper connects to the growing literature on financial technology, e.g., Philippon (2015,
2016) and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013). To our knowledge, ours is the first paper that
performs a detailed analysis on fintech and non-fintech firms operating within the residential
mortgage industry in an effort to explore what technological advantages fintech lenders have over
non-fintech ones. Using a methodology similar to Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015), we show that
fintech lenders appear to use substantially different methods to set interest rates. Philippon (2015)
shows that advances in financial technology have failed to reduce intermediation costs. In that
spirit, our paper shows fintech lenders in fact offer higher interest rates than non-fintech lenders.
However, consumers’ willingness to use more expensive fintech lenders may also reflect more
convenient services offered by these lenders. In this regard, Fuster et al. (2018) study how
technology impacts frictions in the mortgage origination process, such as slow processing times,
capacity constraints, and refinancing. They show that fintech lenders process mortgage
applications faster and adjust supply more elastically than other lenders in response to mortgage
demand shocks, which suggests that technological innovation may have improved the efficiency
of financial intermediation in the mortgage market. Bartlett et al. (2018) study the role of fintech
lenders in alleviating discrimination in mortgage markets. They find evidence that suggests that
such lenders make the mortgage lending markets more accessible to African American and
Hispanic borrowers and provide these borrowers with fairer pricing.

        Finally, Philippon (2016) proposes that fintech can offer a way toward structural change in
the financial industry, because political economy considerations can stifle change in the traditional
part of the sector. Our paper advises caution: while fintech lenders do enter to help fill the gap left
by the banks, they have done so by having relied almost exclusively on explicit and implicit
government guarantees as customers.

3. Data and lender classification

3.1. Description of data sets

       We combine and use the following data sets in our paper.

        HMDA: We use mortgage application data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA) to examine loan-level and area-level lending patterns. HMDA records the vast
majority of home mortgage applications and approved loans in the United States. The data
provides, among other things, the application outcome, the loan type and purpose, the borrower's
race, income, loan amount, year, census tract, and importantly for our purpose, the originator’s
identity. Due to mergers and name changes, the identification of HMDA lenders changes over
time, and to overcome this limitation, we manually linked lenders across years. HMDA further

                                                  6
records whether the originator retains the loan on balance sheet or sells the loan within one year to
a third party, including to a GSE. If the originator retains a loan through the end of the calendar
year before selling it, we would observe this as a nonsale.

         Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac single-family loan performance data: The Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac data sets provide origination and performance data on a subset of these GSEs’ 30-
year, fully amortizing, full documentation, single-family, conforming fixed-rate mortgages that
are the predominant conforming contract type in the US.5 This loan-level monthly panel data has
detailed information on a rich array of loan, property, and borrower characteristics (e.g., interest
rates, location of the property, borrower credit scores, LTV ratios) and monthly payment history
(e.g., delinquent or not, prepaid). The loans in our data were acquired between January 1, 2000,
and October 2015. The monthly performance data runs through June 2016. Combining the Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac data sets gives us coverage of the majority of conforming loans issued in
the United Sates during the period of our study.

        The FHA data set: This data provided by the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) contains single-family portfolio snapshots of loans insured by the FHA. The
FHA program is intended to aid borrowers with particularly low credit scores who may otherwise
be unable to borrow from conventional lenders. The data begins in February 2010 and is updated
monthly through December 2016. The FHA data records product type (adjustable or fixed-rate),
loan purpose (purchase or refinance), interest rate, state, county, metropolitan statistical area
(MSA), and importantly for our purposes, the originating mortgagee. Notably absent from the FHA
data are borrower FICO scores; so while by the nature of the program, FHA borrowers have low
credit scores, and we cannot directly control for borrower credit score within the FHA data. For
this reason, when studying loan interest rates and outcomes, we focus our analysis primarily on
the loans from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac databases.

        US Census data: We use county-level demographic data from the US Census and American
Community Survey between 2006 and 2015. We collect population, population density, racial and
ethnic characteristics, education, income and poverty, and homeownership statistics.

       Regulatory burden of depository institution data: In studying the market share of shadow
banks we investigate whether shadow banks are likely to enter areas where the traditional banking
system faces heightened regulatory scrutiny. We draw on a number of data sources to measure

5
 The data set does not include adjustable-rate mortgage loans, balloon mortgage loans, interest-only mortgage loans,
mortgage loans with prepayment penalties, government-insured mortgage loans, Home Affordable Refinance Program
(HARP) mortgage loans, Refi Plus™ mortgage loans, and nonstandard mortgage loans. Also excluded are loans that
do not reflect current underwriting guidelines, such as loans with originating LTVs over 97% and mortgage loans
subject to long-term standby commitments, those sold with lender recourse or subject to other third-party risk-sharing
arrangements, or were acquired by Fannie Mae on a negotiated bulk basis.

                                                          7
these regulatory burdens between 2006 and 2015. In particular, we use bank balance sheet data
from the bank call reports, from which we calculate bank capitalization.

        Lawsuit settlements data: Finally, following Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2015) and
Fligstein and Roehrkasse (2016), we collect lawsuit settlements arising out of the financial crisis
brought against banks, lenders, and mortgage servicers. We construct a timeline of settlements and
settlement amounts by year and bank by aggregating data from a number of sources. From
Law360,6 a news service that covers all aspects of litigation, we collect data on lawsuit settlements
associated with residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), mortgage foreclosures, fraud,
deceptive lending, securitization, refinancing, and robo-signing. The Law360 data spans 2008
through 2016. From the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), we collected all legal actions
taken by the SEC regarding misconduct that led to or arose from the financial crisis. 7 The SEC
data spans 2009 through 2016. From SNL Financial, now a part of S&P Global Intelligence, we
collect a timeline of major bank settlements arising out of the financial crisis between 2011 and
2015. 8



3.2. Lender classification

        Central to this paper is the classification of mortgage lenders as banks or shadow banks
and within shadow banks as fintech or non-fintech. We perform this classification manually. The
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and FHA data identify each loan’s originator if the originator was
among the top 50 originators in the reporting period. HMDA identifies all originators. We classify
the identified lenders in the Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and FHA data. Additionally, we classify
the largest lenders in HMDA that are not identified in the Fannie, Freddie, or FHA data so that our
classified sample covers 80% of total originations by value in 2010. Robustness with respect to
lender classification is discussed in Section 10.

        A lender is a “bank” if it is a depository institution; a lender is a “shadow bank” otherwise.
This definition commands broad regulatory agreement: it is consistent with the definition of the
FSB, which defines banks as “[a]ll deposit-taking corporations” and shadow banks as “credit
intermediation involving entities and activities outside of the regular banking system.”9 Because
our focus is mortgage origination, our measurement of shadow banking falls squarely within the
FSB definition. FSB members comprise both national regulators of G20 countries, as well as
international financial institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and

6
  https://www.law360.com/faq
7
  https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/enf-actions-fc.shtml
8
  https://www.snl.com/InteractiveX/Article.aspx?id=33431645
9
  http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/global-shadow-banking-monitoring-report-2015.pdf

                                                      8
the Bank of International Settlements, as well as international standard-setting and other bodies
such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.

        The classification of fintech and non-fintech is more subjective: we classify a lender as a
fintech lender if it has a strong online presence and if nearly all of the mortgage application process
takes place online with no human involvement from the lender. For example, an applicant to
Quicken Loans, the prototypical fintech lender, can be approved for a loan with a locked-in interest
rate with no human interaction; the borrower meets a Quicken Loans loan officer for the first time
only at closing (see Online Appendix A.4). An applicant at a non-fintech firm, on the other hand,
interacts with a human loan officer much earlier in the process, even if the process begins online.
For instance, a borrower may input her name and location online and then be directed to phone a
local loan officer to continue.

        While we consider the possibility of “fintech traditional banks,” we find no banks fitting
our criteria among the nation’s largest bank lenders. More details on this are discussed in Online
Appendix A.7, where we additionally confirm the historical accuracy of our classifications using
the “Wayback Machine” to view archived webpages. Conversations with senior bankers confirm
our finds and suggest a hesitancy to adopt automated lending technology, due to the existence of
legacy systems and processes, and, in line with the themes of this paper, a concern over regulatory
scrutiny in the wake of robo-signing scandals.10

       Online Appendix A.1 shows the list of main lenders in each of these three categories.
Online Appendix A.7 provides more details on the classification process.

4. Institutional background

       This section provides an overview of the institutional details and history of shadow banking
before and after the financial crisis.

4.1. History of shadow banking in the retail mortgage market

       While this paper focuses on shadow bank mortgage origination after the crisis, we note that
shadow banks a large market share before the crisis. Goldman Sachs estimates that among the top
20 lenders, shadow banks originated roughly 30% of all mortgages for the years 2004—2006. The




10
   See, for example, https://diginomica.com/2017/10/12/fintech-risk-aversion-culture-shock/,
https://letstalkpayments.com/why-banks-should-not-be-held-responsible-for-slow-innovation-adoption/
https://www.americanbanker.com/opinion/regulatory-ambiguity-is-slowing-bank-adoption-of-cloud-services
https://thefinancialbrand.com/65069/america-us-banking-digital-innovation-trends/



                                                      9
shadow bank lending was heavily concentrated: Countrywide Financial alone accounted for more
than half of the shadow bank originations.11

         Shadow bank originators rely almost exclusively on making loans that are originated for
sale to third parties The identity of the third party depends on the originated product: Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac buy conforming loans; Ginnie Mae buys loans by the FHA or Veterans
Administration (VA). Private securitizers bought nonconforming jumbo or subprime mortgages.

        Precrisis shadow banks were particularly active in these nonagency markets, which
essentially vanished during the crisis. Because shadow banks are so reliant on secondary markets
for their originations, shadow bank lenders like Countrywide and New Century found themselves
unable to secure additional financing when the secondary market for nonconforming subprime and
jumbo loans dried up in 2007. As a result, many shadow bank lenders declared bankruptcy or were
sold to traditional banks.12 Consequently, during the financial crisis and the following recession,
shadow bank mortgage origination fell significantly. In the depths of the recession, shadow bank
market share among the 50 largest lenders fell to roughly 15%. (See Online Appendix A.6). Even
including smaller lenders, the shadow bank market share fell to less than 30% in 2008.

4.2. Regulatory changes

        Following the financial crisis, a number of regulatory changes have had a direct influence
on traditional banks’ mortgage origination activity. Weakened bank balance sheets combined with
new capital rules under Basel III led to tightened regulatory capital constraints. In particular, Basel
III changed risk-weighted capital requirements and placed limits on banks counting MSRs toward
their regulatory capital requirement. 13 The MSR rule change was proposed, finalized, and
implemented between 2010 and 2015.14 At the same time, lawsuits arising from conduct prior and
during to the crisis fell heavily on the surviving lenders, which were overwhelmingly banks.
Additionally, the OTS, which had overseen failed lenders like Countrywide and Washington
Mutual and had a reputation for lax oversight, was closed, and its duties folded into the OCC,
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Federal Reserve, and newly formed Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).

5. The rise of shadow banks and fintech

      We begin our analysis by showing the rapid decline of traditional banks in residential
mortgage lending in the US during 2007-2015 period, following the start of the Great Recession.

11
   GS Report, pg. 51
12
   http://www.charlotteobserver.com/news/business/banking/article9151889.html, accessed April 15, 2017
13
   GS Report, pg 54.
14
   See https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/110908/1213_Shakespeare_March2016.pdf

                                                      10
5.1. Aggregate facts

         Residential lending volume fluctuated significantly between 2007 and 2015. Fig. 1, Panel
A shows the value of new US residential mortgages as reported in HMDA by year of their
origination. In 2007 the originations reached over $2 trillion; in 2008 it declined to less than $1.4
trillion, only to peak at almost $2.2 trillion in 2012 before declining again. Fig. 1, Panel B shows
the lending volume in conforming mortgages, the most popular residential loans in the US.15 Over
this time period, almost half of loans were loans sold to GSEs within the year.16

       Fig. 1, Panel C presents volumes of FHA-insured loans. FHA loans allow lower income
and less creditworthy households to borrow money, often at below-private-market rates, for the
purchase of a home that they would not otherwise be able to afford. FHA borrowers typically make
only a 3.5% down payment, with the FHA loan financing the balance. These loans account for
approximately 15% of our sample (Table 1, Panel A, Column 1) and are the second most popular
loan segment in the United States. Aggregate trends in FHA loan volumes differ substantially from
conforming mortgage trends. The issuance segment rose from $70 billion in 2007 to peak in 2009
at over $340 billion. This dramatic growth reflects the disappearance of the private subprime
lending market, which was the closest substitute for many FHA loans.

        Despite these large fluctuations in the aggregate amount of residential mortgage
originations, the share of shadow banks has been steadily increasing over time. Fig. 2 shows that
the share of mortgages originated by shadow banks across different markets. Panel A shows that
among all loans reported in the HMDA data, the share of shadow banks has increased from roughly
30% in 2007 to 50% in 2015, with the majority of the growth taking place after 2011.

       This growth in shadow banks was not confined to a specific segment of the residential
market. Panel B shows that among conforming loans, the shadow bank share approximately
doubled from 25% in 2007 to 50% in 2015 with the majority of the growth occurring after 2011.
Panel C, shows that among FHA loans, the shadow bank origination share grew from about 45%
in 2007 to about an astounding 75% in 2015. The share of shadow banks grew both in the period




15
   Prior to the Great Recession, private nonconforming (nonagency) loans had an important market share but virtually
disappeared after 2007. The exception is the jumbo loan segment catering to high creditworthy borrowers buying
expensive homes (see Keys et al., 2013).
16
   The HMDA data only allows a loan to be classified as conforming if it was sold to the GSEs in the same year as the
year of loan origination. As a result, the estimate of conforming loans based on HMDA understates the overall market
share of conforming loans in the United States.



                                                         11
of rising volumes from 2007 to 2009 as well as declining volumes from 2010 to 2014. These
aggregate data suggest a structural shift has taken place in who lends in this market.17

         The rise in shadow banks has coincided with a shift away from brick-and-mortar
originators to online intermediaries. Here, we show the extent of this shift in the residential
mortgage market. Fintech originations accounted for roughly 3% of residential loans and grew to
12% by 2015. Fig. 3, which shows fintech shadow banks’ share of shadow bank lending, reveals
that fintech shadow banks account for a substantial part of the expansion of shadow bank lending.
Fig. 3, Panel A shows that fintech share of shadow bank lending grew especially in 2009-2013
period. This growth is in both the conforming and FHA segments (Fig. 3, Panels B and C).

5.2. Financing of shadow banks

        Accompanying these market share changes have been shifts in the source of traditional and
shadow bank financing. Table 1, Panel B shows that between 2007 and 2015, traditional banks
have held more than 30% of originated mortgages, while shadow banks retain, at most, 7.5%.18 In
addition to these level differences, traditional banks and shadow banks’ financing patterns evolved
very differently over time. Fig. 4 shows the time trends of loan financing among traditional banks,
shadow banks, and fintech lenders, respectively. While private securitization accounted for the
bulk of shadow bank purchasers precrisis, this market collapsed prior to the start of our period of
interest. At the start of our study, neither traditional nor shadow banks had access to this source of
financing. Panel A shows that the share of bank loans held on balance sheet has been roughly
stable, fluctuating from 50% in 2007 to 30% in 2012, before increasing again to 40%. This
contrasts significantly with changes in shadow bank financing. As Panel B shows, shadow banks
have grown increasingly reliant on GSEs: in 2007, only 30% of their funding came from GSEs.
By 2015, nearly 50% of shadow bank loans were sold to GSEs after origination.19

        Significant changes are also apparent for fintech shadow banks. As Panel C shows, before
2010, fintech lenders sold most of their mortgages to insurance companies. From 2010 onward,
fintech lenders started shifting their sales toward GSEs, and by 2015, nearly 80% of loans
originated by fintech lenders were loans financed by some underlying government guarantee.


17
   Online Appendix A.7 presents results for top 50 largest lenders. The difference in the samples reflects a relatively
large market share of small shadow banks early in the sample that declined over time relative to large shadow banks.
The decline in the share of shadow bank loans sold to affiliates (Fig. 4, Panel B) suggests that some of these small
shadow banks sold loans to traditional banks.
18
   The share of loans retained on the balance sheets is likely smaller. HMDA loans not sold within the calendar year
of origination are recorded as not sold. Therefore, some of “not sold” loans are likely sold in the next calendar year.
In the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data set (which records both date of origination and date of sale), roughly 9% of
shadow bank loans are sold in a year that is different from their origination year. If this pattern holds in HMDA, this
fully explains the 7.5% of not sold shadow bank originations.
19
   The patterns are even more striking if we focus only on the largest lenders (Online Appendix A.7).

                                                          12
Overall, these results suggest that shadow banks, and fintech shadow banks in particular, grew
increasingly reliant on government guarantees in the form of GSEs and FHA insurance relative to
traditional banks, which instead rely on government-guaranteed deposits for funding.

        In addition to differences between traditional banks and shadow banks in how their
originated mortgages are ultimately financed, we also show significant variation in financing
patterns, even conditional on the mortgages being sold. In particular, among conforming loans sold
to the GSEs, we study the length of time the mortgage is held on the originator’s balance sheet.
We define !"#$_&'_()*$+,-. of borrower i of lender type j at location z at time t (in the unit of
quarters) as

                 !"#$_&'_()*$+,-. = 01)2&$23 5$&6$$7(()*$, :2";"7)&"'7)                        (1)

        The mean Time_to_Sale is roughly 40 days. To investigate how this varies across lender
types, we estimate the following regression:

                        !"#$_&'_()*$+,-. = = !>?$, + A+B Γ + δEF + G+,-. ,                     (2)

        where !>?$, is bank, shadow bank, fintech, or non-fintech. A+ is a vector of loan controls,
and H-. are zip-time fixed effects. The results in Table 2 show that the time-to-sale for shadow
banks by roughly 0.10 quarters (9 days) shorter than time-to-sale of traditional banks. Within
shadow banks, non-fintech shadow banks’ time-to-sale is roughly 0.08 quarters (7 days) faster than
traditional banks, and fintech shadow banks’ time-to-sale is roughly 0.17 quarters (16 days), faster
than traditional banks. These results are consistent with shadow banks having a more limited
balance sheet capacity than traditional banks, which results in a faster sale. Without additional
data, it is hard to assess whether fintech lender’s even faster time is driven by technological
advantages, or greater balance sheet constraints, or a combination of both. These findings are
certainly consistent with Fuster et al. (2018) who find that fintech lenders process mortgage
applications faster.

6. Loan-level differences between traditional banks, shadow banks, and fintech

       This section shows differences in loans and borrower characteristics among lender types.
We first examine characteristics of loans and borrowers within and across geographic markets. We
then study pricing and performance differences across lender types. These facts will provide
suggestive evidence on the role of regulation and technology in the decline of traditional banks
that we study in greater detail in following sections.

6.1. The characteristics of non-fintech and fintech shadow bank borrowers and loans




                                                13
        Our first cuts of the data are based on the idea that we should observe the largest decline
of traditional banks in regions where their relative disadvantage to shadow banks is highest. Since
regulation is the main differentiating factor between shadow and traditional banks, such results
suggest that these are sectors in which the additional regulatory burden of banks is highest.

6.1.1. Descriptive statistics

        We begin our descriptive analysis by examining differences between traditional bank
borrowers and shadow bank borrowers in the HMDA data. We display these differences during
the expansion period, 2007-2015, as well as the final year in our data, 2015, at which point the
shadow bank lending had already substantially expanded (Table 3, Panel A). Compared with
traditional banks, shadow bank borrowers have approximately $4,000 lower annual incomes on
average. This difference became more pronounced in the recent period, growing to $9,000 by 2015.
Among shadow bank borrowers, those using fintech firms report slightly higher incomes.

        We do not observe dramatic racial differences. Relative to traditional banks, non-fintech
shadow banks have a roughly equal proportion of borrowers reporting as white and a slightly larger
proportion of borrowers reporting to be African American (in 2015). Racial differences are more
striking between fintech and other lender types: fintech borrowers are much more likely to report
“other” or “unknown” race; in 2015, approximately one quarter of fintech borrowers did not report
their race. Presumably, some borrowers may choose not to report their race when lenders cannot
easily observe it, especially in the context of online lending. The lack of reported race also suggests
that any results on the racial composition of the borrower pool have to be interpreted with care.

6.1.2. Borrower and loan characteristics

        We now frame our analysis with the observation that if shadow banks are engaging in
regulatory arbitrage, they should be most active among borrowers and geographies where
traditional banks face the greatest regulatory burdens. Moreover, to the extent that fintech shadow
banks are exploiting technological advantages, they should be most active among those best able
to use the technology and those for whom the technology offers the greatest benefits.

       We analyze both individual loan-level differences within a given market as well differences
in market share at the geographical level. On the individual level, we estimate the following linear
probability specification:

                            I$7J$2_!>?$+K. = A+B Γ + HK. + G+K. .                                (3)

        Each observation is a residential mortgage " in county M originated in time &. We first
estimate the regression first on the sample of all residential loans, where I$7J$2_!>?$+K. is an
indicator variable taking the value 100 if the originator is a shadow bank, and 0 otherwise, meaning

                                                  14
the coefficients are in units of percentage points. We next estimate the regression only among
shadow bank loans in which case I$7J$2_!>?$+K. is an indicator taking the value 100 if the
originator is a fintech shadow bank, and 0 otherwise. A+ is a vector of borrower and loan
characteristics, such as borrower income, race, loan purpose, or loan type. Both specifications
include county x time fixed effects HK. to compare borrowers within a market at the same time.

        We estimate these specifications separately using HMDA data and Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac data. The broader HMDA data gives insight into the overall mortgage market over certain
characteristics such as borrower race and loan financing. The narrower Fannie and Freddie data
are limited to FRM loans but contain more detailed credit information and loan term information.

        While the above specification provides insight at the individual level within a given market,
we also study market-level differences at the county level. Fig. 5 shows significant heterogeneity
in the county-level shadow bank penetration in 2015, ranging from less than 10% to more than
80%. It is these differences that this section seeks to understand. To that end, we estimate the
following regression of 2015 market share on county characteristics:

                           %I$7J$2_!>?$_I')73K = AKB Γ + GK .                                   (4)

       In parallel with the individual-level analysis, we study both shadow bank penetration as a
share of all loans and fintech penetration as a share of shadow bank loans. That is, we use as left-
hand side variables both

                                             +∈STUTUVWXY Q'**)23  :2";"7)&$J+K                  (5)
            %(ℎ)J'6_5)7P_I')73K =                                              ,
                                                 +∈VZZ Q'**)23 :2";"7)&$J+K

and

                                           +∈S\+S.]KU Q'**)23
                                                            :2";"7)&$J+K                        (6)
                 %["7&$Mℎ_I')73K =                                       .
                                           +∈TUVWXY Q'**)23 :2";"7)&$J+K

       The individual-level results are shown in Table 3, Panel B for HMDA and Table 4 for the
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data; the market-level results are shown in Table 5, with Panel A
showing average differences and Panel B showing the regressions. The individual and
geographical results, broadly similar, are presented below.

6.1.2.1. Race, income, and credit scores

       Concerning race and income, Table 3, Panel B, Column (2) shows that within markets,
lower income borrowers and racial minorities are more likely to be shadow bank borrowers. Table
5, Panel B, Columns (1)-(3) show that this result holds across markets: counties with greater shares


                                                 15
of African American and Hispanic residents see significantly higher shadow bank market share.
Additionally, counties with higher unemployment rates and fewer high school graduates see
significantly higher shadow bank market share. As a consumer segment, economically
disadvantaged and minority borrowers as have seen more mortgage-related lawsuits, and therefore
we interpret these findings as shadow banks focusing on segments in which traditional banks face
greater regulatory scrutiny. The Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data in Table 4 reveals that among
GSE borrowers, while shadow bank borrowers tend to have slightly lower FICO scores and slightly
higher debt-to-income ratios, they also have lower loan-to-value ratios. Thus, while shadow bank
borrowers tend to have lower incomes overall, within the GSE segment, they are not clearly more
or less creditworthy.

         Comparing fintech shadow banks to brick-and-mortar shadow banks, we do not find robust
differences in incomes among individuals but do find that counties with lower unemployment rates
see significantly greater fintech market penetration. Concerning race, we find the interesting result
that borrowers reporting unknown race are significantly more likely to be fintech borrowers. This
suggests that online borrowers are more circumspect in reporting their race when a loan officer
cannot easily observe it. Within GSE loans, we once again find ambiguous differences in borrower
riskiness and credit quality, with borrowers having lower FICO scores, greater debt-to-income
ratios, and lower loan-to-value ratios being more likely to be fintech borrowers.20

6.1.2.2. Loan purpose: purchase versus refinancing

         We find striking differences between lender types regarding the purpose of mortgage
originations, particularly as between fintech and other lender types. Among individual shadow
bank borrowers, Table 3, Panel B, Column (8) shows that a refinance is nearly 20% more likely to
be a fintech loan. Table 4 shows that this is the case for conforming mortgages as well, with a
conforming refinance being 7%-8% more likely to be a fintech loan. Consistent with this finding,
first-time borrowers are significantly less likely to be fintech borrowers. Table 5 confirms this
result across markets, which shows that counties where many residents have lived in the same
home for more than a year see significantly greater fintech penetration. These are counties where
many residents are likely candidates for mortgage refinancing.



20
  Simple descriptive statistics in Panel A of Table 5 suggests that consumer characteristics that predict shadow banks
and fintech loans in a given market also predict across market variation in shadow bank and fintech penetration.
Counties with a large shadow bank presence have more minorities and worse socioeconomic conditions: there are
more African American and Hispanic residents and a greater percentage of unemployed residents. Interestingly,
shadow banks are also more predominant in areas with significantly lower lending concentration as measured by a
Herfindahl index and with more unique lenders on average. Fintech lending requires a certain degree of technological
sophistication on the part of borrowers. Therefore, it is surprising that fintech firms are most present in counties with
less educated populations. These are univariate comparisons, however, and should be interpreted with caution.

                                                           16
        These loan purpose differences are less stark looking at shadow banks as whole. Table 3
shows that when examining shadow banks as a whole, a refinance is roughly 2% less likely to be
a shadow bank loan than a home purchase, which is mirrored in the GSE results in Table 4.
Additionally, the share of residents living in their home for more than a year is not significantly
predictive of shadow bank penetration, whereas it was predictive of fintech penetration.

        These robust results linking refinance and fintech shadow banks in particular lead us to
speculate that fintech technology is particularly well suited toward mortgage refinancing rather
than new purchases. In refinancing, many activities, such as a title check, structural examination,
and negotiations between buyer and seller, already took place at the time of purchase, leaving less
nonstandardized work for the fintech lender to do. These somewhat nonstandardized activities may
be less-well suited to technological comparative advantages of a fintech lender.

6.1.2.3. Financing: portfolio loans, GSEs, and government programs

        We find that shadow banks are substantially more likely to originate loans in segments in
which government intervention is meant to increase mortgage access. Table 3 confirms results
suggested by our aggregate data. Shadow banks are much more active in the FHA market: an FHA
loan is 9% more likely to be originated by a shadow bank. Shadow banks loans are also more likely
among VA loans. The effect is in the opposite direction for US Department of Agricultural and
Rural Housing Service (FSA/RHS) loans, with FSA/RHS loans more likely to be originated by
traditional banks.

        One explanation for why shadow banks are so active in these programs may be
measurement: HMDA data does not include detailed borrower attributes, such as their consumer
credit scores or debt-to-income ratios, so a loan having an FHA and VA guarantee may proxy for
creditworthiness of borrowers, and shadow banks may focus on less creditworthy borrowers. Our
results discussed above using the GSE data, however, did not find economically significant
differences in borrower creditworthiness or risk. Table 4 shows that a borrower with a 100-point
higher FICO score is only 2 percentage points less likely to be a shadow bank borrower.

        The second reason why government-guaranteed originations are more likely to be shadow
bank mortgages is that these types of loans are tied to the originate-to-distribute model, which
shadow banks necessarily follow. The results in Table 3 show that even conditioning on borrower
and loan characteristics, sold loans are more likely to be originated by shadow banks. This is the
case for mortgages sold to GSEs, as well as to other banks and financial institutions, or mortgages,
which were privately securitized. These results confirm the aggregate results on financing
discussed earlier and highlight the importance of GSE financing for shadow bank growth.

6.2. Loan pricing and performance

                                                17
6.2.1. Loan pricing: are traditional banks more expensive?

        We now turn to interest rate differences between lender types. A potential explanation for
the growth of shadow banks and fintech is that they have lower costs and gain market share by
offering cheaper mortgages: shadow bank lenders benefit from lower regulatory cost, and fintech
shadow banks additionally benefit from cost-reducing technology. The alternative explanation is
that regulations restrict banks on the quantity side, while better technology increases the quality of
fintech offerings, allowing fintech lenders to gain market share while charging equal or higher
rates. Studying differences in loan pricing helps to resolve this question.

        We focus on the conforming loan sample, which reports interest rate and FICO score and
test whether rates offered to observationally equivalent borrowers differ by lender type. In
particular, we estimate the following regression:

          2)&$+,-. = =^ _'7 `"7&$Mℎ (5, + =a ["7&$Mℎ (5, + A+B Γ + H-. + G+,-. ,                (7)

where an observation is a mortgage ", originated by lender type j in zip code z in quarter t. The
dependent variable, 2)&$+,-. is the mortgage rate in percentage points. _'7 `"7&$Mℎ (5, is a
dummy variable for whether the originator was a non-fintech shadow bank. ["7&$Mℎ (5, is a
dummy variable for whether the originator was a fintech shadow bank. We control for borrower
characteristics such as FICO, loan-to-value ratio, and debt to income in A+ . To compare rates in
the same market at the same point in time, we include zip code times quarter fixed effects H-. .
These fixed effects absorb differences in supply and demand conditions across markets, including
regulatory differences across markets. Table 6 shows the results.

        Overall, we find negligible differences between traditional bank and shadow bank interest
rates, with each type’s rates falling within one basis point of each other. However, there is
significant heterogeneity within shadow bank types. Non-fintech lenders charge rates that are
around three basis points lower than those of traditional banks This difference in rates suggests
that consumers perceive some product differentiation. However, traditional and non-fintech
shadow banks appear to compete enough to keep these prices close in equilibrium. This
quantitatively small difference serves as evidence against regulatory cost advantages being the
primary driver of shadow bank growth.

        While non-fintech shadow banks offer slightly lower rates than traditional banks, we find
that fintech shadow banks offer significantly higher interest rates. Fintech firms charge 13 basis
points more than traditional banks to observably similar borrowers in the same zip code and
quarter. This is equivalent to a 60 point difference in FICO score. Within shadow banks, the




                                                 18
difference is even larger at 14-16 basis points .21 Overall, this pricing evidence suggests borrowers
pay a significant premium for fintech loans. Therefore, we conclude that the growth of fintech
market share cannot be explained by fintech gaining market share by passing lower costs onto
borrowers. Rather, the answer lies in differing consumer tastes between fintech and non-fintech
offerings.

6.2.2. Loan performance

        We next investigate loan performance, noting that in addition to offering higher interest
rates on average, a lender may price differentially by giving loans at similar interest rates to worse
performing borrowers. We first clarify some institutional details regarding lenders’ exposure to
GSE loan performance. A default in a pool of conforming loans is insured by the GSEs; hence,
investors may not require interest rate premia for bearing default risk beyond insurance fees
charged by the GSEs. Since these insurance fees depend on a few key loan and borrower
characteristics (e.g., FICO, LTV), our specifications with a full set of controls account for variation
in interest rates induced by these fees. The one exception is that originators may fear legal liability
for riskier loans (e.g., suits by GSEs for violations of representation of warranties). The more
relevant aspect of performance for originators is prepayment. Since prepayment risk is not insured
by the GSEs, investors may want to require a higher interest rates on loans with higher prepayment
risk. We therefore examine both dimensions of loan performance.

        With this in mind, we estimate differences in performance across lender types by running
the following regressions:

       Q$`)1*&+,-. = =^ _'7 `"7&$Mℎ (5, + =a ["7&$Mℎ (5, + =b 2)&$+,-. + A+B Γ + H-. + G+,-. ,                  (8)
     c2$?)>#$7&+,-. = =^ _'7 `"7&$Mℎ (5, + =a ["7&$Mℎ (5, + =b 2)&$+,-. + A+B Γ + H-. + G+,-. .

          Q$`)1*&+,-. measures whether a mortgage i, originated by lender of type j in zip code z,
in quarter t, is at least 60 days delinquent within two years of its origination. We therefore restrict
loans to have two years of performance. This reduces our sample to loans originated between 2010
and 2013. c2$?)>#$7&+,-. is defined analogously. We control for the mortgage interest rate
2)&$+,-. and borrower and mortgage characteristics, A+ . We compare mortgage performance
within a market at the same point in time, using zip code x quarter fixed effects H-. .

        Shadow bank conforming loans are more likely to default than traditional bank loans (Table
7, Panel A). The magnitudes are small: shadow bank borrowers default at rates about 0.02% higher
than traditional bank borrowers, the effect equivalent to about a three points lower FICO score.


21
  We further note that this premium is unlikely to be explained by differences in origination fees between fintech and
non-fintech lenders (see Online Appendix A.4).

                                                         19
This effect is mostly driven by non-fintech shadow bank lenders whose borrowers default at about
0.023% higher rate over the two-year period. The results for fintech loans indicate that fintech
conforming borrowers have very similar default rates as traditional bank borrowers.

        We find larger absolute differences in loan prepayment (Table 7, Panel B). Shadow bank
loans are more likely to be prepaid, with coefficients ranging roughly between 1.8% and 2.5%
depending on the specification. The base rate of prepayment within two years of origination over
the time period is approximately 11%, meaning that a shadow bank loan is between 16%-22%
more likely to be prepaid than a comparable traditional bank loan. Relative to traditional banks,
fintech lenders exhibit an even larger probability of prepayment, with fintech shadow bank loans
approximately 7% more likely to be prepaid. These results, taken together, suggest that indeed,
shadow bank loans are slightly riskier to investors ex-post, even conditional on interest rates, but
only from a prepayment perspective. This is consistent with earlier findings that shadow banks
target a riskier segment of the market.

7. Rise of shadow banks: regulatory arbitrage

        Having documented differences between banks and shadow banks that suggest an
underlying regulatory cause, this section directly ties the growth of shadow banks to four measures
of regulatory burden that fell primarily on traditional banks: building capital buffers to comply
with risk-based capital requirements, harsher regulatory treatment of MSRs, mortgage lawsuits
arising out of the financial crisis, and the dissolution of the OTS and the folding of its regulatory
duties into OCC and other regulators.

       The tests are difference in difference in nature. In particular, we study whether counties
whose traditional banks were more exposed to a specific regulatory burden experienced larger
market share gains in shadow bank lending. We first describe the construction and justification of
the four measures of and then describe the regression specifications, which follow parallel
approaches, before presenting the results.

7.1. Capital requirements

        The Dodd-Frank Act imposed minimum risk-based capital requirements on traditional
banks. As a result, the average tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of US banks rose by roughly 5% from
22% in 2008 to 27% in 2015 (4% on asset-weighted basis). As we show, at the beginning of the
Great Recession, traditional banks kept roughly half of their loans on their balance sheet and took
longer to dispose of the loans they eventually sold. Banks focusing on building capital buffers may
do so at the expense of less balance sheet mortgage lending.




                                                 20
        Limiting the amount of portfolio loans implicitly reduces the profitability of mortgage
lending for traditional banks. Traditional banks’ balance sheets are, to a large degree, funded with
government-guaranteed deposits. Shadow banks, on the other hand, predominantly sell their
originated loans through GSE securitization and almost never hold them for portfolio reasons.
Increased capital requirements indirectly lower the guaranteed deposits subsidies to traditional
banks, thereby creating a relative advantage for shadow banks.

        Here, we investigate whether banks withdrew from the mortgage market to generate
adequate capital buffers over this time period and whether this build up in capital allowed for the
entry of shadow banks. Our unit of analysis is a county. We compute in which counties banks had
to build up the largest capital buffers. Consider a county c and bank b. We first calculate the change
in individual bank b’s tier 1 risk-based capital ratio (!1e5f%) from 2008 to 2015:

                            Δfeh = !1e5f%hai^j − !1e5f%haiil .                                                (9)

       We aggregate these to the county level by weighing banks by their share of the mortgage
market in that county at the beginning of the analysis in 2008:

                                                                  :2";"7)&"'73hKaiil                         (10)
            ΔI'M)* M)?"&)* 2)&"'K = 100×                 Δfeh                           .
                                                                 W∈K :2";"7)&"'73WKaiil
                                                   h∈K

        The counties with the largest change in the local capital ratio are those in which banks
capital ratios grew the most. Our hypothesis is that these counties saw greater shadow bank market
share and lending growth.

7.2. Mortgage servicing rights

         Some changes to capital requirements specifically targeted mortgage lending. Basel III
guidelines implemented by the Federal Reserve Board increased the regulatory cost of holding
MSR on banks’ balance sheets. In particular, the rule change increased the risk weighting of MSR
assets for purpose of capital requirements. The Federal Reserve Board issued the final rule
implementing these guidelines in 2013.22 Because origination and servicing are complementary
activities, a higher cost of servicing reduces the attractiveness of origination. As with the capital
ratio measure, we calculate the origination-weighted MSR as a percent of tier 1 capital at a county
level:



22
  The Basel Committee released these proposed guidelines in 2009 and agreed upon the standards in 2010. The
Federal Reserve Board (FRB) issued the final rule implementing these guidelines in 2013 with the required compliance
date being January 2015. Hendricks et al. (2016) show that affected banks began changing their lending practices and
reducing their MSR exposures prior to the required compliance date.

                                                         21
                                                          :2";"7)&"'73hKaiil                   (11)
               MSR%r = 100×            MSR%saiil                                .
                                                         W∈K :2";"7)&"'73WKaiil
                                 h∈K

        The counties with the largest ex-ante MSR percent of tier 1 capital are those in which banks
relied most heavily on MSR assets to bolster their regulatory capital. Our hypothesis is that these
counties saw greater shadow bank market share after implementation.

7.3. Regulatory oversight

         The descriptive statistics suggest that shadow banks tilt their lending to markets with more
minorities and worse socioeconomic conditions. Given that several enforcement actions and
lawsuits had specifically targeted banks’ treatment of less creditworthy borrowers, it may not be
surprising that traditional banks tilted lending away from that sector. Because shadow bank
activities are concentrated on origination, rather than holding and servicing, they escaped much of
the scrutiny that full-service banks received from regulators and class action lawsuits with respect
to their legacy loans.

        We therefore investigate the association between the intensity of lawsuits aimed at
traditional banks and the market share of shadow banks. The idea behind this test is to investigate
whether shadow banks expanded more in areas in which the legal risks increased for traditional
banks. Such exposure may have limited the traditional banks’ ability and willingness to serve
riskier borrowers. The losses from these lawsuits have a potential knock-on effect of tightening
the capital constraints of affected banks

        We collect data on large mortgage lawsuit settlements against large traditional banks and
shadow banks. Ninety-eight percent of observed lawsuits target traditional banks. Denote a bank
b’s accumulated lawsuit settlements between 2008 and 2015, in billions as Ih . As before, we
calculate exposure to mortgage settlements of county c as a weighted average of 2008 lending
activity of banks in that county as follows:

                                                           :2";"7)&"'73hKaiil                  (12)
             ΔI)631"& $t?'312$K = 100×              Ih                           .
                                                          W∈K :2";"7)&"'73WKaiil
                                              h∈K

       The counties with a high exposure to lawsuits are those counties whose most active banks
received the most mortgage-related lawsuits. Our hypothesis is that these counties saw greater
shadow bank market share and lending growth.

7.4. Office of Thrift Supervision closure

       Dodd Frank dissolved the Office of Thrift Supervision in 2011, and its regulatory duties
were folded into the OCC, FDIC, Federal Reserve, and CFPB. Prior to its dissolution, the OTS

                                                 22
supervised several institutions that experienced financial-crisis era notable failures such as
Countrywide, Washington Mutual, and AIG. Importantly for our analysis, the OTS was regarded
as a lax regulator. It was understaffed relative to the number of institutions it supervised and to
attract more resources, marketed itself as lax to potential lenders, which would in turn bring funds
to the agency (see also Agarwal et al., 2014; Granja and Leuz, 2017).23

        We investigate whether counties that previously saw a large share of originations regulated
by the OTS in 2008, prior to its closure, saw greater growth in shadow bank lending between 2008
and 2015 and particularly between 2011 and 2015, following its closure. We calculate the county-
level exposure to this shock as follows:

                                         :!( 2$;1*)&$J '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil                                   (13)
                     OTS%r = 100×                                        .
                                             !'&)* '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil

       Counties with higher share of OTS regulated originations in 2008 receive a relatively larger
shock when the OTS is dissolved and its duties folded into the supervision of the OCC, FDIC,
Federal Reserve, or CPBF. Our hypothesis is that these counties saw greater shadow bank market
share and lending growth, as the banks in these counties adjust to stricter regulatory supervision.

7.5. The differential effect of regulation

        With our four measures of regulatory burdens defined, we now describe the basic
specification. There are two outcome variables of interest, the change in shadow bank market share
between 2008 and 2015 and the growth in shadow bank lending between 2008 and 2015 as a share
of all 2008 lending. That is, we examine both:

                                       (ℎ)J'6 '2";"7)&"'73Kai^j (ℎ)J'6 '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil                   (14)
      Δ(ℎ)J'6 w)7P 3ℎ)2$ = 100×                                −                         ,
                                         x** '2";"7)&"'73Kai^j    x** '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil

                                        (ℎ)J'6 '2";"7)&"'73Kai^j − (ℎ)J'6 '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil                (15)
     Δ(ℎ)J'6 w)7P *$7J"7; = 100×                                                            .
                                                       x** '2";"7)&"'73Kaiil

       Examining changes in market share allows us to analyze changes in shadow bank lending
separately from changes in overall market size; examining changes in lending levels additionally
allows us to answer whether changes in shadow bank market share arises merely because banks
reduce lending and shadow bank lending stays constant or whether shadow banks actually actively
expand lending in the face of regulatory gaps. The two specifications we consider are


23
   For example, Countrywide, which was regulated by the OCC, switched regulators to the OTS. According to a report
by the Washington Post, “critics in government and industry said Countrywide’s shift from OCC oversight to that of
OTS was evidence of a `competition in laxity’ among regulators eager to attract business.”
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/11/22/AR2008112202213.html.

                                                       23
                Δ(ℎ)J'6 w)7P 3ℎ)2$K = =i + =^ Regulationr + AKB Γ + GK ,                                   (16)

And analogously,

               Δ(ℎ)J'6 w)7P *$7J"7;K = =i + =^ Regulationr + AKB Γ + GK ,                                  (17)

         where Regulationr is one of the aforementioned measures of county-level regulation,
changes in capital ratios, MSR percentage of tier 1 capital, lawsuit exposure, or OTS share. To
facilitate comparison between these measures, we first standardize by dividing by the cross-
sectional standard deviation. Thus, coefficients can be interpreted as percent changes in market
share of lending volume for a one standard deviation change in the regulation variable. We control
for other county characteristics in AKB , including demographics and traditional bank share in 2008.
Because counties are of very heterogeneous size with respect to lending activity, we run weighted
least squares regressions weighted by 2008 originations.

        The results, shown in Table 8, Panel A, indicate significant and economically meaningful
associations between shadow bank activity and our measures of bank regulatory burden.24 A one
standard deviation increase in capital ratio changes is associated with a 3.4% rise in shadow bank
market share (Column 1) and a 3.4% rise in shadow bank lending activity (Column 5). Similarly,
a one standard deviation increase in MSR assets is associated with approximately a 1.9% rise in
shadow bank market share (Column 2) and a 1.9% rise in shadow bank lending activity (Column
6). Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in lawsuit exposure is associated with a 2.0% rise
in shadow bank market share (Column 3) and a 6.5% rise in shadow bank lending activity (Column
7). Finally, a one standard deviation increase in OTS lending share is associated with a 1.2% rise
in shadow bank market share (Column 4) and a 5.2% rise in shadow bank lending activity (Column
8). These numbers are all economically meaningful relative to the mean increase in shadow bank
market share of roughly 20% and the mean increase in shadow bank lending activity of 27%.

        These results, taken together, suggest that shadow banks gained the most market share in
counties whose banks were exposed to the greatest regulatory pressure. Notably, they show that
shadow banks are gaining market share relative to banks, so our results are not simply picking up
counties with better or worse economic fundamentals but are rather associated with differential
impacts across banks and shadow banks. Moreover, the results are not merely driven by banks
exiting lending, but rather, shadow banks are expanding into these markets.

24
   To provide a visual of the variation in the data coming from these four measures of regulatory exposure, Online
Appendix A.9 shows binned scatter plots of shadow bank market share versus the four measures of regulatory
exposure. These plots show that the positive relationship tends to be robust through many values of the regulatory
exposure measures.




                                                       24
        To provide more credence to our interpretation of the results, we examine the exact timing
of these market share changes for the two measures with definitive event dates. In particular, the
MSR rule was finalized in 2013, and the OTS shut down in 2011. We therefore run the following
panel event study:

   (ℎ)J'6 w)7P 3ℎ)2$K. = Ç. + ÇK + = É";ℎ 2$;K ×Ñ$)2 + AK ×Ñ$)2 B Γ + GK. ,                    (18)

        where High regc is defined as a county falling in the top quintile for either MSR % of tier
one capital or OTS origination share. We allow for year and county fixed effects and allow
coefficients on county-level controls to vary by year. Fig. 6 shows the difference in difference
coefficient = by year. In particular, we compare the shadow bank shares in counties with high
MSR (Fig. 6a) or high OTS origination (Fig. 6b) to other counties over time. Notice that the large
relative jump in high MSR county shadow bank share occurs in 2013, the year when the rule is
finalized, and the large relative jump in high OTS county shadow bank share occurs in 2011, when
the OTS closes. The timing of when the effects in market shares show up lines up well with the
timing of the events, consistent with arguments made in this section.

7.6. Robustness: instrumenting for capital ratio increase

        To further isolate the effect that the rebuilding of regulatory capital had on bank lending,
which may be endogenously related to loan demand, we instrument for capital ratio increases
between 2008 and 2015 with capital ratio decreases between 2006 and 2008. Our hypothesis is
that counties whose banks saw the largest capital decreases during the crisis are the counties whose
banks had rebuild their capital reserves the most following the crisis at the expense of mortgage
origination. In other words, we test whether counties whose banks were induced to increase capital
between 2008 and 2015 due to capital decreases between 2006 and 2008 saw increase shadow
bank market share and lending activity.

         The results in Table 8, Panel B confirm this intuition. First, Column (1) shows that as
expected, there is a significant negative relationship between capital ratio decreases in from 2006
to 2008 and capital ratio increases from 2008 to 2015. Columns (2) and (4) show the reduced form
results that capital ratio decreases between 2006 and 2008 are associated with greater shadow bank
market share growth and shadow bank lending activity, respectively. Columns (3) and (5), the
second stage regressions, confirm the results shown in Table 8, Panel A that increases in bank
capitalization between 2008 and 2015 are associated with greater shadow bank entry.

        The findings of this section suggest that a tightening of capital constraints and increased
regulatory scrutiny faced by the traditional banks may have meaningfully facilitated expansion of
shadow bank lending in the residential mortgage market during the recent period. More broadly,
the findings are consistent with the idea that traditional banks retreated from markets with a larger
regulatory burden, and that shadow banks filled this gap.

                                                 25
8. The rise of fintech lenders: the role of technology

        The descriptive results in Section 6 point to significant differences between fintech and
non-fintech lenders. Because these shadow bank lenders face the same regulations, the differences
are likely driven by technology. This section attempts to shed light on economic forces driving
these differences. We consider two explanations for the role of technology in the rise of fintech
lenders. One explanation is that fintech lenders make use of more data and different models to
price their loans. A second explanation is that fintech delivers a more convenient mortgage
origination experience by requiring less effort from the borrower in the origination process.

8.1. Different credit models

        Fintech lenders rely on technology to set mortgage interest rates, while non-fintech shadow
banks potentially still rely on loan officers to do so. Online lending allows lenders to collect
different types of information than would be collected by a loan officer. We want to understand
whether fintech lenders’ use of different information results in different mortgage pricing models.
We do so by examining how much variation in interest rates is explained by standard borrower
characteristics (hard information) across lenders. Following Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015), we
regress:

                   2)&$+-. = =^ [Öf:+ + =a I!Ü+ + A+B Γ + H-. + G+-. .                       (19)

        We estimate the regressions separately for fintech and non-fintech shadow bank over the
2010-2015 period and year by year. We use the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac origination data,
because we observe interest rates as well as information on a rich array of loan, property, and
borrower characteristics. The R2 from these regressions measures the object of interest: how much
of the variation in interest rates is explained by the observable borrower characteristics across
lender types. A large portion of variation in interest rates arises from nationwide macroeconomic
effects and not from lenders’ models. We therefore difference out fixed effects and calculate R2 of
the within regression.

       We present the results in Table 9. Fintech shadow banks use substantially less hard
information than non-fintech shadow banks: the R2s are smaller across all specifications. FICO
and LTV alone can explain nearly 25% of the variation in non-fintech interest rates but less than
16% of the variation in fintech interest rates. We test for the significance of the R2 differences
following the method in is Erickson and Whited (2002) and find that the differences are significant
beyond the 1% significance level in all cases

        To ensure the pattern is robust, we estimate several specifications, using different fixed
effects, including more controls, as well as polynomials of controls, to ensure our patterns do not


                                                26
arise because lenders use nonlinear models. Even in the most saturated specifications, with the
most comprehensive fixed effects and nonlinear controls, the R2 of non-fintech lenders exceed
54% and is below 52% for fintech lenders. 25 These results suggest that fintech lenders use
substantially different information in setting mortgage interest rates than non-fintech lenders,
likely by using other dimensions of “big” data, not available to other lenders.

        As an additional robustness test of significance, we bootstrap the calculation as follows:
we sample with replacement from the set of originated loans. With the randomized sample, we
divide the originations into fintech and non-fintech loans and rerun the interest rate regression. We
do this for 100 samples. The test statistic is the t-value of the difference in R2s across the fintech
and non-fintech samples. We present the distribution of the bootstrapped R2 in Fig. 7. The R2 of
non-fintech lenders exceed those of fintech lenders.
         Finally, we further examine whether fintech and non-fintech lenders’ interest rates are
better predictors of ex-post performance in terms of default and prepayment. This analysis rests
on the observation that if lenders are using more or better data to set interest rates, these interest
rates should be more correlated with ex-post performance. Online Appendix A.5 presents the
results together with a detailed discussion. In short, we find little difference regarding default,
which is not surprising as GSE lenders have little economic exposure to defaults. We find large
differences regarding prepayment, where investors do have economic exposure, finding the
coefficient on interest rate to be two to four times larger than non-fintech interest rates. This finding
is consistent with fintech interest rates being better predictors of ex-post performance. However,
these findings should be interpreted with caution since borrowers more likely to refinance might
select fintech lenders for loans.
8.2. Convenience and cost savings

       Next, we consider the possibility that fintech’s origination model also allows for lower cost
or more convenient originations. Fintech can potentially lower origination costs though its
automated process and can offer more convenient originations more quickly through the
borrower’s home computer. To the extent that borrower willingness to pay is correlated with
observable characteristics like FICO score or income, fintech lenders may be able to price
discriminate.

       Earlier results in Section 6.2.1 showed that that fintech interest rates were 14-16 basis
points higher than non-fintech interest rates among conforming loans. At the same time, Online
Appendix Section A.2 shows suggestive evidence that among FHA borrowers, an economically
disadvantaged segment, that fintech interest rates were roughly three basis points lower than non-
fintech interest rates for otherwise similar borrowers. Comparing across segments, these

25
  In unreported tests we also examine year-by-year differences in R2 between fintech and non-fintech lenders and find
lower R2 for fintech lenders in all years. The R2s for non-fintech lenders have grown smaller over time, suggesting
that these lenders may also be adopting more sophisticated pricing models.

                                                         27
differences are consistent with low income FHA borrowers being price sensitive with low
willingness to pay for convenience, with higher income conforming borrowers being more willing
to pay for convenience.

        To examine this mechanism in more detail, we focus on interest rates within conforming
mortgages. We divide borrowers into two groups: the dummy variable “High FICO” takes the
value of one if the borrower’s FICO score is in the top 10% of FICO scores for the origination
year, and zero otherwise. We estimate the following regression:

     2)&$+-. = =T ["7&$Mℎh-. + =U×T ["7&$Mℎh-. ×É";ℎ["M'+-. + A+B Γ + H-. + G+-. .             (20)

        We are interested in the coefficient on fintech, which captures the difference in interest
rates for comparable borrowers with FICO below the highest 10th percentile, and the coefficient
on the interaction term, which captures the additional difference in interest rates between fintech
and non-fintech lenders for High FICO borrowers.

        The results presented in Table 10 show that fintech borrowers with the highest credit
ratings pay an even greater premium for fintech loans, relative to other borrowers with the same
characteristics. The highest credit score fintech borrowers pay approximately 0.6 basis points more
than borrowers in the ordinary credit score range do for fintech loans. This difference is roughly
equivalent to the interest rate difference associated with a 3.5 point FICO differential. Relative to
the baseline difference of 15 basis points, this estimate corresponds to a 4% increase in the
premium of fintech over non-fintech rates. The results suggest that borrowers most likely to value
convenience might be willing to pay for the convenience offered by fintech lenders. This
interpretation is also consistent with findings of Fuster et al. (2018) who show that fintech lenders
process mortgage applications about 20% faster than other lenders and that in areas with more
fintech lending, borrowers refinance more, especially when it is in their interest to do so.

        The differences become larger in the later part of the sample, between the years 2014 and
2015. As we show in the model below, it was in these years where consumers’ appreciation for
fintech convenience was at its highest, likely to do technological improvements. Over this period,
we find a 17 basis points difference between fintech and non-fintech loans for the lower 90th
percentile of FICO scores, with an additional 1.1 basis point difference for the highest FICO scores.

        To summarize, we find some suggestive evidence that fintech lenders use different
technology in determining mortgage rates. In addition, fintech lenders offer convenience, which
borrowers appear to value. Among the most price sensitive borrowers, fintech loans have lower
interest rates. In contrast, among the borrowers most likely to value convenience, fintech lenders
are able to command a premium for their services. An alternative explanation, which we do not
rule out, is that fintech’s technology may allow for better price discrimination of borrowers.

                                                 28
9. Decomposing effects of regulation and technology: a quantitative framework

       The shadow bank market share in the overall mortgage market grew by more than 20% in
2008 to 2015 period. Of this increase, about 9% are attributable to the growth in fintech firms. Our
analysis so far suggests that regulatory burdens on traditional banks benefited all shadow banks,
but that fintech shadow banks additionally benefited from technological improvements. This
section presents a simple model to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of regulation and
technology to the overall decline of traditional banks in this sector.

9.1. Model framework

        Three types of lenders compete for mortgage borrowers: banks, non-fintech shadow banks
(“non-fintech”), and fintech shadow banks (“fintech”). These lenders differ on three dimensions:
regulatory burden; convenience, modeled as a difference in quality; and differences in the cost of
making loans. Pricing, firm entry, and markups are determined endogenously for each type of
lender.

       A mass of borrowers, indexed by b, faces the mortgage market, which comprises Ns bank
lenders, Nâ non-fintech lenders, and Nä fintech lenders. While the number of lenders is determined
endogenously, individual borrowers take pricing decisions and market structure as given. Lenders,
indexed by i, offer mortgages at interest rate rå .

9.1.1. Demand

       Borrower b’s utility from choosing mortgage from lender i is

                                      uås = −αrå + qå + ϵås.                                  (21)

        Borrowers’ utility declines in the mortgage rate with α > 0 measuring interest rate
sensitivity. Borrowers also derive utility from nonprice attributes of lenders: qå + ϵås (Egan,
Matvos, and Hortacsu, 2017). Nonprice attributes represent convenience, quality, and other
services offered by the lender. For example, banks offer checking accounts and other financial
services that other lender types do not, while fintech lenders offer the convenience of at-home
origination that other lender types do not. qå captures these type-specific quality differences.
Individual borrowers’ preferences across individual lenders can also differ idiosyncratically: Bank
of America may have a particularly desirable branch location for a particular borrower; Quicken’s
online interface may be especially appealing to another particular borrower. These differences are
captured in the utility shock ϵås . To aggregate preferences across borrowers, we employ a standard
assumption in discrete choice demand models (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995) that ϵås is
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) type 1 extreme value.


                                                29
9.1.2. Supply

          Lenders differ in quality of service qå and in the marginal costs of providing a mortgage,
ρå , which can reflect their shadow cost of financing. Operating within a market entails a fixed entry
cost cå , such as the cost of basic regulatory registrations, offices, support staff, and offices.

           Lenders are identical within type so that the lender side of the economy is parameterized
by each type’s quality qå ∈ {qs , qâ , qä } , funding cost ρå ∈ {ρs , ρâ , ρä } , and entry costs cå ∈
 cs , câ , cä .

         In addition to changing a bank’s marginal cost, regulatory burdens may also reduce
traditional banks’ activity on the extensive margin. For example, binding capital requirements, risk
constrains, or lawsuits may sometimes prevent a traditional bank from lending to a given borrower
altogether. We capture this type of regulatory burden through parameter γs . If lender i is a bank,
its probability of lending to a specific borrower is scaled by a factor Çh . A higher Çh captures a
relatively unconstrained bank; a lower Çh captures a relatively constrained bank. Çh shocks are
i.i.d. across lender-borrower pairs. Denote a lender’s market share she would have obtained
without regulatory burdens as så ; the actual market share is then γå så . These constraints do not
affect shadow banks, i.e., for non-fintech and fintech lenders, γâ = γä = 1.

       Conditional on being present in a market, a lender sets its interest rate rå to maximize its
expected profit:

                                             rå − ρå γå så ,                                     (22)

which is a function of the spread it charges over its financing cost and the probability that its offer
is accepted.

        Let F represent the total face value of loans in the market (size of the market). Then total
lender profit, net of entry cost cå is

                                      πå = rå − ρå γå så F − cå .                                (23)

       A lender only operates in a market as long as πå ≥ 0

9.1.3. Equilibrium

    We focus on equilibria in which all lenders within a type are symmetric. An equilibrium is a
market structure comprising the number of lenders of each type Ns , Nâ , Nä ; the pricing decisions
of lenders, rs , râ , rä ; and the market shares of lender types Ss , Sâ , Sä ,such that




                                                  30
   1) Borrowers maximize utility, taking market structure and pricing as given (Eq. (21) holds
      for all borrowers b).
   2) Lenders set interest rates to maximize profits, taking market structure and the pricing
      decisions of other lenders as given (Eq. (22) holds for all lenders i).
   3) There is free entry: the number of firms of each type _h , _S , _\ is set such that profits of
       all firms are zero. (Eq. (23) equals zero for all lenders i).

    Given the distribution of idiosyncratic taste shocks, consumers’ optimal choices result in
standard logistic market shares:

                                                        exp (−αrå + qå )                         (24)
                            så rå , qå ; rõ , qõ   =    û                  .
                                                        õü^ exp
                                                              (−αrõ + qõ )

        Recall that the actual market shares of firms depend on their regulatory burden. Given
lender attributes and the number of each type of lender operating in a market, Ns , Nâ , Nä , aggregate
market shares for each type are as follows:

                                     γs Ns exp (−αrs + qs )                                      (25)
         Ss =                                                                 ,
                 γs Ns exp −αrs + qs + Nâ exp −αrâ + qâ + Nä exp (−αrä + qä )

                                            Nâ exp −αrâ + qâ                                     (26)
         Sâ =                                                                     ,
                 γs Ns exp −αrs + qs        + Nâ exp −αrâ + qâ + Nä exp −αrä + qä

                                            Nä exp (−αrä + qä )                                  (27)
          Sä =                                                                      .
                 γs Ns exp −αrs + qs       + Nâ exp −αrâ + qâ + Nä exp (−αrä + qä )

      The solution to the lender’s maximization problem gives the standard expression for
markup over funding cost as a function of market share:

                                                    1 1                                          (28)
                                       rå∗ − ρå =            .
                                                    α 1 − så

       Last, the free entry condition can be written as

                            rå∗ − ρå γå så rå∗ , qå ; rõ , qõ F − cå = 0.                        (29)

9.2. Calibration

        To quantitatively decompose the contribution of different factors to the growth of shadow
banks and fintech firms, we first calibrate the model to the conforming loan market data. We
calibrate the model every year from 2008 onward to provide a simple assessment of how the



                                                       31
funding costs, quality, and regulatory burden of different types of lenders banks have changed over
the period.

          We aggregate data to the zip-year level and calibrate to observed data in the mean zip for
each year. In other words, each year we observe the number of firms of each type (Ns , Nâ , Nä ), the
market share of each lender type (Sâ , Sä , Ns ), the pricing of each lender type (rs , râ , rä ), and the
market size F. 26 We measure costs relative to the ten-year government yield, yF . That is, we
measure ρ¢ = ρå − yF . We calibrate the model to obtain model primitives, each type’s quality qå ∈
{qs , qâ , qä } , funding cost ρå ∈ {ρs , ρâ , ρä } , entry costs cå ∈ cs , câ , cä , and consumer price
sensitivity α.

        Additionally, we make the following normalizations: first, we measure quality and funding
costs relative to banks, £h = §h = 0. Setting §h = 0 plays a similar role to setting the share of
outside good in demand in Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). We further
assume not only that banks differ from non-fintech lenders in the quality of their service, but that
the relative difference in service provision between brick and mortar lenders did not change during
the period. Further, we measure the change in regulatory burdens relative to 2008, so we set Çh =
1 in 2008 and allow it to change thereafter.

        We obtain consumer’s price sensitivity for every year, •. , from the optimal pricing choices
of traditional banks. We observe the markup over treasuries charged by traditional banks, 2h. − >.
and the market share of individual traditional banks,3h. . We calibrate •. , by inverting the bank’s
first-order condition for each year:

                                              1       1                                       (30)
                                           αF =            .
                                          2h. − >. 1 − såF
         Intuitively, smaller margins rsF − yF imply that consumers are more price sensitive.

       Next, given αF , we calibrate the marginal costs of lending for fintech and non-fintech
shadow banks using the optimal pricing decisions of these lenders. Formally, we invert their first-
order pricing conditions:

                                                        1     1                                                   (31)
                                     £S. = râF − yF −                ,
                                                        αF 1 − sâF
                                                        1    1                                                    (32)
                                     £\.   = räF − yF −            .
                                                        αF 1 − säF

26
   A data limitation is that we do not see fintech interest rates in the data until 2010 because Quicken Loans is not yet
large enough to be reported by name in the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data. We assume that the 2010 gap between
bank and fintech interest rates is similar in 2008 and 2009. When we restrict the model to only 2010 onwards, it does
not alter the results because most effects of regulation and technological growth occurred after 2010.

                                                           32
         Intuitively, given demand elasticity, i.e., given markup, a lender charges higher interest
rates if it has higher marginal costs.

        We next turn to calibrating the differences in quality of services between these lenders
using optimal consumer choice (aggregate market share) Eqs. (25)-(27). Recall that we set §h =
0, so the service quality is relative to banks. We first calibrate the service quality of non-fintech
shadow banks, §S . The regulatory burden is normalized relative to 2008, i.e., Çh,il = 1, so we can
derive an expression for §S as a function of observed interest rates, market shares, and price
sensitivity, • , in 2008, which we calibrated above:

                                                             3S,il                              (33)
                            §S = •il 2S,il − 2h,il + log           .
                                                             3h,il

        Intuitively, both higher quality and higher interest rates lead to larger market shares. The
price sensitivity • measures the relative weight that consumers place on these characteristics. So
holding market shares fixed, the higher interest rates that non-fintech shadow banks charge, the
higher their implied quality. Holding fixed interest rates, a larger market share also implies higher
quality.

        Following similar logic, given quality of non-fintech shadow banks §S and price
sensitivity, •, we can calibrate the quality of fintech services for every year §\. :

                                                       3\.                                      (34)
                            §\. = •. 2\. − 2S. + log           + §S .
                                                       3S.

        The intuition for this expression is the following: because there are no regulatory
differences between different types of shadow banks, the regulatory burden γsF does not affect the
relative market shares of these lenders. So if fintech shadow banks charge higher rates than non-
fintech shadow banks räF − râF , holding market shares fixed, this implies they have higher
quality. Similarly, if they obtain a larger market share for given rates, consumers must be choosing
them because of higher quality.

       Given •. and §S , we calibrate the regulatory burden for every year by inverting the relative
market shares of banks and non-fintech shadow banks:
                                                         3h.                                    (35)
                          log Çh. = •. 2h. − 2S. + log           + §S .
                                                         3S.
       Intuitively, given differences in quality and rates offered by traditional and non-fintech
shadow banks, a smaller market share of traditional banks implies that there is a larger regulatory
burden, 1 − Çh. , which prevents them from lending more. A limitation of this calibration is that we
only calibrate the differences in technology between banks and fintech shadow banks. Overall


                                                 33
improvements in technology, which also benefit traditional banks, would affect the size of the
market rather than market shares. In other words, if bank technology also improves over time, our
calibration only measures this improvement relative to fintech shadow banks. As we discuss in
Section 3.2, however, our searching revealed little by way of “fintech banks”, and so this
understatement is likely minimal.

           Finally, the zero-profit condition implies that the fixed costs lenders face have to equal
their profits, i.e., the margin on individual loans råF − £¶. − >. times the quantity of loans
γåF såF FF :

                                M+. = råF − £¶. − >. γåF såF FF .                              (36)

9.3. Results

        The results of the calibration are shown in Fig. 8. Our estimates imply that non-fintech
shadow banks offer lower quality services than traditional banks. Obtaining a mortgage from her
primary bank is more convenient for the borrower; for instance, it does not involve search, the
borrower can make automatic payments from linked accounts, and the bank offers other
convenient banking services such as checking accounts. The simultaneous rise of fintech market
share and higher prices of fintech mortgages imply that fintech is gaining market share through
increased quality and convenience of providing mortgages online. Our estimates suggest fintech
quality increases dramatically, reaching parity with traditional banks by 2012 and surpassing it
thereafter.

        Our estimates suggest that the expansion of fintech would have been even larger if it were
not for its rising marginal (funding) costs. Fintech funding costs rise initially to roughly 20 basis
points above bank and non-fintech funding costs and stay at this increased level after 2011,
suggesting that the funding for these new entrants became scarcer as they grew. While fintech
funding costs exceed that of other shadow banks, shadow bank marginal costs of funding still
slightly exceeded those of traditional banks, which have access to a large (and subsidized) deposit
base. These results are not surprising, given that banks and shadow banks charge similar interest
rates. Rates are a markup over funding costs that depends on market shares. Neither the rate
differential nor relative market shares of individual lenders underwent significant changes during
this period, implying that relative funding costs could not have changed dramatically. We also do
not find that entry costs of banks increased dramatically.

       This leaves the rising regulatory burden to explain the growth of shadow banks. While the
burden rose overall, between 2008 and 2010, in the aftermath of the crisis, banks’ ability to lend
appears to increase slightly, indicating a progressive recovery of traditional bank mortgage


                                                  34
lending. This suggests that the dissolution of the private securitization market that occurred early
in our sample did not play a large role in the growth of shadow bank market share. It is not until
after 2011 that banks’ regulatory position starts deteriorating substantially. We note that the 2011-
2015 period of substantial deterioration in our calibrated measure of regulatory burden corresponds
to the period of implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act, development of Basel III rules changing
the treatment of MSR from the perspective of capital requirements, the establishment of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and increased mortgage lawsuit activity targeted at
traditional banks. These results suggest that rather than operating on the intensive margin of
increasing the funding costs of traditional banks, new regulations reduce banks’ abilities to lend
function primarily through an extensive margin channel.27

        Recall the findings in Section 7.1 in which we study the effects of Basel III changing the
treatment of MSR from the perspective of capital requirements (Fig. 6). The estimates from Fig. 6
suggested that banks’ initially benefit from their regulatory position, and it is only after 2010 that
their exposure to this regulatory shock begins to take hold. The patterns obtained in Fig. 8 from
our model are remarkably similar to those in Fig. 6 despite the regression and model exploiting
different types of variation.

       We conclude by noting that the fixed costs of fintech lending have increased over time,
suggesting increasing barriers to entry in this sector. High entry costs in this sector are consistent
with a rise in intellectual property and software development costs that the entry of new
competitors requires, as well as potential unmodeled economies of scale in this sector.

9.4. Regulatory burden and technology: a decomposition

       We conclude by using the calibrated model to infer how much of the growth in shadow
banking and fintech is attributable to an increased regulatory burden and how much is attributable
to technological improvements. First, we ask how the mortgage sector would have developed if
the regulatory burden of traditional banks were frozen at the level of 2008 and the technological
progress would not have taken place, setting up a baseline. We do so by setting both bank
regulatory burden Çh and fintech quality §\ to their 2008 levels. We allow other fitted parameters
to evolve as calibrated and report the growth of non-fintech and fintech shadow banks. Our
estimates presented in Fig. 9 suggest that both fintech and non-fintech shadow banks would have
approximately zero growth between 2008 and 2015.


27
  These findings are consistent with evidence in Fuster, Lo, and Willen (2017), who find evidence of an increased
legal and regulatory burden over 2008-2014. They argue that an important part of this trend may reflect increased loan
servicing costs and the changed treatment of servicing rights under revised capital regulations. These findings are also
consistent with Gete and Reher (2017), who present evidence suggesting that the 2014 US liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR) rules has led to a higher FHA market share for nonbanks.

                                                          35
        Next, we investigate how much shadow growth can be explained by rising regulatory
burden placed on traditional banks without any technology improvements. We do so by setting
fintech quality qä to their 2008 levels but let regulatory burden parameter to evolve as estimated.
We find that in this case total shadow bank growth reaches approximately 12%, including a 1%
growth occurring in the fintech sector (Fig. 9). Hence, without technological improvements, we
can account for about 60% of growth in shadow bank lending.

        Finally, we examine the role of technology. We ask how the mortgage sector would have
developed if the regulatory constraints would not have tightened, but the technological
improvements in fintech had taken place. We therefore fix the regulatory burden parameter of
traditional banks at the level of 2008. We find that technological improvements lead to fintech
gaining roughly 8.3% in market share, with non-fintech shadow banks losing roughly 2% in market
share (Fig. 9) as their fintech competitors improve their offerings. Therefore, technology alone is
responsible for approximately 90% of gains of fintech firms and 30% of shadow bank growth
overall. The 12% shadow bank growth due to regulatory changes and 6% shadow bank growth
due to technological changes leaves roughly 2% unexplained by the model.

10. Robustness

       This section describes a number of robustness checks concerning lender classification,
sample selection, and other concerns that might impact inferences from our earlier analysis.

10.1. Classification

        While we describe the classification process in detail in Online Appendix A.7, we highlight
here several important robustness checks. First, while the classification of bank versus nonbank is
straightforward, the classification of fintech versus non-fintech involves some subjective
judgment. To overcome any subjectivity in the classification, we utilize multiple independent
research assistants (RAs) to cross-validate the classifications; the Ras, together with the authors,
arrive at substantively similar classifications. Where there is disagreement, we take a conservative
approach and classify the lender as non-fintech.

       Second, while the primary classification is based on visiting websites at the time of writing,
we verify that these classifications are appropriate at the start of the sample period. We view
archived versions of the lenders’ websites through a webservice called the Internet Archive
Wayback Machine, 28 which has, since 2001, periodically archived historical websites. When
examining the largest lenders, we verify that nearly all lenders classified as fintech in 2016 would


28
     https://archive.org/web/



                                                 36
have been fintech between 2008 and 2010, and all lenders classified as non-fintech in 2016 would
have been non-fintech in 2008-2010.29 Additionally, we find that no large traditional banks would
have been classified as fintech in either time period.

        Finally, we note that while HMDA identifies all originators, the Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac data sets only identify sellers which have comprised at least 1% of total sales to the GSE
within a given quarter. On average, there are between 15 and 20 uniquely identified Fannie/Freddie
lenders in a given quarter. In our sample period, we identify 55 unique lenders comprising between
50% and 85% of the entire market share in a given quarter. As we will discuss next, the qualitative
inferences in the paper do not change when we only isolate the sample to the largest lenders.

10.2. Sample selection

        We rerun the tests on a number of samples. In particular, we (1) restrict the HMDA data to
the top 50 lenders, (2) look only at retail originations in the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data, (3)
exclude Quicken Loans from the sample, and (4) run the tests on the 2010-2013 (rather than 2010-
2015) sample. In all cases the results are substantively unchanged.

        Top 50 lenders. We rerun all tests involving HMDA data, which includes borrower and
geographic characteristics, as well as market share changes, looking only at the largest 50 lenders
as of 2010. This restriction makes the HMDA data more comparable to the Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac data, in that it focuses only on the largest lenders. Online Appendix A.6 shows market shares
of fintech and non-fintech shadow banks as well as the buyers of their loans. When restricting the
sample to the top 50 lenders, the results are qualitatively unchanged.

         Retail originations. The Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data identify by name the largest
sellers to the respective GSE rather than the originator directly. While most fintech lend are retail
lenders and sell their own originations, many non-fintech sellers are wholesale lenders that
purchase loans from other originators, bundle them, and sell them to GSEs. To address concerns
that our results are driven by differences in wholesale and retail lending, we restrict our Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac sample to only retail originations and rerun our tests. With this restriction,
the results are unchanged.

       Excluding Quicken Loans. Quicken Loans is the largest fintech lender. To test whether the
findings regarding fintech shadow banks are restricted to Quicken Loans only, we rerun a number

29
   The Wayback Machine does not allow us to fully verify that the historical online application process would result
in a firm offer rate, since the archived online pages of lenders are inactive. However, we note that our results are robust
to restricting the fintech classification to largest market participants that account for vast majority of fintech lending
in our sample and that were known to offer firm offer rates through their online lending platforms during our entire
sample period.

                                                            37
of tables excluding Quicken Loans sales from the sample. Online Appendix A.8 shows key tables
from these results. While excluding Quicken Loans substantially reduces the power of our tests,
we find on the restricted sample that most substantive results hold: fintech still appears to
specialize in refinances; Fintech lenders are significantly faster that banks in selling originated
loans (though not statistically significantly so); Fintech shadow banks charge significantly higher
interest rates than non-fintech shadow banks, and the interest rates they charge are significantly
less-explained by borrower observable characteristics. Having said that, fintech lenders, excluding
Quicken, do not charge as high rates relative to non-fintech lenders as they did in Table 6.
Consequently, shadow banks all together as a group, excluding Quicken, appear to charge lower,
not higher, rates than banks.

        2010-2013 sample. We restrict the sample period to 2010-2013 to test whether the results
are driven by financial technology that has only recently improved. The results are unchanged.

11. Other robustness

        To conclude this section, we highlight three other robustness checks. First, while we show
that fintech lenders charge significantly higher interest rates, it is possible that they compensate
borrowers with lower origination fees or points. While comprehensive data is not available on
origination fees, manual investigation appears to show that this is not the case; in fact, online
reviews often cite high origination fees as a problem regarding Quicken Loans. See Online
Appendix A.3 for details.

        Second, we run similar tests on the FHA data set to test whether interest rates differ
significantly. A drawback of this analysis is that we do not observe borrower credit score, so there
may be uncontrolled-for correlation between the creditworthiness of borrowers and their selection
into fintech or non-fintech borrowing. With this caveat, unlike in the conforming loans analysis,
we find that fintech lenders charge slightly lower interest rates, which is consistent with our
interpretation of fintech lenders charging high rates for price insensitive consumers valuing
convenience and passing lower costs on to price sensitive consumers.

        Third, most tables cluster standard errors by geographical area cross time to account for
correlated shocks within a market. For robustness, we also calculate standard errors clustering by
lender times time to account for within-lender shocks. The significance of the main results is
unaffected.

12. Conclusion




                                                38
        The residential mortgage market has changed dramatically in the years following the
financial crisis and the Great Recession. Our paper shows two important aspects of this
transformation: the rise of shadow bank lenders on one hand and the rise of fintech lenders on the
other.

        Shadow bank lenders’ market share among all residential mortgage lending has grown
from roughly 30% in 2007 to 50% in 2015. We argue that traditional banks have faced greater
regulatory restrictions since the crisis and have consequently reduced mortgage lending. Shadow
banks, not subject to these restrictions, have partially filled the gap. Shadow banks dominate in
market segments that are subject to greater regulatory scrutiny: low income, minority, and FHA
borrowers. Additionally, shadow banks have gained the most market share in geographical areas
where banks have been subject to more regulatory constraints, and their growth coincides with the
timing of specific regulatory changes. Our quantitative assessment indicates that these regulatory
differences can explain roughly 60% of the documented shadow bank growth.

        Fintech lenders’ market share has grown from roughly 3% in 2007 to 12% in 2015,
representing a significant fraction of shadow bank market share growth. We identify two forces
associated with online technology. Fintech lenders make use of different information to set interest
rates, which they acquire through the lending process. Second, the ease of online origination
appears to allow fintech lenders to charge higher rates, particularly among the lowest-risk, and
presumably least price sensitive and most time sensitive borrowers. Our model suggests that 30%
of the recent shadow bank growth is due to the disruption caused by online origination.

        We conclude by cautioning against a normative interpretation of our results. While the
regulation of the traditional banking sector is potentially responsible the rise of shadow banks, it
is unclear whether this shift in mortgage origination is problematic. Because shadow banks do not
rely on guaranteed deposits as a source of direct financing, they may be preferred as originators
from the perspective of banking system stability. Fintech lenders, for their part, appear to offer
products that consumers value greatly may have the potential to address ongoing regulatory
challenges raised by Philippon (2016). On the other hand, fintech and non-fintech shadow banks
alike rely extensively on the ongoing operation of GSEs and the FHA–institutions plagued by
political economy concerns surrounding implicit and explicit government guarantees (e.g., Admati
et al., 2018). How these considerations weigh against each other and impact the interaction
between various lenders remains an area of future research.




                                                39
                                           References

Acharya, V., Richardson M., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., White, L., 2011. Guaranteed to Fail: Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Debacle of Mortgage Finance. Princeton University Press.
Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M., Pfleiderer, P., 2018. The Leverage Ratchet Effect. The
Journal of Finance 73, 145-198.
Adrian, T., Ashcraft A., 2016. Shadow Banking: A review of the literature. In Banking Crises.
Palgrave Macmillan, UK, pp. 282-315.
Agarwal, S., Lucca, D., Seru, A., Trebbi, F., 2014. Inconsistent regulators: Evidence from banking.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 889-938.


                                                40
Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Ben-David, I., Chomsisengphet, S., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2017.
Policy intervention in debt renegotiation: Evidence from Home Affordable Modification Program.
Journal of Political Economy 125, 654-712.
Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Chomsisengphet, S., Landvoigt, T., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Yao, V.,
2015. Mortgage refinancing, consumer spending, and competition: Evidence from the home
affordable refinancing program. Unpublished working paper. NBER.
Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2018. Consumer Lending Discrimination in the
Era of FinTech. Unpublished working paper. University of California, Berkeley.
Berndt, A., Gupta, A., 2009. Moral hazard and adverse selection in the originate-to-distribute
model of bank credit. Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 725-743.
Berry, S.T., 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND
Journal of Economics, pp.242-262.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J. and Pakes, A., 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp.841-890.Bhutta, N., 2012. GSE activity and
mortgage supply in lower-income and minority neighborhoods: The effect of the affordable
housing goals. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 45, 238-261.
Bord, V., Santos, J., 2012. The Rise of the Originate-to-Distribute Model and the Role of Banks
in Financial Intermediation. Economic Policy Review 18, 21-34.
Egan, M., Matvos, G., Hortacsu, A., 2017. Deposit Competition and Financial Fragility: Evidence
from the US Banking Sector. American Economic Review 107, 169-216
Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2016. Phasing out the GSEs. Journal of
Monetary Economics 81, 111-132.

Erickson, T., Whited, T. M., 2002. Two-step GMM estimation of the errors-in-variables model
using high-order moments. Econometric Theory 18, 776–799.

Fligstein, N., Roehrkasse A., 2016. The causes of fraud in the financial crisis of 2007 to 2009:
Evidence from the mortgage-backed securities industry. American Sociological Review 81, 617-
643.
Fuster, A., Lo, S., Willen, P., 2017. The time-varying price of financial intermediation in the
mortgage market. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 805.

Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, and J. Vickery. 2018. The role of technology in mortgage
lending, NBER working paper 24500.

Gete, P., Rehrer, M., 2017. Nonbanks and lending standards in mortgage markets. The spillovers
from liquidity regulation, Unpublished working paper. Georgetown University and Harvard
University.

Granja, J., Leuz, C., 2018. The death of a regulator: Strict supervision, bank lending and business


                                                41
activity. Unpublished working paper. NBER.

Granja, J., Matvos, G., Seru A., 2017. Selling failed banks. Journal of Finance 72, 1723-1784.

Greenwood, R., Scharfstein, D., 2013. The growth of finance. Journal of Economic Perspectives
27, 3-28.
Haughwout, A., Okah E., Tracy, J., 2016. Second chances: Subprime mortgage modification and
redefault. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48, 771-793.
Hurst, E., Keys B., Seru, A., Vavra, J., 2016. Regional redistribution through the US mortgage
market. American Economic Review 106, 2982-3028.
Keys, B., Mukherjee T., Seru A., Vig, B., 2010. Did securitization lead to lax screening? Evidence
from subprime loans. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.
Keys, B., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2013. Mortgage financing in the housing boom and bust.
In Glaeser, E., Sinai, T. (Ed.), Housing and Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press, pp. 143-
204.
Lucca, D., Seru, A., Trebbi, F., 2014. The revolving door and worker flows in banking regulation.
Journal of Monetary Economics 65, 17-32.
Mayer, C., Morrison, E., Piskorski, T., Gupta, A., 2014. Mortgage modification and strategic
behavior: Evidence from a legal settlement with Countrywide. American Economic Review 104,
2830-2857.
Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2010. Securitization and distressed loan renegotiation: Evidence
from the subprime mortgage crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 97, 369-397.
Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Witkin, J., 2015. Asset quality misrepresentation by financial
intermediaries: Evidence from the RMBS market. Journal of Finance 70, 2635-2678.
Philippon, T., 2015. Has the US finance industry become less efficient? On the theory and
measurement of financial intermediation. American Economic Review 105, 1408-1438.
Philippon, T., 2016. The FinTech opportunity. Unpublished working paper. NBER.
Purnanandam, A., 2011. Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage crisis. Review
of Financial Studies 24, 1881-1915.
Rajan, U., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2015. The failure of models that predict failure: Distance, incentives,
and defaults. Journal of Financial Economics 115, 237-260.
Stanton, R., Wallace, N., Walden, J., 2014. The industrial organization of the U.S. residential
mortgage market. Annual Review of Financial Economics 6, 259-288.
Stanton, R., Wallace, N., Walden, J., 2018. Mortgage loan-flow networks and financial norms.
Review of Financial Studies 31, 3595-3642.



                                                 42
Table 1
Residential mortgage lending: traditional versus shadow banks
Table 1 provides shows loan type and disposition by lender type. Panel A reports the types of loans types made by different lenders between 2007 and 2015. Loan
types are Conventional, FHA, or Other, which includes VA and FSA/RHS (Farm Service Agency and Rural Housing Service) loans. Conventional loans are all
loans that are not FHA or VA/FSA/RHS loans. Column (1) reports the composition of loans made by all lenders; Column (2) reports those made by traditional
banks; Column (3) reports those made by shadow banks. Column (4) reports those made by non-fintech shadow banks, and Column (5) reports those made by
fintech shadow banks. Panel B reports to which type of entity the originating entity sold the loan. Loans not sold within one year are Not sold. Columns are the
same as in Panel A.

                                                    Panel A: Loan types based on 2007-2015 HMDA
                                                          All     Traditional    Shadow        Shadow banks
                                                       lenders      banks         banks    Non-fintech  Fintech
                                     % Conventional     76.9%       83.2%        64.31%      62.0%      74.3%
                                     % FHA              15.8%       11.0%        25.33%      26.9%      18.7%
                                     % Other             7.3%        5.8%        10.36%      11.1%       7.0%
                                     Count           46,431,132 30,943,694 15,487,438 12,575,694 2,911,744


                                                    Panel B: Loan disposition based on 2007-2015 HMDA
                                                               All       Traditional    Shadow           Shadow banks
                                                             lenders       banks         banks       Non-fintech  Fintech

                                  Not sold                   23.32%        31.15%        7.50%         6.80%        10.53%

                                  Sold to:
                                  Fannie Mae                 23.37%        23.68%        22.80%        20.25%       33.85%
                                  Freddie Mac                14.63%        17.58%         8.84%         8.25%       11.35%
                                  Ginnie Mae                 10.55%         9.12%        13.47%        13.19%       14.66%
                                  Private securitization      0.68%         0.76%         0.49%         0.57%        0.15%
                                  Commercial bank             9.50%         5.38%        17.71%        19.19%       11.29%
                                  Ins/CU/Mortgage bank        5.93%         2.44%        12.89%        12.34%       15.26%
                                  Affiliate institution       4.75%         6.70%         0.88%         0.99%        0.44%
                                  Other                       7.26%         3.19%        15.43%        18.42%        2.49%

                                  Count                    46,431,132    30,943,694    15,487,438    12,575,694    2,911,744




                                                                              43
Table 2
Time between origination and sale.
Table 2 shows the results of the time-to-sale regression for quarters between origination and sale, using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac origination data from 2010
to 2015. Columns (1)-(2) compare shadow banks to traditional banks for the entire sample of lenders. Columns (3)-(4) compare present the results with shadow
banks broken out by fintech and non-fintech lenders. Columns (5)-(6) compare fintech shadow banks to non-fintech shadow banks among the shadow bank sample
only. Columns (1), (3), and (5) have quarter fixed effects and no other controls. Columns (2), (4), and (6) have borrower and loan controls and zip-quarter fixed
effects. The left-hand-side variable is in quarters since origination. Its mean among all lenders is 0.46, or approximately 41 days; its mean among shadow bank
lenders is 0.40, or approximately 36 days. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-quarter level; t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                            (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)
                                                        Qtrs to sale   Qtrs to sale Qtrs to sale    Qtrs to sale   Qtrs to sale Qtrs to sale
                         Sample                                                All lenders                            Shadow banks only
                         Shadow bank                     -0.103***      -0.100***           -             -             -            -
                                                          (-52.77)      (-52.67)            -             -             -            -
                         Non-fintech shadow bank              -             -          -0.0812***    -0.0803***         -            -
                                                              -             -           (-39.12)      (-39.37)          -            -
                         Fintech shadow bank                  -             -           -0.180***     -0.173***    -0.0846***   -0.0842***
                                                              -             -           (-63.17)      (-60.18)      (-28.21)     (-26.84)
                         Borrower and loan controls          No            Yes             No            Yes           No          Yes
                         Zip x Quarter FE                    No            Yes             No            Yes           No          Yes
                         Quarter FE                         Yes            No              Yes           No            Yes          No
                         N                               4,075,985     40,71,465       4,075,985     4,071,465     1,187,390    1,185,846
                         R2                                0.0349        0.0491          0.0368        0.0507        0.0603       0.0931




                                                                                  44
Table 3
Shadow bank, fintech presence, and the borrower and loan characteristics: all loans.
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for borrowers and loans by lender type. Panel A summarizes differences in borrower demographics in accepted mortgage
applications as reported in the HMDA data. Columns (1)-(4) compare cover the period 2007-2015. Columns (5)-(8) cover the 2015. Columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)
compare traditional and shadow banks; Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) compare non-fintech and fintech shadow banks. Panel B shows the result of Eq. (3), a linear
probability model regressing whether the lender is a shadow bank, Columns (1)-(2); a non-fintech shadow bank, Columns (3)-(4); a fintech lender among all
lenders, Columns (5)-(6); or a fintech lender among shadow banks,Columns (7)-(8), on borrower characteristics over the period 2007-2015. Odd columns include
year fixed effects. Even columns include year-county fixed effects. For race dummies, the base category is White; for sex dummies, the base is Male. For loan
purpose dummies, the base is Purchase. For purchaser dummies, the base is Not sold. For type dummies, the base is Conventional. Coefficients are in percent.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county-year level; t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

                                                         Panel A: Summary statistics based on (HMDA)
                                                            2007-2015                                               2015
                                        Traditional    Shadow         Shadow banks            Traditional    Shadow         Shadow banks
                                          banks         banks     Non-fintech  Fintech          banks         banks    Non-fintech Fintech
                 Count                  30,943,694    15,487,438 12,575,694 2,911,744         2,300,721     2,182,654    1,670,680   511,974

                 Median income           $83,000       $79,000       $78,000        $82,000    $89,000      $80,000      $79,000    $82,000
                 Male                    66.98%        67.61%        68.94%         61.87%     65.64%       65.94%       69.01%     55.92%

                 Race
                 Native American          0.52%         0.50%          0.50%         0.50%      0.59%         0.57%       0.56%      0.62%
                 Asian                    5.21%         5.79%          6.09%         4.50%      5.63%         5.50%       5.79%      4.55%
                 African American         4.72%         5.59%          5.85%         4.48%      4.83%         6.34%       6.80%      4.86%
                 Native Hawaiian          0.36%         0.42%          0.43%         0.34%      0.36%         0.45%       0.49%      0.33%
                 White                   78.04%        76.47%         77.76%        70.90%     77.10%        74.93%      78.17%     64.38%
                 Other/Unknown           11.15%        11.23%          9.36%        19.27%     11.49%        12.19%       8.19%     25.26%

                 Loan purpose
                 Home improvement         6.34%         0.68%          0.78%         0.22%      9.80%         1.14%       1.35%      0.47%
                 Refinancing             60.40%        52.69%         47.26%        76.13%     44.67%        47.44%      40.87%     68.88%




                                                                               45
Table 3 [continued]
                                                                                   Panel B: Regressions (HMDA)
                                                                        (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                                    Shadow bank     Shadow bank     Non-fintech        Non-fintech      Fintech        Fintech         Fintech         Fintech
                      Sample                                                                                  All lenders                                                 Shadow banks only
                      Income (000s)                                  -0.00857***      -0.00673***    -0.00692***        -0.00468***    -0.00165***    -0.00206***    0.00138***      -0.00197***
                                                                    (0.0000462)      (0.0000453)    (0.0000440)        (0.0000431)    (0.0000266)    (0.0000266)     (0.000107)      (0.000106)
                      Loan amount (000s)                              0.00835***     0.000881***      0.00931  ***
                                                                                                                       0.000910***    -0.000965***    -0.0000288      -0.0152 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.00511***
                                                                    (0.0000392)      (0.0000423)    (0.0000373)        (0.0000402)    (0.0000226)    (0.0000249)    (0.0000799)     (0.0000895)
                      Race (Omitted category = White)
                                    Native American                   -0.227**        -1.362***      -0.821***         -2.028***        0.593***       0.666***       1.170***       1.879***
                                                                     (0.0877)         (0.0861)       (0.0835)          (0.0820)        (0.0506)        (0.0506)       (0.138)         (0.136)
                                      Asian                           3.923***         1.204***       4.384***          1.498***       -0.461***      -0.294***      -3.313***       -2.288***
                                                                     (0.0276)         (0.0283)       (0.0263)          (0.0269)        (0.0159)        (0.0166)      (0.0414)        (0.0421)
                                      Black                           0.405***         0.296***       0.338***          0.346***       0.0676***      -0.0501**      0.000883        0.171***
                                                                     (0.0300)         (0.0304)       (0.0285)          (0.0290)        (0.0173)        (0.0179)      (0.0448)        (0.0456)
                                      Hawaiian                        1.363***        -0.696***       1.630***         -0.774***       -0.267***        0.0776       -0.798***       0.680***
                                                                       (0.103)         (0.101)       (0.0980)          (0.0961)        (0.0594)        (0.0593)       (0.153)         (0.151)
                                      Unknown                         7.438***         5.663***       3.716***          1.958***        3.723***       3.705***       5.309***       5.925***
                                                                     (0.0292)         (0.0286)       (0.0278)          (0.0272)        (0.0168)        (0.0168)      (0.0407)        (0.0400)
                                      NA                             -24.98***        -20.46***      -26.68***         -22.71***        1.706***       2.247***      -6.432***       -4.702***
                                                                       (0.816)         (0.794)        (0.776)           (0.756)         (0.470)         (0.467)       (1.463)         (1.429)
                      Sex (Omitted category = Male)
                                    Female                            0.163***        -0.113***      -0.204***         -0.535***         0.366***       0.422***     0.896***        1.110***
                                                                     (0.0146)         (0.0143)       (0.0139)          (0.0136)        (0.00841)      (0.00838)      (0.0225)        (0.0220)
                                      Unknown                        -4.636***        -4.091***      -8.296***         -7.846***         3.660***       3.755***     15.78***        15.33***
                                                                     (0.0375)         (0.0366)       (0.0357)          (0.0348)         (0.0216)       (0.0215)      (0.0556)        (0.0545)
                                      NA                              16.27***         16.38***       19.76***          19.74***        -3.487***      -3.362***     -8.278***       -8.503***
                                                                      (0.734)          (0.715)        (0.699)           (0.681)          (0.424)        (0.420)       (0.709)         (0.692)
                      Purpose (Omitted category = Purchase)
                                    Home improvement                 -13.26***        -12.18***      -12.25***         -11.40***        -1.011***      -0.782***     -6.862***       -5.399***
                                                                     (0.0327)         (0.0323)       (0.0311)          (0.0307)         (0.0189)       (0.0190)       (0.116)         (0.114)
                                      Refinance                      -2.056***        -1.792***      -7.965***         -7.839***         5.908***       6.047***      18.24***       18.14***
                                                                     (0.0143)         (0.0141)       (0.0136)          (0.0134)        (0.00823)      (0.00831)      (0.0212)        (0.0213)
                      Purchaser (Omitted category = Held)
                                   Fannie Mae                         20.65***         19.04***       15.66***          13.96***        4.995***       5.082***      -5.948***       -4.915***
                                                                     (0.0188)         (0.0187)       (0.0179)          (0.0178)        (0.0109)       (0.0110)       (0.0414)        (0.0415)
                                      Ginnie Mae                      19.46***         19.03***       12.96***          12.51***        6.504***       6.520***      -5.474***       -5.567***
                                                                     (0.0333)         (0.0326)       (0.0316)          (0.0310)        (0.0192)       (0.0192)       (0.0515)        (0.0512)
                                      Freddie Mac                     8.171***         7.333***       7.620***          6.654***        0.551***       0.679***      -9.832***       -8.992***
                                                                     (0.0212)         (0.0210)       (0.0202)          (0.0199)        (0.0122)       (0.0123)       (0.0485)        (0.0484)
                                      Farmer Mac                      64.94***         59.91***       65.85***          59.75***         -0.903         0.159        -21.07***       -16.13***
                                                                      (1.094)          (1.067)        (1.041)           (1.015)         (0.631)        (0.627)        (1.097)         (1.075)
                                      Private securitization          9.693***         8.028***       11.82***          10.11***       -2.123***      -2.081***      -16.40***       -15.03***
                                                                     (0.0751)         (0.0735)       (0.0715)          (0.0700)        (0.0433)       (0.0432)        (0.142)         (0.142)
                                      Bank                            48.21***         46.72***       42.39***          40.79***        5.824***       5.923***      -13.54***       -13.08***
                                                                     (0.0255)         (0.0253)       (0.0243)          (0.0240)        (0.0147)       (0.0149)       (0.0424)        (0.0429)
                                      Insr or Fnce co.                57.96***         56.34***       43.68***          41.76***        14.29***       14.57***      -3.679***       -2.688***
                                                                     (0.0298)         (0.0294)       (0.0284)          (0.0280)        (0.0172)       (0.0173)       (0.0444)        (0.0448)
                                      Affiliate                      -2.121***        -3.004***      -1.137***         -1.920***       -0.983***      -1.084***      -13.48***       -12.39***
                                                                     (0.0327)         (0.0325)       (0.0311)          (0.0309)        (0.0189)       (0.0191)        (0.107)         (0.107)
                                      Other                           58.01***         55.87***       57.20***          54.89***        0.807***       0.972***      -20.90***       -20.12***
                                                                     (0.0279)         (0.0276)       (0.0265)          (0.0263)        (0.0161)       (0.0163)       (0.0432)        (0.0439)
                      Loan Type (Omitted category = Conventional)
                                  FHA                                 9.418***         9.242***       9.085***         8.938***         0.332***       0.304***      -1.755***       -1.972***
                                                                     (0.0249)         (0.0245)       (0.0237)          (0.0233)        (0.0143)       (0.0144)       (0.0301)        (0.0299)
                                      VA                              2.331***         3.189***       2.717***         3.237***        -0.386***      -0.0475*       -1.909***       -1.713***
                                                                     (0.0361)         (0.0360)       (0.0344)          (0.0343)        (0.0209)       (0.0212)       (0.0461)        (0.0464)
                                      FSA/RHS                        -3.036***        -0.660***      -0.205***         2.484***        -2.832***      -3.144***      -5.681***       -6.684***
                                                                     (0.0566)         (0.0563)       (0.0538)          (0.0536)        (0.0326)       (0.0331)       (0.0760)        (0.0766)
                      Year FE                                           Yes               No            Yes               No              Yes             No            Yes             No
                      Year x County FE                                   No              Yes             No               Yes              No            Yes            No              Yes
                      N                                             43,138,392       43,138,392     43,138,392        43,138,392      43,138392      43,138,392     14,340,698      14,340,698
                      R2                                               0.241            0.281          0.223             0.265           0.059          0.074          0.133           0.178




                                                                                                      46
Table 4
Shadow bank presence and the borrower and loan characteristics: conforming loans.
Table 4 shows the results of a linear probability model, Eq. (3), regressing whether the lender is a shadow bank, Columns (1)-(2); a non-fintech shadow bank,
Columns (3)-(4)); a fintech lender among all lenders, Columns (5)-(6); or a fintech lender among shadow banks, Columns (7)-(8), on individual characteristics,
using the pooled Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Data for the period 2010-2015. Odd columns include quarter fixed effects only; even columns include zip-quarter
fixed effects. Loan purpose dummies (Refinance, Investment/Second home) use Purchase and Primary residence as the base category. Coefficients are in percents.
Standard errors are clustered by zip-quarter; t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.


                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)                 (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                Shadow bank    Shadow bank     Non-fintech        Non-fintech        Fintech           Fintech         Fintech         Fintech
                Sample                                                                       All lenders                                                  Shadow banks only
                Loan amount                     0.0000100***   0.00000748***   0.0000103***      0.00000846***   -0.000000292***   -0.000000975***   -0.0000122***   -0.0000104***
                                                  (90.27)         (55.75)        (99.88)             (67.29)         (-5.04)          (-14.19)         (-52.91)        (-37.45)
                Loan term (Months)               0.0436***      -0.00237***     0.0321***           -0.000162       0.0115***        -0.00221***      0.00515***      -0.0176***
                                                  (212.38)       (-10.78)        (168.56)            (-0.80)        (116.49)          (-20.48)          (10.18)        (-30.33)
                Loan-to-value                    -0.0608***     -0.0414***      -0.0400***          -0.0295***     -0.0208***        -0.0119***       -0.0392***      -0.0293***
                                                  (-58.29)       (-38.33)        (-41.31)           (-29.35)        (-39.71)          (-21.43)         (-17.58)        (-12.62)
                Debt-to-income                   0.0606***       0.0517***      0.0268***           0.0225***       0.0338***         0.0292***        0.102***        0.0780***
                                                  (41.09)         (35.71)        (19.48)             (16.60)         (45.73)           (39.44)          (32.92)         (25.84)
                FICO                             -0.0186***     -0.0207***      0.000627          -0.00167***      -0.0192***        -0.0191***       -0.0519***      -0.0416***
                                                  (-51.68)       (-59.23)         (1.90)             (-5.15)        (-93.99)          (-94.54)         (-71.09)        (-58.69)
                Investment/Secondary property    -1.333***       -2.431***       -0.0902*           -0.772***       -1.243***         -1.659***        -3.359***       -4.226***
                                                  (-30.50)       (-54.68)        (-2.22)            (-18.63)        (-56.08)          (-71.48)         (-37.47)        (-46.32)
                Refinance                        -0.623***       1.503***       -2.484***           -0.822***       1.862***          2.326***         8.083***        6.832***
                                                  (-21.90)        (51.08)        (-93.23)           (-30.19)        (133.10)          (141.09)         (138.63)        (105.76)
                First-time buyer                 -5.805***       -4.725***      -1.808***           -0.847***       -3.997***         -3.878***        -11.79***       -11.78***
                                                 (-139.23)       (-113.69)       (-45.56)           (-21.40)        (-213.31)         (-200.91)        (-148.39)       (-147.96)
                Has mortgage insurance            1.282***       0.900***        0.597***            0.349***       0.685***          0.551***         2.637***        2.023***

                                                  (27.64)         (19.91)        (13.83)              (8.27)         (27.47)           (22.19)          (28.96)         (22.73)
                Zip x Quarter FE                    No             Yes             No                  Yes             No               Yes               No             Yes
                Quarter FE                          Yes             No            Yes                 No              Yes               No               Yes              No
                N                                8480852         8480851        8480852             8480851         8480852           8480851          1946017         1946017
                R2                                0.0709          0.135          0.0404               0.101          0.0364            0.0736           0.0581          0.162




                                                                                               47
Table 5
Shadow bank and fintech penetration and regional characteristics.
Table 5 shows the regional characteristics associated with shadow bank and fintech penetration. Panel A summarizes demographic differences between counties
with low and high shares of shadow bank lending in 2015. Shadow bank and fintech share is calculated from accepted HMDA acceptances. Demographic
information comes from the American Community Survey, while Herfindahl, Numbers of lenders, and Percentage of FHA loans is calculated from HMDA. Column
(1) shows statistics for all counties. Column (2) shows statistics for counties in the bottom 25% of shadow bank share. Column (3) shows statistics for counties in
the top 25% of shadow bank share. Column (3) shows statistics for counties in the bottom 25% of fintech share. Column (4) shows statistics for counties in the top
25% of fintech share. Panel B shows the results of Eq. (4), where the share of shadow banks—Columns (1)-(3)—or fintech—Columns (4)-(6) —in a county is
regressed on county characteristics. Columns (1) and (4) are the baseline specification. Columns (2) and (5) include the county-level Herfindahl measure. Columns
(3) and (6) include the number of unique lenders within a county. t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
                                                                    Panel A: Summary statistics

                                                                    All              Shadow bank                           Fintech
                                  Median values                 counties     Bottom quartile   Top quartile    Bottom quartile   Top quartile
                     Median household income                  $45,114.00       $44,587.00         $46,949.00     $48,160.00      $41,101.00
                     Population density                           42.7            35.6               44.1           55.3               19.1
                     % with less than 12th grade education      13.10%          11.80%             15.35%         10.80%             17.00%
                     % with bachelor degree or higher           18.20%          17.70%             18.20%         20.00%             15.40%
                     % African American                          2.10%           1.06%              2.83%          1.35%              1.81%
                     % Hispanic                                  3.74%           2.40%              8.80%          3.39%              4.07%
                     Unemployment rate                           7.00%           6.40%              7.50%          6.30%              7.20%
                     % living in same house ≥ 1 year            86.90%          87.60%             86.19%         86.74%             87.25%
                     Herfindahl                                 0.09761         0.14843            0.07831        0.11564            0.11421
                     # Lenders                                   39.00           29.00              50.00          45.00              22.00
                     % of FHA origination loans                 16.28%          12.50%             18.71%         13.58%             17.76%
                     Population                                25930.00         20913.00          33417.00        34184.00           13472.00
                     % with less than 35K salary                26.70%           27.10%            25.70%          24.80%             29.95%




                                                                                48
Table 5 [continued]
                                                                Panel B: Regressions
                                                      (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
                                              % Shadow banks   % Shadow banks   % Shadow banks     % Fintech       % Fintech       % Fintech
      Median household income                   0.000199***      0.000159***      0.000135***    -0.0000368***   -0.0000309**     0.00000211
                                                (0.0000224)      (0.0000221)      (0.0000231)    (0.00000944)    (0.00000951)    (0.00000955)
      Population density                       -0.000620***     -0.000606***     -0.000665***     -0.000256***    -0.000258***    -0.000229***
                                                 (0.000146)       (0.000143)       (0.000144)     (0.0000616)     (0.0000614)     (0.0000597)
      % with less than 12th grade education        0.186***         0.147**          0.192***       0.0817***       0.0874***       0.0780***
                                                  (0.0469)         (0.0458)          (0.0462)       (0.0197)        (0.0197)        (0.0191)
      % with bachelor degree or higher             0.0743*           0.0459           -0.0263       -0.00912        -0.00493        0.0522***
                                                  (0.0339)         (0.0331)          (0.0350)       (0.0143)        (0.0142)        (0.0145)
      % African American                          0.0511***        0.0414**           0.0376*       0.0219***       0.0233***       0.0302***
                                                  (0.0151)         (0.0147)          (0.0149)      (0.00634)       (0.00633)       (0.00617)
      % Hispanic                                   0.259***         0.268***         0.239***       0.0860***       0.0846***       0.0979***
                                                  (0.0170)         (0.0166)          (0.0169)      (0.00714)       (0.00713)       (0.00698)
      Unemployment rate                            0.450***         0.321***         0.252***       -0.119***       -0.100***       0.00145
                                                  (0.0631)         (0.0623)          (0.0654)       (0.0265)        (0.0268)        (0.0271)
      % living in same house >= 1 year             -0.100*          -0.0493           -0.0565        0.114***        0.106***       0.0872***
                                                  (0.0444)         (0.0435)          (0.0440)       (0.0187)        (0.0187)        (0.0182)
      % FHA                                        0.288***         0.259***         0.271***       0.0744***       0.0788***       0.0848***
                                                  (0.0213)         (0.0209)          (0.0210)      (0.00894)       (0.00897)       (0.00870)
      Herfindahl                                       -           -19.81***              -              -           2.922***            -
                                                       -            (1.549)               -              -           (0.666)             -
      # Lenders                                        -                -           0.0584***            -               -         -0.0355***
                                                       -                -           (0.00605)            -               -         (0.00250)
      Constant                                     12.15**          14.83***          12.47**         -2.647          -3.042          -2.845
                                                   (4.124)          (4.026)           (4.065)        (1.735)         (1.732)         (1.682)
      N                                             3,131             3,131            3,131           3,131           3,131           3131
      R2                                            0.256             0.293            0.277           0.176           0.181          0.226




                                                                        49
Table 6
Shadow bank and fintech mortgage rates: conforming loans.
Table 6 shows the results of Eq. (7) using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans from 2010-2015. Columns (1)-(2) test differences between shadow banks and
traditional banks. Columns (3)-(4) split shadow banks into fintech and non-fintech lenders and compare interest rates across all lenders. Columns (5)-(6) test
differences in fintech rates within shadow banks. Columns (1), (3), and (5) quarter fixed effects and no other controls. Columns (2), (4), (6) have quarter times zip
fixed effects and borrower controls. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-quarter level. Interest rates are quoted in percent. The mean interest rate over the sample
period is 4.74. t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                        Interest rate   Interest rate Interest rate   Interest rate   Interest rate Interest rate
                        Sample                                                   All lenders                              Shadow banks only
                        Shadow bank                     0.00665***       0.00714***           -            -                -             -
                                                          (5.19)           (8.33)             -            -                -             -
                        Non-fintech shadow bank              -                -          -0.0281***   -0.0242***            -             -
                                                             -                -           (-20.48)     (-27.42)             -             -
                        Fintech shadow bank                  -                -           0.143***     0.129***         0.163***      0.144***
                                                             -                -           (87.68)      (101.99)         (91.09)       (113.17)
                        Borrower and loan controls          No              Yes              No           Yes              No           Yes
                        Zip x Quarter FE                    No              Yes              No           Yes              No           Yes
                        Quarter FE                         Yes               No              Yes          No              Yes            No
                        N                               8,485,573        8,480,376       8,485,573    8,480,376        1,946,802     1,943,693
                        R2                                0.598            0.808            0.601        0.811           0.585         0.807




                                                                                   50
Table 7
Shadow bank presence and loan performance: conforming loans.
Table 7 shows the results of Eq. (8) for loan outcomes using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac performance data from 2010 to 2013. Panel A shows the results for
default. Panel B shows the results for prepayment. Prepayment is defined as the loan being prepaid within two years of origination. Default is defined as the loan
status becoming 60 days past due within two years of origination. Columns (1)-(2) test differences between shadow banks and traditional banks. Columns (3)-(4)
split shadow banks into fintech and non-fintech lenders and compare performance across all lenders. Columns (5)-(6) test differences in fintech performance within
shadow banks. Columns (1), (3), and (5) quarter fixed effects and no other controls. Columns (2), (4), (6) have quarter times zip fixed effects and borrower controls.
The left-hand-side variable is in percent. Its mean for defaults over the sample period is 0.23. Its mean for prepayments over the sample period is 11. Standard
errors are clustered at the zip-quarter level; t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
                                                                          Panel A: Default
                                                               (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)
                                                            Defaulted    Defaulted Defaulted       Defaulted    Defaulted Defaulted
                             Sample                                             All lenders                      Shadow banks only
                             Shadow bank                    0.0196***    0.0208***          -           -            -         -
                                                              (3.90)       (4.11)           -           -            -         -
                             Non-fintech shadow bank             -            -         0.0116*    0.0236***         -         -
                                                                 -            -          (2.15)      (4.34)          -         -
                             Fintech shadow bank                 -            -        0.0557***    0.00795      0.0307*   -0.0286*
                                                                 -            -          (4.66)      (0.67)       (2.33)    (-2.04)
                             Borrower and loan controls         No          Yes            No         Yes           No        Yes
                             Zip x Quarter FE                   No          Yes            No         Yes           No        Yes
                             Quarter FE                        Yes           No           Yes          No          Yes        No
                             N                              6,527,612    6,523,402 6,527,612       6,523,402    1,151,439 1,149,115
                             R2                             0.000359       0.0112      0.000362      0.0112     0.000609    0.0348

                                                                        Panel B: Prepayment
                                                                (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)
                                                              Prepaid     Prepaid       Prepaid      Prepaid     Prepaid   Prepaid
                             Sample                                             All lenders                      Shadow banks only
                             Shadow bank                     2.469***     1.823***          -           -            -         -
                                                             (20.31)      (23.38)           -           -            -         -
                             Non-fintech shadow bank             -            -         1.456***    0.713***         -         -
                                                                 -            -         (10.71)      (8.94)          -         -
                             Fintech shadow bank                 -            -         7.054***    6.757***     5.675***  6.358***
                                                                 -            -         (34.50)     (34.23)      (26.48)   (30.27)
                             Borrower and loan controls         No          Yes            No         Yes           No       Yes
                             Zip x Quarter FE                   No          Yes            No         Yes           No       Yes
                             Quarter FE                        Yes           No           Yes          No          Yes        No
                             N                              6,527,612    6,523,402 6,527,612       6,523,402    1,151,439 1,149,115
                             R2                               0.0566       0.151        0.0571       0.152        0.0594    0.155

                                                                                 51
Table 8
Regulatory activity and shadow bank market shares.
Table 8 shows the result of the regressions specified by Eqs. (16) and (17). The regression is at the county level. Panel A, Columns (1)-(4) regress percent changes
in county-level shadow bank market share on four measures of regulatory exposure. Columns (5)-(8) regress percent changes in county-level shadow bank lending
volume on four measures of regulatory exposure. All columns include demographic controls. Δ Capital ratio is the 2008 lending-weighted change in bank capital
ratios between 2008 and 2015. % MSR is the lending-weighed 2008 fraction of MSR assets of tier-1 capital. Lawsuit exposure is the lending-weighted exposure
to mortgage-related lawsuits. % OTS is the share of mortgage originations regulated by the OTS in 2008. Panel B shows the results of using 2006-2008 capital
ratio changes to instrument for 2008-2015 changes. Column (1) is the first stage; Columns (2) and (4) are the reduced form regressions. Columns (3) and (5) are
the second stage regressions. The F-statistic of the instrument is 48.68. All regulatory variables are standardized, so coefficients can be interpreted as percent
change in shadow bank share for a one standard deviation change in the regulatory measure. t-statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

                                                         Panel A: Regulation and market share changes
                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
                                                         Δ Shadow bank share                       Δ Shadow bank lending
                            Δ Capital ratio     3.358***      -          -         -      3.412***       -        -          -
                                                (16.601)      -          -         -      (8.160)        -        -          -
                            % MSR                   -     1.902***       -         -          -      1.939***     -          -
                                                    -     (9.403)        -         -          -       (4.739)     -          -
                            Lawsuit exposure        -         -      2.034***      -          -          -    6.494***       -
                                                    -         -     (10.898)       -          -          -    (17.921)       -
                            % OTS                   -         -          -     1.215***       -          -        -      5.209***
                                                    -         -          -      (4.759)       -          -        -      (10.333)
                            County controls         Y         Y          Y         Y          Y          Y        Y          Y
                            N                     3,094     3,094     3,094      3,094     3,094      3,094     3,094      3,094
                            R2                    0.211     0.164     0.172      0.147     0.327      0.318     0.378      0.336


                                                     Panel B: 2006-2008 capital ratio change as instrument
                                                                      (1)              (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                               ΔCR (2008-2015) Δ Shadow bank share Δ Shadow bank lending
                                                                  first stage
                                                                                         -
                             ΔCapital ratio (2008-2015) (Fit)           -                        9.634***      -     8.241***
                                                                        -               -        (8.270)       -     (3.838)
                             ΔCapital ratio (2006-2008)            -0.238***        -2.289***        -     -1.958***     -
                                                                  (-11.270)         (-9.201)         -     (-3.888)      -
                             County controls                           Y                Y            Y         Y         Y
                             N                                       3,094            3,094        3,094     3,094    3,094
                             R2                                      0.215            0.163       -0.036     0.316    0.298




                                                                                52
Table 9
R2 of different specifications explaining interest rates.
Table 9 shows the R2 of observables for different specifications of the regression specified by Eq. (19). Data is from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Fixed effects
are differenced out so that their effects are not included in the total sum of squares. The table shows pooled regressions between 2010 and 2015 for the banks
shadow bank, non-fintech, and fintech subsamples. Nonlinear controls include third-order polynomials of all observables. Tests of significance of R2 differences
follow Erickson and Whited (2002). *** denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                                             Panel A: R2 of pooled regressions, 2010-2015
                                 Specification                                    Full sample                       Shadow bank sample
            Controls      Quarter FE Zip-Quarter FE         Lender FE        Bank Shadow bank           Non-Fintech Fintech (Non-fintech – Fintech)
           FICO, LTV          Y                N                N            0.159        0.234           0.249       0.159         0.090***
           FICO, LTV          N                Y                N           0.0888        0.103           0.109      0.0837        0.0253***
              All             Y                N                N            0.547        0.558           0.586       0.519         0.067***
              All             N                Y                N            0.507        0.476           0.500       0.465         0.035***
            Nonlinear         Y                N                N            0.588        0.596           0.621       0.563         0.058***
            Nonlinear         N                Y                N            0.553        0.521           0.544       0.513         0.031***
            Nonlinear         N                Y                Y            0.559        0.533           0.542       0.520         0.022***




                                                                                53
Table 10
Fintech cost and convenience.
Table 10 shows the results of the regression specified by Eq. (20). Data is from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Shadow Bank originations between 2010 and 2015.
High FICO is a dummy variable for borrowers with FICO in the top decile for the year. Columns (1)-(2) show the results for the full sample, 2010-2015. Columns
(3)-(4) show the results for the early period, 2010-2013. Columns (5)-(6) show the results for the late sample, 2014-2015. All columns include borrower and loan
controls. Columns (1), (3), and (5) include quarter fixed effects; Columns (2), (4), and (6) include quarter-zip fixed effects. The left-hand-side variable is in percent
terms; the mean is 4.18. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-quarter level; t-statistics are in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                                Full (2010-2015)           Early (2010-2013)          Late (2014-2015)
                                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                                Rate         Rate           Rate        Rate          Rate        Rate
                             Fintech                          0.156***     0.143***      0.140***     0.122***      0.172***    0.166***
                                                              (121.33)     (112.12)       (77.41)     (70.28)       (99.07)     (97.99)
                             High FICO x Fintech             0.00574*** 0.00338*        0.00905*** 0.00770***      0.0111*** 0.00948***
                                                               (3.59)       (2.16)         (4.08)      (3.55)        (5.32)      (4.55)
                             Borrower and loan controls         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                             Zip x Quarter FE                    No          Yes             No         Yes            No         Yes
                             Quarter FE                         Yes           No            Yes          No           Yes          No
                             N                               1,946,017 1,943,693        1,151,009 1,149,115        795,008      794,578
                             R2                                0.792        0.808          0.826       0.841         0.682       0.698




                                                                                   54
Fig. 1. Total residential mortgage originations. Panel A shows total dollars in billions originated between 2007 and 2015 as reported by HMDA. Panel B shows
the total dollar value of originated conforming mortgages, where a mortgage is conforming if it is conventional and reported as sold to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac
in HMDA. Note that if the mortgage is sold to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac more than a year after origination it is not reported as sold and hence not counted in
Panel B. Panel C shows total dollars of FHA originations.
   $2,400                                                                               $900
   $2,200                                                                               $800
   $2,000
                                                                                        $700
   $1,800
   $1,600                                                                               $600
   $1,400                                                                               $500
   $1,200
                                                                                        $400
   $1,000
    $800                                                                                $300
    $600                                                                                $200
    $400
                                                                                        $100
    $200
       $0                                                                                  $0
            2007    2008   2009   2010   2011    2012     2013    2014    2015                  2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015

                                   (a) All loans                                                                 (b) Conforming loans


                                          $400

                                          $350

                                          $300

                                          $250

                                          $200

                                          $150

                                          $100

                                           $50

                                           $-
                                                   2007    2008    2009     2010    2011    2012   2013   2014   2015

                                                                             (c) FHA loans


                                                                                   55
Fig. 2. Shadow bank origination shares. Panel A shows shadow bank origination shares as a fraction of total originations for all mortgages in HMDA between 2007
and 2015. Panel B shows shadow bank origination shares among conforming mortgages. Panel C shows the shadow bank origination share among FHA mortgages.
    60%                                                                           60%

    50%                                                                           50%

    40%                                                                           40%

    30%                                                                           30%

    20%
                                                                                  20%

    10%
                                                                                  10%
     0%
           2007    2008   2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015     0%
                                                                                        2007    2008    2009     2010   2011    2012   2013   2014    2015

                                  (a) All loans                                                               (b) Conforming loans


                                         90%
                                         80%
                                         70%
                                         60%
                                         50%
                                         40%
                                         30%
                                         20%
                                         10%
                                         0%
                                                 2007    2008    2009    2010    2011   2012   2013    2014     2015

                                                                           (c) FHA loans
                                                                                                                                                                  (a)



                                                                                 56
Fig. 3. Fintech origination shares of shadow bank originations. Panel A of this figure shows fintech originations as a share of shadow bank originations for all
mortgages in HMDA between 2007 and 2015. Panel B shows fintech bank origination shares among shadow bank conforming originations. Panel C shows fintech
share among shadow bank FHA originations (based on HMDA).
    30%                                                                                 40%

                                                                                        35%
    25%
                                                                                        30%
    20%
                                                                                        25%

    15%                                                                                 20%

                                                                                        15%
    10%
                                                                                        10%
     5%
                                                                                          5%

     0%                                                                                   0%
           2007    2008   2009    2010    2011      2012    2013    2014    2015               2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015

                                    (a) All loans                                                               (b) Conforming loans
                                         25%


                                         20%


                                         15%


                                         10%


                                         5%


                                         0%
                                                 2007      2008    2009    2010    2011    2012   2013   2014   2015

                                                                             (c) FHA loans
                                                                                                                                                                   (d)




                                                                                   57
Fig. 4. Disposition of loans among traditional banks, shadow banks, and fintech lenders. Fig. 4 shows the percentage of originated loans by originator type sold to
various entities within the calendar year of origination (including loans not sold). Panel A shows the buyer composition of traditional bank originations; Panel B
shows the buyer composition of all shadow bank originations; Panel C shows the buyer composition of fintech shadow bank originations. Loans categorized as
“unsold” are not sold within the calendar year of origination, although they may be sold some time later. The GSE category pools Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie
Mae, and Farmer Mac. Calculations are based on HMDA data.

    100%                                                                                                  100%
     90%                                                                                                   90%
     80%                                                                                                   80%
     70%                                                                                                   70%
     60%                                                                                                   60%
     50%                                                                                                   50%
     40%                                                                                                   40%
     30%                                                                                                   30%
     20%                                                                                                   20%
     10%                                                                                                   10%
      0%                                                                                                    0%
        2007       2008      2009   2010      2011     2012        2013   2014     2015    2016               2007          2008     2009      2010       2011   2012        2013   2014   2015    2016

           Not sold / affiliate   GSE     Private securitization     Bank    Insurer      Other                  Not sold / affiliate        GSE    Private securitization     Bank   Insurer     Other

                                        (a) Traditional banks                                                                                       (b) Shadow banks
                                                     100%
                                                      90%
                                                      80%
                                                      70%
                                                      60%
                                                      50%
                                                      40%
                                                      30%
                                                      20%
                                                      10%
                                                        0%
                                                          2007        2008    2009     2010       2011    2012       2013    2014       2015       2016

                                                            Not sold / affiliate   GSE      Private securitization     Bank        Insurer     Other

                                                                                           (c) Fintech lenders


                                                                                                     58
Fig. 5. Regional shadow banking penetration. Fig. 5 shows the county-level percentage of mortgages originated by shadow bank lenders as of 2015. Calculations
are based on HMDA data.




                                                                             59
Fig. 6. Mortgage servicing rights, OTS shares, and bank shares over time. Fig. 6 shows the year-by-year relationship in the county-level shadow bank market share
for counties in the top quintile of MSR assets (a) or the top quintile of OTS originations (b). Shadow bank market shares in high MSR and high OTS counties are
compared with other counties. Coefficients are estimated from the difference in difference regression specified in Eq. (18), ShadowBankSharect = γt + γc + β (Year
× High) + (Year × Xc)Γ + εct. The shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals. The rule implementing the MSR guidelines was finalized in 2013. The OTS
dissolved in 2011.




                   (a) High MSR counties relative to other counties                              (b) High OTS counties relative to other counties




                                                                               60
Fig. 7. Distribution of bootstrapped R2. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of bootstrapped R2s, corresponding to the determinants of interest rates. Each bootstraped
sample selects a random sample of originations with replacement, reruns the interest rate regression, and records the R2s. The bootstrap is run on 100 random
samples. Panel A shows a model of interest rates with FICO, LTV, and quarter fixed effects. Panel B shows a model of interest rates with all (linear) observables
and quarter fixed effects. Panel C shows a model of all observables with up to third-degree terms included.



    100                                                                                   90
                                                                                          80
     80                                                                                   70
                                                                                          60
     60                                                                                   50
                                                                                          40
     40
                                                                                          30
     20                                                                                   20
                                                                                          10
      0                                                                                    0
       0.125              0.175           0.225                 0.275                    -10 0.5                       0.55                       0.6                  0.65
    -20                                                                                  -20

               Non-fintech shadow bank    Fintech shadow bank            Bank                            Bank           Non-fintech shadow bank         Fintech shadow bank


                             (a) LTV, FICO, Quarter FE                                                                (b) All controls, Quarter FE
                                           70

                                           60

                                           50

                                           40

                                           30

                                           20

                                           10

                                            0
                                                0.5                     0.55                       0.6                     0.65
                                          -10

                                                       Bank             Non-fintech shadow bank             Fintech shadow bank


                                                                (c) All controls (nonlinear), Quarter FE

                                                                                         61
Fig. 8. Calibrated characteristics of lenders. Fig. 8 presents the model parameters discussed in Section 9.3. Panel A shows lender quality characteristics for fintech
and non-fintech shadow banks relative to traditional bank. Panel B shows the evolution of regulatory burden face by traditional banks implied by our model relative
to 2008 level. A higher value of the parameter implies a lower regulatory burden level. Panel C shows funding costs for fintech and non-fintech shadow banks and
relative to traditional bank. Panel D shows fixed costs of traditional banks, and fintech and non-fintech shadow banks.


      0.2                       Non-fintech          Fintech                            1.4
                                                                                        1.3
        0
                                                                                        1.2

      -0.2                                                                              1.1
                                                                                          1
      -0.4                                                                              0.9
                                                                                        0.8
      -0.6
                                                                                        0.7
      -0.8                                                                              0.6
             2008    2009    2010    2011     2012    2013     2014   2015                        2008      2009   2010       2011     2012      2013    2014    2015

                                 (a) Lender’s quality                                                                  (b) Regulatory burden


      0.4                       Non-fintech          Fintech                             40,000                 Bank            Fintech            Non-fintech
                                                                                         35,000
                                                                                         30,000
      0.2
                                                                                         25,000
                                                                                         20,000
                                                                                         15,000
        0
                                                                                         10,000
                                                                                          5,000
      -0.2                                                                                    -
             2008    2009    2010     2011    2012    2013     2014   2015                               2008   2009   2010     2011      2012    2013   2014    2015

                                 (c) Funding costs                                                                        (d) Fixed costs



                                                                                 62
 Fig. 9. Counterfactuals for the change in the shadow bank market share implied by our model. Fig. 9 shows predicted changes in shadow bank market share in the
overall mortgage market between 2008 and 2015, broken down between non-fintech and non-fintech entrants, for three counterfactuals regarding fintech quality
and bank regulatory impairment. “No changes” fixes both fintech quality to its 2008 and bank regulatory burden parameter to zero. “Regulatory impairment” has
fixed fintech quality and allows bank regulatory burden to vary as calibrated. “Fintech quality increase” fixes bank regulatory burden and allows fintech quality to
vary as in the data. “Actual” shows the actual changes in our data.


                                                                        Fintech        Non-fintech

                               25.0%



                               20.0%



                               15.0%



                               10.0%



                                5.0%



                                0.0%



                                -5.0%
                                          Cost changes only      Regulatory burden           Fintech quality        Actual




                                                                                  63
                       On-Line Appendix

Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks

        Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski and Amit Seru




                                    1
Appendix A.1. Classification of lenders1
                                                                    Panel A: List of largest shadow banks
                                                               Name                 Bank or Shadow Bank   Fintech or Non-Fintech
                                                Amerisave Mortgage                      Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Cashcall Inc                            Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Guaranteed Rate Inc                     Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Homeward Residential                    Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Movement Mortgage                       Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Quicken Loans                           Shadow Bank               Fintech
                                                Academy Mortgage                        Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                AmCap Mortgage LTD                      Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                American Neighborhood Mtg               Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                American Pacific Mortgage               Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Amerifirst Financial Corp               Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Amerihome Mortgage                      Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Ark-LA-TEX Fin Svcs.                    Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Bay Equity                              Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Broker Solutions                        Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Caliber Home Loans                      Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Chicago Mortgage Solutions              Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                CMG Mortgage                            Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Ditech Financial                        Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Fairway Independent Mortgage            Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Franklin American Mortgage              Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Freedom Mortgage                        Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Greenlight Financial                    Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Guild Mortgage                          Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Homebridge Financial Services           Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Impact Mortgage                         Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                LoanDepot.com                           Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Mortgage Research Center                Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Nationstart Mortgage                    Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Newday Financial                        Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Pacific Union Financial                 Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                PennyMac Loan Services                  Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                PHH Mortgage                            Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Plaza Home Mortgage                     Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Primary Residential Mortgage Inc.       Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                PrimeLending                            Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Primelending Plainscapital              Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Prospect Mortgage                       Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Provident Funding                       Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Sierra Pacific Mortgage                 Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Sovereign Lending Group                 Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Stearns Lending                         Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Stonegate Mortgage                      Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech
                                                Suntrust Mortgage                       Shadow Bank             Non-Fintech


1
    This list is partial and includes the largest lenders. The full list comprises 550 lenders that accounted for 80% of mortgage lending market share as of 2010.


                                                                                         2
Sunwest Mortgage Company              Shadow Bank              Non-Fintech
United Shore Financial Services       Shadow Bank              Non-Fintech
Walker and Dunlop                     Shadow Bank              Non-Fintech


                  Panel B: List of largest traditional banks
            Name                               Bank or Shadow Bank
            Ally Bank                                  Bank
            Bank of America                            Bank
            BOK Financial                              Bank
            Branch Banking and Trust Company           Bank
            Capital One                                Bank
            Citibank                                   Bank
            Citimortgage                               Bank
            Colorado FSB                               Bank
            Everbank                                   Bank
            FHLB Chicago                               Bank
            Fidelity Bank                              Bank
            Fifth Third Mortgage                       Bank
            First Republic Bank                        Bank
            Flagstar Bank FSB                          Bank
            Fremont Bank                               Bank
            Homestreet Bank                            Bank
            HSBC Bank                                  Bank
            JPMorgan Chase                             Bank
            MB Bank                                    Bank
            Metlife Home Loans                         Bank
            Mortgage Stanley Private Bank              Bank
            MUFG Bank                                  Bank
            Navy FCU                                   Bank
            NY Community Bank                          Bank
            PNC Bank                                   Bank
            Redwood Credit Union                       Bank
            Regions Bank                               Bank
            Union Savings Bank                         Bank
            US Bank                                    Bank
            USAA FSB                                   Bank
            Wells Fargo Bank                           Bank




                                       3
Appendix A.2. Shadow bank and fintech mortgage rates: FHA loans
Table A.2 shows the results of the regression specified in Eq. (7) using FHA from 2010-2015. Columns (1)-(2) test differences between shadow banks and traditional
banks. Columns (3)-(4) split shadow banks into fintech and non-fintech lenders and compare interest rates across all lenders. Columns (5)-(6) test differences in
fintech rates within shadow banks. Columns (1), (3), and (5) quarter fixed effects and no other controls. Columns (2), (4), (6) have quarter times zip fixed effects
and borrower controls. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-quarter level. Interest rates are quoted in percent. The mean interest rate over the sample period is
4.20. t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                    Interest Rate   Interest Rate Interest Rate    Interest Rate   Interest Rate Interest Rate
                    Sample                                                   All Lenders                               Shadow Banks Only
                    Shadow Bank                       -0.0896***      0.0291***           -               -              -             -
                                                       (-71.47)        (42.20)            -               -              -             -
                    Non-Fintech Shadow Bank                -              -          -0.0416***       0.0500***          -             -
                                                           -              -           (-28.86)         (64.69)           -             -
                    Fintech Shadow Bank                    -              -           -0.187***      -0.0137***      -0.144***    -0.0334***
                                                           -              -          (-127.30)        (-15.08)       (-91.97)      (-32.46)
                    Borrower and Loan Controls            No             Yes             No              Yes            No            Yes
                    Zip x Quarter FE                      No             Yes             No              Yes            No            Yes
                    Quarter FE                           Yes             No              Yes             No             Yes           No
                    N                                  2280859        2173287         2280859         2173287        1079862        977309
                    R2                                  0.0105          0.730          0.0169           0.731         0.0190         0.710




                                                                                 4
Appendix A.3. Fintech origination fees
        We briefly provide evidence on mortgage origination fees, which we do not observe in our dataset.
In particular, a concern is that while fintech lenders offer higher rates on average, they may offer these
higher rates in exchange for lower fixed costs at origination. Closing costs are typically 1-5% of the
mortgage balance,2 and cover costs associated with closing the transaction such as legal and processing
fees paid to the originator.

         Anecdotally, fintech lenders do not appear to offer lower origination fees. On the contrary, their
fees appear on the high end of the typical range. For example, on consumer review sites, a common
complaint regarding Quicken Loans, the largest fintech lender in our data, is it high origination fees3
relative to other lenders. Several lenders, including Quicken Loans, provide closing cost estimators for
purchases and refinances.4 For the purchase of a $200,000 home with a 20% down payment in Illinois,
the calculator estimates an origination fee of $8,648, which is 5.4% of the principal balance at origination.
Bank of America provides a similar tool5 and estimates origination fees of $8,659. Bankrate.com, which
gathers closing cost information on the largest lenders within each state, reports that average closing costs
in Illinois for a similar loan are $2,079.6




2
  https://www.zillow.com/mortgage-learning/closing-costs/ (Accessed March 7, 2017)
3
  https://www.consumeraffairs.com/finance/quicken_loans_mortgage.html
4
  https://www.quickenloans.com/my-mortgage/calculator#!/purchase/question/purchase-price (Accessed March 7, 2017)
5
  https://www.bankofamerica.com/mortgage/closing-costs-calculator/ (Accessed March 7, 2017)
6
  http://www.bankrate.com/finance/mortgages/closing-costs/illinois.aspx (Accessed March 7, 2017)



                                                          5
Appendix A.4. The origination process at Quicken Loans
        To illustrate the degree of automation offered by fintech lenders, this section walks through the
process on Quicken Loans, the largest fintech lender, that the borrower must take in order to get a firm
loan offer. The process is designed to take place entirely online with no human interaction necessary
until closing. What follows combines screenshots from Quicken Loans’ flagship online product, Rocket
Mortgage, accessed on March 7, 2017, and screenshots from a TechCrunch.com November 24, 2015
review of the product.7

       The system guides the borrower through a series of online questions regarding the borrowers need
and financial situation. (Figure 1). As the user clicks through the questionnaire, the system automatically
gathers income and asset information using the borrower’s social security number. (Figure 2). With the
borrower’s consent, the system performs a credit check and proposes mortgage terms, which the borrower
can lock in online (Figure 3).

                                                        Figure 10




7
    https://techcrunch.com/2015/11/24/this-could-be-the-mortgage-industrys-iphone-moment/, Accessed (March 7, 2017).




                                                             6
    Figure 11




    Figure 1




From TechCrunch.com




        7
Appendix A.5. Interest rate and performance of fintech and non-fintech


        We test whether loan pricing better reflects observable and unobservable loan characteristics. If
the model prices risk better, then the interest rate should reflect the probability of default or prepayment
better. Following Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015) we model the probability that a loan defaults as follows:

                            ! "#$%&'()* = Φ ./ + .1 2) + 3)4 Γ + 6*                                  (37)

                             ! 72#7%8)* = Φ(./ + .1 2) + 3)4 Γ + 6* )                                (38)

where 2) is the interest rate on the loan. Panel A of Table A6.1 presents the results for default. While the
coefficients on interest rate are all positive, fintech interest rates appear slightly less related to default.
The coefficient for non-fintech shadow banks without other controls is 0.487 versus 0.446 for fintech.
Including controls, the coefficients become 0.190 and 0.087, respectively. As we discuss above, however,
the base rate of default is very low, and fintech loans are significantly less likely to default than non-
fintech loans, suggesting that fintech lenders are able to screen bad risks on the extensive margin.

        As we discuss above, these loans have substantially higher differences in prepayment risk.
Prepayment is bad for the investor but those borrowers who are able to repay are less likely to default.
Consequently, the direction of the relationship between interest rates and prepayment is not obvious ex-
ante. Panel B of Table A.6.1 shows the results. The results are consistent both with and without controls:
Both fintech and non-fintech lenders’ rates are positively associated with repayment, but the association
between fintech interest rates and prepayment is much stronger.

       To formally test whether fintech shadow banks models in fact incorporate prepayment risk better
than non-fintech shadow banks by estimating the following specification:

                  ! 72#7%8)* = Φ(./ + .1 2) + .; 2) ×=>?(#@ℎB + 3)4 Γ + 6* )                         (39)

        The results are presented in Table A.6.2. The results in Column (4) show that there are important
differences in how the interest rates fintech lenders charge on loans relate to the subsequent prepayment
of borrowers relative other shadow banks. This evidence is consistent with fintech lenders using different
pricing models that are more reflective of prepayment risk. Two important caveats need to be considered,
however. First, for fintech lenders to care about better pricing, investors who buy these loans need to be
aware that such lenders are able to better price prepayment risk and be willing pay a premium for these
loans. Second, a stronger association between interest rates and subsequent prepayment on fintech loans
may also reflect different selection of borrowers into fintech lenders.




                                                      8
                                       Table A.5.1: Relationship between interest rate and performance
Panels A and B show the coefficients on mortgage interest rate for probit regressions (37) and (38), respectively. Data is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac performance
data for loans originated by Shadow Banks between 2010 and 2013. A mortgage is in default if it is more than 60-days past due within two years of origination; A
mortgage is prepaid if it is prepaid within two years of origination. All regressions include year fixed effects. Regressions with controls include all controls in
earlier loan-level Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Regressions; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

                                                                        Panel A: Default
                                                          No Controls                                             Controls
                                                     Rate         Pseudo R2                              Rate            Pseudo R2
                              Bank                 0.451***         0.0364                             0.188***            0.124
                              Shadow Bank          0.479***         0.0426                             0.170***            0.135
                              Non-Fintech          0.487***         0.0454                             0.190***            0.142
                              Fintech              0.446***         0.0315                              0.087*             0.115

                                                                      Panel B: Prepayment
                                                          No Controls                                             Controls
                                                     Rate         Pseudo R2                              Rate            Pseudo R2
                              Bank                 0.248***         0.0528                             0.561***             0.111
                              Shadow Bank          0.297***         0.0384                             0.740***            0.0973
                              Non-Fintech          0.218***         0.0454                             0.666***             0.110
                              Fintech              0.697***         0.0523                             1.045***            0.0953




                                                                                9
                                              Table A.5.2: Interest rates and performance differentials

This table shows the results of probit regression (39) for the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data for loans originated by Shadow Banks between 2010 and 2013. A
loan is prepaid if it is prepaid within two years of origination. Columns (1)-(2) have no controls; Columns (3)-(4) include borrower and loan controls. All
specifications have year fixed effects. Columns (2) and (4) additionally have a fintech dummy, not shown; t-statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <
0.001.

                                                                          Panel A: Default

                                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                           Prepaid      Prepaid       Prepaid      Prepaid
                                          Rate                             0.479***     0.479***      0.170***     0.178***
                                                                           (38.29)      (37.99)       (10.63)      (11.04)
                                          Rate x Fintech                       -        0.00144           -       -0.0142***
                                                                               -         (0.41)           -         (-3.73)
                                          Borrower and Loan Controls          No           No           Yes           Yes
                                          Year FE                            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
                                          N                               1,151,439    1,151,439     1,151,003    1,151003
                                          Pseudo R2                         0.0426       0.0427        0.135         0.136


                                                                       Panel B: Prepayment

                                                                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                                            Prepaid       Prepaid      Prepaid      Prepaid
                                          Rate                             0.297***      0.280***     0.740***     0.724***
                                                                           (114.51)      (106.40)     (208.34)     (201.21)
                                          Rate x Fintech                       -        0.0308***         -       0.0262***
                                                                               -          (37.70)         -         (30.73)
                                          Borrower and Loan Controls          No            No           Yes          Yes
                                          Year FE                             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
                                          N                               1,151,439     1,151,439    1,151,009    1,151,009
                                          Pseudo R2                         0.0384        0.0395       0.0973       0.0980




                                                                                  10
Appendix A.6. Shadow bank trends among top 50 lenders
Panel A shows the shadow bank share among mortgage originations by top 50 lenders (based on HMDA origination volume). Panel B shows the corresponding
shadow bank origination share among FHA loans. Panel C shows the disposition of mortgages among shadow banks in this large-lender sample. The GSE category
pools Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, and Farmer Mac. Calculations are based on HMDA data.
  45%                                                                                              80%
  40%                                                                                              70%
  35%                                                                                              60%
  30%
                                                                                                   50%
  25%
                                                                                                   40%
  20%
                                                                                                   30%
  15%
  10%                                                                                              20%

    5%                                                                                             10%
    0%                                                                                               0%
          2007    2008   2009    2010   2011       2012       2013        2014     2015                        2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                   (a) All loans                                                                                                 (b) FHA loans
                                          100%

                                          90%

                                          80%

                                          70%

                                          60%

                                          50%

                                          40%

                                          30%

                                          20%

                                          10%

                                           0%
                                             2007         2008          2009     2010      2011        2012          2013     2014        2015

                                                   Not Sold/Affiliate      GSE    Private Securitization      Bank      Insurer   Other

                                                                                 (c) Loan disposition

                                                                                          11
Appendix A.7. Lender classification

    Lenders are classified into one of three mutually exclusive categories: (1) Traditional Banks,
(2) Non-Fintech Shadow Banks, and (3) Fintech Shadow Banks. The classification procedure is
summarized in the following steps:
    1. Is the lender a traditional bank or a shadow bank?
            a. If the lender is a traditional bank, this is its classification.
            b. If the lender is a shadow bank, proceed to step 2:
    2. Is the shadow bank a fintech shadow bank or a non-fintech shadow bank?

This appendix provides details regarding steps one and two: (1) the determination of whether a
lender is a traditional bank or a shadow bank, and (2) the determination of whether a shadow bank
is a fintech shadow bank or a non-fintech shadow bank.8

A.7.1. Traditional banks versus shadow banks

        A lender is a traditional bank if it is a depository institution; otherwise, the lender is a
shadow bank. We argue that this is a sensible definition for our paper because whether a lender is
subject to most banking regulation is determined by its status as deposit-taking or not, and one of
our primary goals is to explore the role that banking regulation has played in the mortgage market.
Whether a non-depository institution has a funding relationship to a depository institution is not
our primary concern; rather, we are interested in why lending activities have been pushed outside
the traditional banking system.

        The Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data identify by name sellers who have comprised at
least 1% of sales to the GSE within a given quarter. There are on average between 15 and 20
uniquely identified lenders in a given quarter. As market shares change through time, the
composition of identified lenders shifts, which results in a greater number of identified lenders.
Over our sample period, we identify 55 unique lenders comprising between 50% and 85% market
share in a given quarter. See Figure A.8.1, Panels A and B. These lenders are classified as
traditional or shadow banks manually based on their status as a depository institution.

        The HMDA data identifies all loan originators. We classify 551 lenders so as to cover 80%
origination market share as of 2010. HMDA identifies the lender’s primary regulator, which
provides a useful first-cut regarding depository versus non-depository institutions. For OCC, OTS,
and NCUA-regulated lenders, all lenders were classified as banks. The FRS regulates both


8
    Note that we do not classify traditional banks as “fintech traditional banks” or “non-fintech traditional banks.”


                                                             12
traditional banks and shadow banks, so these lenders were manually classified. For FDIC regulated
lenders, Merrimack Mortgage Company was classified as a shadow bank because it did not have
deposits. It accounts for 0.12% of FDIC loans. For HUD regulated lenders, Homeowners Mortgage
Enterprise, Liberty Mortgage Corporation, Morgan Stanley Credit Corp, and Prosperity Mortgage
Company were categorized as banks. This made up 0.30% of HUD loans. For CFPB regulated
loans, Suntrust Mortgage was classified as a shadow bank and made up 2.57% of CFPB loans.

The following table summarizes the classifications by regulator in HMDA.


                              Regulatory Agency   Classification distribution
                                    OCC           100.00% Bank
                                                  0.00% Shadow Bank

                                    FRS           62.92% Bank
                                                  37.08% Shadow Bank

                                    FDIC          99.88% Bank
                                                  0.12% Shadow Bank

                                    OTS           100.00% Bank
                                                  0.00% Shadow Bank

                                   NCUA           100.00% Bank
                                                  0.00% Shadow Bank

                                    HUD           0.30% Bank
                                                  99.70% Shadow Bank

                                    CFPB          97.43% Bank
                                                  2.57% Shadow Bank


A.7.2. Fintech shadow banks versus non-fintech shadow banks

         Among shadow bank lenders, a lender is “fintech” if the loan application process is entirely
online and the potential borrower is able to obtain a firm, contractual rate quote without interacting
with a human loan officer. Fintech lenders’ websites typically include automated tools to collect
and verify information including the applicant’s work and financial assets automatically. See
Figure A.8.2, Panel A. This classification focuses on the front-end, consumer-interaction aspect of
fintech, although lenders with this automated interface empirically appear to also bring more (or
at least non-standard) data into the interest rate decision relative to lenders with less sophisticated
consumer-facing platforms.




                                                  13
        Many lenders have online forms that allow borrowers to submit an application online.
Under our classification rule, having such a form is not sufficient for a lender to be a fintech lender.
For example, Figure A.8.2, Panel B shows the website of Home Point Financial. While the site
allows users to begin the application process online, it explicitly states “After you have finished,”
that the company will “contact you to: Guide you through the loan process… Complete your loan
application package… Help you select the best program and interest rate.” Because this lender
does not allow the borrower to receive a firm, contractual rate quote online, it is not a fintech
lender. Where the correct classification is ambiguous, our approach is to be conservative with
respect to classifying a lender as fintech: Ambiguous cases are treated as non-fintech shadow
banks.

        The classification process for fintech shadow banks versus non-fintech shadow banks is
done by hand, using multiple independent RAs to verify the classifications. The primary
classification is based on visiting lenders’ websites and reading reviews as of 2016 and 2017. In
order to ensure that lender types are stable through time, we make use of archived versions of the
lenders’ websites though the Wayback Machine,9 which periodically saves timestamped snapshots
of websites. The following table provides links to archived sites of some of the largest fintech and
non-fintech lenders in our classification:

            Lender                                                        Link                                        Date   Notes
     Fintech Lenders
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20000301152531/http://rockloans.com/
     QuickenLoans                                                                                                     2000
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20080201145127/http://cashcall.com/
     CashCall                                                                                                         2008
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20080105084749/http://www.guaranteedrate.com:80/
     Guaranteed Rate                                                                                                  2008
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20081121145731/http://www.amerisavemortgage.com/aboutus.cfm
     Amerisave                                                                                                        2008
     Homeward              https://web.archive.org/web/20120725213830/http://ahmsi3.com:80/servicing/home.asp#
                                                                                                                      2012   Note10
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20130205223025/http://www.movementmortgage.com:80/refinance/
     Movement                                                                                                         2013   Note11
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20130901000000*/http://summit-mortgage.com/
     Summit Mortgage                                                                                                  2007

     Non-Fintech Lenders
     Franklin American                                                                                                2010   Note12
     Ditech                https://web.archive.org/web/20100314055607/http://ditech.com
                                                                                                                      2010   Note13
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20090217131827/http://www.nationstarmtg.com
     Nationstar                                                                                                       2010
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20100819213036/http://alliedmortgagecorp.com
     Allied                                                                                                           2010
                           https://web.archive.org/web/20100306021159/http://academymortgage.com:80/
     Academy                                                                                                          2010

       The results of this check are that the classifications are stable and robust over time. In
almost all cases, lenders classified as fintech in 2016-2017 would have been classified as fintech

9
  https://archive.org/web/, accessed 7/13/2017.
10
   In 2012, Homeward Residential was an online servicer, and did not appear to originate mortgages.
11
   The current website, “movement.com” was held by another owner; “movementmortgage.com” comes online in
2013.
12
   No viewable site in or prior to 2010.
13
   Has (and continues to have as of 2017) an online application that directs user to a human loan officer.

                                                                      14
lenders in 2010 or earlier; Movement Mortgage and Summit Mortgage, which we classify as
fintech lenders now are ambiguous; while they had sophisticated online presences, especially for
the time (and held out their technology as a reason to borrow from them), their application process
appears to involve a human loan officer at some point. In all cases, lenders classified as non-fintech
in 2016-2017 would have been classified as non-fintech in 2010.

A.7.3. Fintech banks

        While the main line of analysis in our paper considers only fintech and non-fintech shadow
banks, we also consider the possibility of fintech traditional banks. Among five large banks we
follow the same classification process: We consider both current and past web offerings using the
Wayback Machine and look for fintech offerings based on the same criteria we use for fintech
shadow banks. Among these lenders, Chase, Bank of America, Citi, HSBC, and Wells Fargo, we
find no current offerings (as of December 2017) that we classify as fintech. We confirm that these
findings held as of 2010 using the Wayback machine. The links are given in the following table.

    Lender                                                                     Link                                                              Date   Notes
                     https://web.archive.org/web/20100110022235/http://mortgage.chase.com:80/pages/other/apply.jsp
 Chase                                                                                                                                           2010
                     https://web.archive.org/web/20101120220636/https://www8.bankofamerica.com/home-loans/mortgage/leads-and-
 BoA                 prequal/mortgage-prequal.go
                                                                                                                                                 2010
                      https://web.archive.org/web/20121208045200/https://www.citimortgage.com/Mortgage/Home.do?page=apply
 Citi                                                                                                                                            2010
                     https://web.archive.org/web/20100120034757/http://www.us.hsbc.com:80/1/2/3/personal/home-loans/mortgage/mortgage-programs
 HSBC                                                                                                                                            2010
 Wells Fargo         https://web.archive.org/web/20100529001150/https://www.wellsfargo.com/
                                                                                                                                                 2010   Note14




14
     Wayback machine does not preserve application page, but no full-service application exists as of December 2017.


                                                                                15
                                                                                            Figure A.7.1: Identified lenders in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

Panel A shows the number of unique identified lenders in the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac data per quarter. Panel B shows the total market share of sales to the
GSEs by the identified lenders.



                                                                  Unique Lenders                                                                                                                                Identified Market Share
 35                                                                                                                                                                                            100%
 30                                                                                                                                                                                             90%
 25                                                                                                                                                                                             80%
 20                                                                                                                                                                                             70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                60%
 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                50%
 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                40%
  5                                                                                                                                                                                             30%
  0                                                                                                                                                                                             20%
      2007 Q1
                2007 Q3
                          2008 Q1
                                    2008 Q3
                                              2009 Q1
                                                        2009 Q3
                                                                  2010 Q1
                                                                            2010 Q3
                                                                                      2011 Q1
                                                                                                2011 Q3
                                                                                                          2012 Q1
                                                                                                                    2012 Q3
                                                                                                                              2013 Q1
                                                                                                                                        2013 Q3
                                                                                                                                                  2014 Q1
                                                                                                                                                            2014 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                      2015 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                2015 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0%




                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2012 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2012 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2014 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2014 Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015 Q3
                                                                     Fannie                                    Freddie

                                                Panel (a): Unique identified lenders                                                                                                                  Panel (b): Market share of identified lenders




                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                              Figure A.7.2: The fintech and non-fintech loan process
Panel A shows part of the loan application process for a fintech lender (Quicken Loans). Note that the lender’s technology automatically retrieves the borrower’s
employment history. Panel B shows part of the loan application process for a non-fintech lender. Note that despite having an “online” application, the application
process requires the applicant to interact with a human loan officer after initially submitting her contact information.




            Panel (a): A fintech lender                                             Panel (b): A non-fintech lender’s site (highlighting added for emphasis).




                                                                               17
Appendix A.8. Excluding Quicken Loans
Table A.8.1 shows Table 4: Loan characteristics of conforming loans, excluding Quicken Loans from the sample. Table A.8.2 shows Table 2: Time between
origination and sale: Conforming loans, excluding Quicken Loans from the sample. Table A.8.3 shows Table 6: Shadow bank and fintech mortgage rates:
Conforming loans, excluding Quicken Loans from the sample.


                                                          Table A.8.1: Loan characteristics of conforming loans
                                               (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)           (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
                                           Shadow Bank    Shadow Bank     Non-Fintech        Non-Fintech       Fintech           Fintech           Fintech            Fintech
                  Sample                                                               All Lenders                                                     Shadow Banks Only
                  Loan Amount              0.0000115***   0.00000824***   0.0000108***      0.00000849***   0.000000692***   -0.000000251***   0.00000185***    -0.000000993***
                                              (105.85)        (62.45)        (100.41)           (64.96)          (38.31)          (-10.89)         (20.46)            (-8.73)
                  Loan Term (Months)         0.0385***     -0.00202***      0.0355***        -0.00178***       0.00299***      -0.000238***       0.0135***        -0.00127***
                                              (193.43)        (-9.49)        (178.99)           (-8.38)         (147.10)          (-17.69)        (125.38)           (-20.21)
                  Loan-to-Value              -0.0478***     -0.0375***      -0.0434***        -0.0373***      -0.00447***        -0.000225      -0.00552***        0.00654***
                                              (-47.10)       (-35.77)        (-43.15)          (-35.90)         (-24.40)           (-1.18)         (-5.65)             (6.66)
                  Debt-to-Income             0.0303***       0.0265***      0.0325***          0.0312***      -0.00218***       -0.00466***      -0.0109***         -0.0211***
                                               (21.12)        (18.85)         (22.89)           (22.38)           (-8.49)         (-18.18)         (-8.20)           (-16.67)
                  FICO                      -0.00359***    -0.00828***     -0.00384***       -0.00775***      0.000254***      -0.000528***      -0.000140          -0.000202
                                              (-10.24)       (-24.24)        (-11.06)          (-22.86)            (4.57)          (-9.59)         (-0.53)            (-0.81)
                  Cash-Out Refinance          -1.372***      -0.382***       -1.647***         -0.581***         0.275***         0.199***         1.443***          0.745***
                                              (-36.67)       (-10.35)        (-44.38)          (-15.84)          (46.94)           (34.70)         (46.87)            (25.79)
                  Non-Cash-Out Refinance      -2.214***      0.601***        -2.656***         0.308***          0.442***         0.293***         2.355***          1.180***
                                              (-70.64)        (18.39)        (-85.65)            (9.51)          (80.21)           (49.40)         (90.94)            (42.20)
                  Unspecified Refinance        40.61**        39.58**         40.70**           39.92**          -0.0834            -0.335         0.651***          0.345***
                                                (2.65)         (2.66)          (2.67)            (2.72)           (-0.41)          (-0.74)          (3.86)             (4.80)
                  Investment                  0.877***       -0.361***       0.709***          -0.323***         0.168***        -0.0375***        1.050***          0.159***
                                               (16.30)        (-6.74)         (13.33)           (-6.11)          (16.30)           (-3.58)         (21.93)             (3.40)
                  Secondary                   -2.210***      -3.306***       -2.122***         -3.190***       -0.0874***         -0.115***        0.147**           -0.180**
                                              (-35.93)       (-51.14)        (-34.81)          (-49.73)           (-9.17)         (-11.31)          (2.78)            (-3.28)
                  First-Time Buyer            -3.003***      -2.269***       -2.852***         -2.081***        -0.151***         -0.188***       -0.0756**          -0.499***
                                              (-72.41)       (-54.97)        (-69.24)          (-50.70)         (-27.14)          (-32.42)         (-2.83)           (-18.73)
                  Has Mtg. Insurance          1.108***       0.607***        0.986***          0.472***          0.122***         0.135***         0.545***          0.323***
                                               (24.36)        (13.72)         (21.89)           (10.76)          (16.07)           (17.94)         (15.46)             (9.63)
                  Zip x Quarter FE                No            Yes              No               Yes                No              Yes              No                Yes
                  Quarter FE                     Yes             No             Yes                No               Yes               No             Yes                 No
                  N                          8,104,117      8,104,116       8,104,117         8,104,116        8,104,117         8,104,116       1,569,282          1,569,282
                  R2                           0.0502          0.119          0.0519             0.118            0.0140           0.0613          0.0782              0.240




                                                                                              18
                      Table A.8.2: Time between origination and sale: Conforming loans
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                              Qtrs to Sale Qtrs to Sale Qtrs to Sale Qtrs to Sale Qtrs to Sale Qtrs to Sale
  Sample                                           All Lenders                       Shadow Banks Only
  Shadow Bank                  -0.0846***   -0.0831***         -            -           -            -
                                (-39.82)     (-40.01)          -            -           -            -
  Non-Fintech Shadow Bank           -            -        -0.0816***   -0.0809***
                                    -            -         (-39.24)     (-39.57)
  Fintech Shadow Bank               -            -         -0.154***    -0.134***   -0.0301*    -0.0121
                                    -            -         (-11.41)     (-10.22)     (-2.14)     (-0.87)
  Borrower and Loan Controls       No          Yes            No           Yes         No          Yes
  Zip x Quarter FE                 No          Yes            No           Yes         No          Yes
  Quarter FE                      Yes           No            Yes          No          Yes         No
  N                            3,844,312    3,839,732     3,844,312    3,839,732    955,717     953,784
  R2                             0.0314       0.0465        0.0316       0.0466      0.0593       0.103

                   Table A.8.3: Shadow bank and fintech mortgage rates: Conforming loans
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
                            Interest Rate Interest Rate Interest Rate Interest Rate Interest Rate Interest Rate
Sample                                             All Lenders                          Shadow Banks Only
Shadow Bank                  -0.0273***    -0.0235***           -            -            -              -
                              (-20.03)      (-26.72)            -            -            -              -
Non-Fintech Shadow Bank           -             -          -0.0280***  -0.0240***
                                  -             -           (-20.33)     (-27.04)
Fintech Shadow Bank               -             -           0.00156     -0.00260      0.0462***     0.00670**
                                  -             -            (0.49)       (-1.02)      (13.81)        (3.03)
Borrower and Loan Controls       No            Yes             No           Yes          No            Yes
Zip x Quarter FE                 No            Yes             No           Yes          No            Yes
Quarter FE                       Yes           No             Yes           No           Yes            No
N                            8,485,573     8,480,376       8,485,573   8,480,376     1,946,802     1,943,693
R2                              0.598         0.808          0.601         0.811        0.585         0.807




                                                      19
Appendix A.9. Regulatory exposure and shadow bank growth
Appendix Figures A.9 show binned scatterplots (in 25 bins) of growth in shadow bank market share versus the four measures of regulatory exposure. The size of
the points represents the number of originations falling into the bin. Best fit lines, along with 95% confidence intervals are shown along with the bins.




                                                                             20
