                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHAT DO EDITORS MAXIMIZE? EVIDENCE FROM FOUR LEADING ECONOMICS
                             JOURNALS

                                           David Card
                                       Stefano DellaVigna

                                      Working Paper 23282
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23282


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We thank Pierre Azoulay, Matthew Gentzkow, Nagore Iriberri, Lawrence Katz, Jesse Shapiro,
and Fabrizio Zilibotti for their comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to the audiences
at Columbia University, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Cruz, and the Annual Meeting of WEAI for
useful comments. We thank Alden Cheng, Johannes Hermle, Kaushik Krishnan, Patricia Sun, and
Brian Wheaton for oustanding research assistance. We are also very appreciative of the support
provided by the editors and staff at the Journal of the European Economic Association, the
Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Review of Economics and Statistics, and the Review of
Economic Studies. The survey analyzed in this paper was approved by UC Berkeley IRB,
protocol 2016-08-9029 and pre-registered as trial AEARCTR-0001669. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Card and Stefano DellaVigna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What do Editors Maximize? Evidence from Four Leading Economics Journals
David Card and Stefano DellaVigna
NBER Working Paper No. 23282
March 2017
JEL No. A11,O3

                                           ABSTRACT

We study editorial decision-making using anonymized submission data for four leading
economics journals: the Journal of the European Economics Association, the Quarterly Journal of
Economics, the Review of Economic Studies, and the Review of Economics and Statistics. We
match papers to the publication records of authors at the time of submission and to subsequent
Google Scholar citations. To guide our analysis we develop a benchmark model in which editors
maximize the expected quality of accepted papers and citations are unbiased measures of quality.
We then generalize the model to allow different quality thresholds for different papers, and
systematic gaps between citations and quality. Empirically, we find that referee recommendations
are strong predictors of citations, and that editors follow the recommendations quite closely.
Holding constant the referees' evaluations, however, papers by highly-published authors get more
citations, suggesting that referees impose a higher bar for these authors, or that prolific authors
are over-cited. Editors only partially offset the referees' opinions, effectively discounting the
citations of more prolific authors in their revise and resubmit decisions by up to 80%. To
disentangle the two explanations for this discounting, we conduct a survey of specialists, asking
them for their preferred relative citation counts for matched pairs of papers. The responses show
no indication that prolific authors are over-cited and thus suggest that referees and editors seek to
support less prolific authors.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Stefano DellaVigna
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction
The editorial decisions at top academic journals determine the career paths of young researchers and
set the direction of research in a field. Yet, remarkably little is known about how these decisions
are made. How informative are the referee recommendations that underlie the peer review process?
How do editors combine the referees’ advice with their own reading of a paper and other prior
information in deciding whether to accept it or reject it? Do editors set the same standards for
established scholars as for less prolific authors?
    We address these questions using anonymized data on 30,000 recent submissions at the Quarterly
Journal of Economics, the Review of Economic Studies, the Journal of the European Economics
Association, and the Review of Economics and Statistics. Our data include information on the
field(s) of each paper, the recent publication records of the authors, summary recommendations for
all papers that were refereed, and the initial editorial decision (desk reject, reject, or revise and
resubmit). All submissions, regardless of the editor’s decision, are matched to citations from Google
Scholar and the Social Science Citation Index.
    This unique dataset allows us to significantly advance our understanding of the editorial decision
process at scientific journals. Most previous research has focused on published papers or aggregated
submission data (e.g., Laband and Piette, 1994; Ellison, 2002a and 2002b; Hofmeister and Krapf,
2011; Card and DellaVigna, 2013; Brogaard, Engelberg and Parsons, 2014). While such studies offer
many potential insights, they cannot directly shed light on the trade-offs faced by editors since they
lack comprehensive information on accepted and rejected papers, including the referees’ opinions.
A few studies have analyzed submissions data but have focused on other issues such as the strength
of agreement between referees (Welch, 2014), the effect of referee incentives (Hamermesh, 1994;
Chetty, Saez, and Sandor, 2014) or the impact of blind refereeing (Blank, 1991). Two recent studies
(Cherkashin et al., 2009 and Griffith, Kocherlakota, and Nevo, 2009) present broader analyses for
the Journal of International Economics and the Review of Economic Studies respectively, though
neither uses information on referee recommendations.
    To guide our analysis we propose a simple model of the revise and resubmit (R&R) decision in
which editors combine observable paper characteristics, the referee recommendations, and their own
private information to select which papers to invite for revision. As a starting point we assume that
editors try to maximize the expected quality of published papers and that quality is revealed by
citations – i.e., citation-maximizing behavior. While highly restrictive, this stylized model is a useful
benchmark for at least three reasons. First, impact factors, which count citations to the articles in a
journal, are widely used to rank journals and are highly salient to publishers, editors and authors.1
Second, existing studies show that citations are important determinants of career advancement
(Ellison, 2012) and salaries (Hamermesh, Johnson and Weisbrod, 1982; Hilmer, Ransom and Hilmer,
2015). Finally, Google Scholar (GS) citations are available for all papers – whether accepted or
rejected – including those that remain unpublished.
    Nevertheless, there are at least three limitations of this simple benchmark. First, editors in
   1 There is some concern in the scientific community – e.g., Seglen (1997), Lariviere et al. (2016) – that impact

factors have become too influential in making comparisons across journals.




                                                        1
certain journals may favor certain fields (e.g., more theoretical versus more applied fields) or certain
groups of authors.2 We show how such preferences can be easily incorporated in the model, leading
to systematic differences between the way that referee recommendations and paper characteristics
affect the accept/reject decision versus expected citations. Second, citations can also be directly
impacted by the publication process. Although this will not necessarily have a differential impact
on papers from different fields or different authors, we provide evidence on this issue by comparing
citations for papers in the period before they are actually published, and by comparing citations
for different types of papers conditional on receiving a revise and resubmit verdict. Third, citations
may be systematically biased as a measure of quality by differences in citing practices across fields
or a tendency to cite well-established authors (Merton, 1968). Again, this possibility can be easily
incorporated in the model. Importantly, however, using only information on citations and editorial
decisions we cannot distinguish between editorial preferences for certain types of papers and differ-
ential biases in the gap between citations and quality. Thus, in the final section of the paper we
augment our sample of submissions with data from a survey of expert readers in which we quantify
the relative bias in citations versus quality for specific types of papers.
    We focus our main empirical analysis on the R&R decision for the roughly 55% of submissions
that are not initially desk rejected. These papers are typically reviewed by 2 to 4 referees who pro-
vide summary recommendations on a 7-point scale, ranging from “Definitely Reject” to “Accept”.
We show that referee recommendations are strong predictors of citations: on average a paper unani-
mously classified as “Revise and Resubmit” by the referees receives many times more citations than
one they unanimously agree is “Definitely Reject”. We also show that the fractions of referees who
rank a paper in each category provide a good summary of the information contained in the reports,
with little loss relative to more flexible alternatives.
    Nevertheless, the referee recommendations are not sufficient statistics for expected citations. In
particular, submissions from authors with more (recent) publications in a set of 35 major journals
receive substantially more citations, controlling for referee recommendations. For example, papers
by authors with 8 recent publications have on average 2-3 times more citations than papers with
similar referee rankings by authors with no recent publications. This suggests either that referees
are tougher on more prolific authors (i.e., a bias arising from referee preferences) or that submissions
from more prolific authors receive more citations conditional on their quality (i.e., a bias in citations
as a measure of quality).
    Looking at the R&R decision we find that editors are heavily influenced by the referees’ rec-
ommendations. Moreover, the relative weights that editor’s place on the fractions of referees in
different categories are nearly proportional to their coefficients in a regression model for citations,
as would be expected if editors are trying to maximize expected citations. We also find that editors
have some private information over and above the summary referee opinions that are predictive of
citations. Comparing papers that receive an R&R decision and those that do not, we estimate that
   2 Laband  and Piette (1994), Medoff (2003) and Brogaard, Engelberg and Parsons (2014) all find that submissions
to economics articles by authors who are professionally connected to the editor are more likely to be accepted, though
they also find that papers by connected authors receive more citations, suggesting that the higher acceptance rate
may be due to information rather than favoritism. Li (2017) similarly finds that members of NIH review committees
tend to favor proposals in their own field, but are better informed about these proposals. In contrast, Fisman et al.
(2016) find strong evidence of favoritism in elections to the Chinese Academies of Engineering and Science.


                                                          2
the editors’ private signals have a correlation of about 0.2 with ultimate citations.
    Among the papers that receive a positive R&R decision we can also compare citations for those
that were unanimously recommended by the referees and those where the referees were split. Cita-
tions for the “close calls” are lower than for the unanimously recommended papers, further stressing
the informativeness of the referee recommendations.
    Moving beyond the referee recommendations, the R&R decision is also affected by other observ-
able paper characteristics including field and author publication record, with a preference for papers
from more prolific authors, conditional on the referees’ evaluations. Since the referees under-value
papers from these authors relative to expected citations, however, editors still tend to accept fewer
papers from more prolific authors than would be predicted from a citation-maximizing perspective.
In fact, the editors at all four journals appear to undo only a small fraction of the bias against more
prolific authors exhibited by referees. This suggests either that editors agree with referees in their
preference for papers from less prolific authors, or they agree with referees that the papers by more
prolific authors get too many citations, conditional on their quality.
    Interestingly, this pattern of underweighting of paper characteristics relative to the citation-
maximizing benchmark is not unique to measures of the authors’ publications. The editors put
essentially no weight on the number of authors of a paper, despite the positive effect of a larger
author team on future citations. They also do not consistently put more weight on fields with higher
citations. Moreover, these patterns are not due to one or two journals: rather, they are shared by
all four journals in our sample. They are also evident in comparisons of citations for papers that
receive a positive R&R verdict. We show that under the citation maximization hypothesis, R&R’d
papers with the same probability of receiving a positive R&R verdict should have the same average
citations. Contrary to this prediction, however, papers by more prolific authors get many more
citations than those by less prolific authors but the same propensity for an R&R.
    Although our main focus is on the R&R decision, we also analyze the desk rejection decision.
Desk rejections have become increasingly common, accounting for over 50% of submissions in our
sample, and yet there is little evidence on how these decisions are made. We find that editors have
substantial private information about paper quality at the desk rejection stage. Conditional on
observable characteristics including field and author publication record, papers sent for refereeing
accumulate many more citations than the papers that are desk rejected. Even papers that end
up rejected after refereeing have 60 log points more citations on average than papers that are
desk rejected. Since both sets of papers are ultimately rejected, this comparison is not biased by
mechanical publication effects. Instead, it confirms that editors have substantial information at the
desk rejection stage. As at the R&R stage, however, we find that editors appear to discount the
expected citations that will accrue to papers by more prolific authors at the desk rejection stage.
Indeed, desk-rejected papers by prolific authors have higher average citations than non-desk-rejected
papers by authors with no previous publications.
    The finding that referees and editors act as if they discount the citations of papers by more prolific
authors is potentially surprising, since evidence from other fields suggests that more prominent
authors receive preferential treatment in the publication process (e.g., Okike et al., 2016), and social
scientists have long suspected that the work of more prominent scholars is viewed more positively


                                                    3
– the so-called ”Matthew Effect” coined by Merton (1968).3 In the case of economics, however,
Blank’s (1991) analysis of a randomized comparison of blind versus non-blind refereeing at the
American Economic Review showed that blind refereeing led to higher relative acceptance rates for
submissions from authors at top-5 schools – consistent with a bias against more prolific authors.4
In addition, Smart and Waldfogel (1996) find higher citations to published articles by authors from
top departments, controlling for the order of publication in the journal and page length, which they
interpreted as measures of editorial treatment.5 Similarly, Hofmeister and Krapf (2011) find higher
citations to articles from authors at top-10 institutions, conditional on the editor’s decision on which
B.E. journal the paper is published in.
    To disentangle whether the discounting of citations for the papers of more prolific authors arises
because reviewers and editors think these papers get too many citations or because they are exhibit-
ing affirmative action for less prolific scholars, we conducted a survey of faculty and PhD students
in economics, asking them to compare matched pairs of papers (published in the same year in one of
the top five journals) in their field of expertise. One paper in each pair was written by an author (or
set of authors) with relatively many publications in the years prior to an approximate submission
date, while the other paper had authors with few recent publications. We provide respondents with
the actual Google Scholar citations for each paper and ask them to assess the appropriate relative
number of citations based on their judgment of the quality of the papers. We then use the responses
to infer the degree of discounting of citations for papers by prominent authors, using a pre-registered
specification.
    Our survey respondents do not think that papers by more prolific authors get too many citations.
Indeed, their preferred relative citations for more prolific authors are only 2% below their actual
relative citations (standard error = 5%), suggesting that the relative citations for papers by more
and less prolific authors are proportional to their relative quality.
    Putting together the pieces we conclude that the editorial decision process at top economics
journals is close to one that maximizes the expected quality of accepted papers, as revealed by
ultimate citations, with the important exception that reviewers and editors impose a higher bar for
submissions from more prolific authors. This higher bar has a clear cost for the journals – a typical
published paper from an author with no previous publications receives many fewer citations than
one from authors with many recent publications. Nevertheless, the similarity of behavior across the
editors and reviewers at the four journals, and the consistency with earlier findings, including Blank’s
(1991) analysis of blind versus non-blind refereeing and Smart and Waldfogel’s (1996) comparisons
of citations for published articles, suggest that the norm of a higher bar for more prolific authors is
deeply ingrained in the field.
   3 Lee  et al. (2013) present a detailed review of notions of bias in the peer review process, but conclude that evidence
of bias in favor of more prominent or successful authors is actually rather limited.
    4 Blank (1991, Table 10) uses information from referees on whether they knew the names of authors even when

reviewing the paper under blind conditions, and constructs IV estimates of the effect of truly blind evaluation on the
probability of acceptance for different groups of authors. Her results show that the acceptance rate of papers from
authors at top 5 schools rises by 20 percentage points when the reviewers do not know the author’s name, though the
effect is imprecisely estimated.
    5 Medoff (2006) finds that papers by authors from Harvard and University of Chicago tend to receive additional

citations conditional on page length and lead article status, but that authors in other top departments do not.




                                                            4
2     Model
In this section we present a stylized model of the editorial decision process. Many journals, including
the four in our sample, use a multi-stage process in which the editor first decides whether to desk
reject the paper or not, then sends non-desk-rejected papers to referees. Based on the referee
reports and his or her own reading of the paper the editor then decides whether to invite the paper
for revision and resubmission. Thereafter, the authors and the editor (with or without feedback
from the referees) iterate to a final decision. We first present a model of the R&R stage, which we
view as the key step in the peer review process. We then discuss the earlier desk reject stage, which
shares many of the same features as the R&R stage, albeit with no input from the referees. For
simplicity we ignore the stages after a positive R&R verdict.


2.1     The revise and resubmit decision
The key attribute of a paper is its quality q, which is only partially observed by editors and referees.
At the R&R stage the editor observes a set of characteristics of the paper and the author(s), x1 , as
well as a set of referee recommendations xR .6 Quality is determined by a simple additive model:

                                         log q = β0 + β1 x1 + βR xR + φ                                            (1)

where for simplicity we treat the unobserved component of quality, φ, as normally distributed with
mean 0 and standard deviation σφ . Notice that we allow observable paper characteristics to help
forecast paper quality conditional on the referee assessments. In principle, if the referee recommen-
dations efficiently incorporate all the information contained in any observable paper features, as well
as any private information garnered by the referees from reading the paper, we would expect the
coefficients on x1 to be zero (i.e., β1 = 0). More generally, however, the referees’ recommendations
may be noisy or biased predictors of quality, in which case β1 may be different from 0.7
    The editor observes a signal s which is the sum of φ and a normally distributed noise term ζ
with standard deviation σζ :
                                               s = φ + ζ.

Conditional on s and x ≡ (x1 , xR ) the editor’s forecast of φ is:

                                                E[φ|s, x] = As ≡ v

where A = σφ2 /(σφ2 + σζ2 ) is the signal-to-total-variance ratio of the editor’s signal. This forecast is
an optimally shrunk version of the editor’s private signal, and is normally distributed with standard
   6 For simplicity in this paper we do not model the editor’s decision over how many referees to assign to a paper,

or the slippage between the number of referees assigned and the number who return reports. Bayar and Chemmaur
(2013) discuss the optimal composition of the referee pool assigned to a given paper focusing on the role of specialist
and generalist reviewers. We present some analysis below of the differences in the opinions of more and less prolific
referees on the work of more or less prolific authors, which was investigated in the seminal study by Zuckerman and
Merton (1971) of refereeing at the Physical Review, and is related to referee “matching” (Hamermesh, 1994).
   7 It is also plausible that the information contained in the recommendations varies across referees, or with the

characteristics of the paper, in which case the coefficients βR could vary with referee characteristics or with x1 . We
have investigated the variation in the reliability of different referees, and found that this is relatively small.


                                                          5
deviation σv = A1/2 σφ and correlation ρ = A1/2 with φ. The editor’s expectation of the paper’s
quality is therefore:
                             E[log q|s, x] = β0 + β1 x1 + βR xR + v.                        (2)

   With this forecast in hand, the editor then decides whether to give an R&R verdict or not. Here,
a natural benchmark is that the editor selects papers for which expected quality is above a threshold.
Assuming v has a constant variance, he or she should therefore give a positive decision (RR = 1) for
papers with E[log q|s, x] ≥ τ0 , where τ0 is a fixed threshold that depends on the target acceptance
rate of the journal.8 More generally, however, the editor may impose a threshold that varies with
the characteristics of the paper or the authors. To allow this possibility we assume:

                              R&R = 1 ⇐⇒ β0 + β1 x1 + βR xR + v ≥ τ0 + τ1 x1                                        (3)

where the benchmark case of τ1 = 0 corresponds to the situation where the editor cares only about
expected quality. Notice that this model is similar to a random preference model (McFadden, 1973)
in that the revise and resubmit decision is deterministic as far as the editor is concerned. From the
point of view of outside observers, however, randomness arises because of the realization of s. Under
our normality assumptions, the R&R decision conditional on x is described by a probit model:
                                                                                         
                                                      β0 − τ0 + (β1 − τ1 )x1 + βR xR
                           P [RR = 1|x]      =    Φ                                                                 (4)
                                                                    σv
                                             =    Φ [π0 + π1 x1 + πR xR ] ,
                                             =    Φ [πx]

where π0 = (β0 − τ0 )/σv , π1 = (β1 − τ1 )/σv , and πR = βR /σv .
  Next, we specify how citations (which are ultimately observable) relate to quality (which is not).
We assume that cumulative citations c at some future time are related to quality:

                                                          q = δc

where δ is a discount factor that varies by the elapsed time since submission, and can also potentially
vary by field and other characteristics of the paper.9 The simplest possible benchmark is that δ = δ0 :
in this case citations form a perfect index of quality (apart from a scale factor). A more general
model allows the discount rate to vary with paper characteristics:

                                                 δ = exp(η0 − η1 x1 )                                               (5)

For example, Merton (1968) argued that more prominent scholars tend to accumulate extra recogni-
    8 Assuming that the editors receive a large number of submissions and face a constraint on the total number of

papers published per year, they will maximize the average quality of accepted papers by accepting a paper if and only
if its expected quality exceeds some threshold. If log q is normally distributed with mean M and variance V then
expected quality is exp(M + V /2), which will exceed a given threshold T if and only if M ≥ τ0 = log T − V /2.
    9 As we discuss in Section 5.2, this can be easily generalized to q = δcθ , which allows a convex or concave mapping

between quality and citations. Allowing θ 6= 1 has no substantive effect on the implications of the model so for
simplicity we set θ = 1.



                                                            6
tion for their work, simply by virtue of their prominence. In this case, citations for papers submitted
by more prominent authors have to be discounted relative to those submitted by less prominent au-
thors (i.e., the coefficient in η1 corresponding to a prominent author will be positive). Combining
this discounting with the model for quality given by equation (2) leads to a model for citations:

                             log c = β0 − η0 + (β1 + η1 )x1 + βR xR + φ
                                    = λ0 + λ1 x1 + λR xR + φ
                                    = λx + φ,                                                         (6)

where λ0 = β0 − η0 , λ1 = β1 + η1 , and λR = βR . Clearly, when δ is constant across papers (and
thus η0 = η1 = 0) we can recover β1 and βR from a regression of citations on paper characteristics
and referee recommendations. More generally, however, the coefficient λ1 in equation (6) will reflect
both quality and any excess citation effect, so we cannot necessarily interpret differences in citations
for papers with different observed characteristics as measures of relative quality.
    In our empirical analysis we observe a set of characteristics of a given paper, the referee recom-
mendations, and both the R&R decision and accumulated citations. Using these data we estimate
equations (4) and (6) and identify the relative effects of x1 and xR on the probability of an R&R
verdict and on citations. As a benchmark, consider a citation maximizing choice model with the
two simplifying assumptions:

    (A1) the editor only cares about quality (τ1 = 0)

    (A2) citations are unbiased measures of quality (η1 = 0)

Notice that we are not assuming that the referee recommendations are unbiased predictors of a
paper’s ultimate citations. If, for example, referees tend to give worse recommendations to certain
types of authors, this will lead to a positive coefficient for the corresponding element of x1 in
equation (6). Assuming the editor is a citation maximizer, he or she will take this into account
in the decision rule and weight papers with this characteristic more positively, controlling for the
referees. Specifically, under assumptions A1 and A2 the editor will use weights in the R&R decision
rule that are strictly proportional to the weights that the referee reports and the paper characteristics
receive in the citation model, leading to the prediction:
    (P1) π1 = λ1 /σv , πR = λR /σv .
Figure 1a illustrates the testable implications of this prediction. If we graph the estimated coefficients
(b
 π1 , π
      bR ) from the R&R probit against the corresponding estimated coefficients (λ   b1 , λ
                                                                                          bR ) from an OLS
model for log citations, the points should lie on a positively sloped line that passes through the origin
with slope 1/σv . As we will show, these restrictions are not fully satisfied at any of the four journals
in our sample, leading us to consider the sources of the violations.
    Dropping either A1 or A2 allows for systematic departures between the way x1 and xR affect
the probability of an R&R verdict and the way they affect observed citations. Consider first the
effect of dropping A1 but maintaining A2, so editors maximize something other than quality but
citations are an unbiased measure of quality. In this case the combined set of referee recommendation
variables will still affect citations and the R&R decision proportionally, so when we plot the estimated

                                                    7
coefficients π
             bR against λbR they will continue to lie on a positively sloped line with slope 1/σv . Now,
however, the coefficients of the x1 variables may lie above or below this line, depending on whether
τ1 is positive or negative. For a paper characteristic that has a smaller positive effect on the R&R
decision than would be expected given its effect on citations (i.e., one for which the coefficient pair is
above the fitted line for the referee variables) we can infer that the editor is using a higher threshold
in evaluating papers with this characteristic. Alternatively, if we maintain A1 but drop A2 (i.e., the
editor maximizes quality but citations are a biased measure of quality), departures from the fitted
line associated with the referee variables are caused by paper characteristics that raise or lower
citations, holding constant quality. If some characteristic of a paper has a smaller positive effect on
the R&R decision than would be expected given its effect on citations, we infer that citations are
upward biased relative to quality for papers with this characteristic.
    In the most general case when editors have different thresholds for different papers (i.e., τ1 6= 0)
and citations are potentially biased measures of quality (i.e., η1 6= 0), we cannot tell whether
departures from the strict proportionality predictions P1 are attributable to editorial preferences or
a bias in the relation between quality and citations, or both. These alternatives can be distinguished
if we measure quality, which is the approach we adopt in our survey of expert readers described below.

Quantifying the editor’s private signal An important feature of this model is that we can
quantify the informativeness of the editor’s private signal s, regardless of whether assumptions A1
and A2 are true or not. Intuitively, if the editor has a strong signal of quality then papers that
receive an R&R verdict should receive more citations than papers that are rejected, controlling for
x1 and xR . Using standard formulas it is easy to show that

                                E [log c|x, RR] = λ0 + λ1 x1 + λR xR + ρσφ × r                                        (7)

where r is the generalized residual from the R&R probit model :

                                                (RR − Φ [πx]) φ [πx]
                                       r   =
                                                 Φ [πx] (1 − Φ [πx])
                                                (    φ[πx]
                                                     Φ[πx]     if RR = 1
                                           =           φ[πx]
                                                    − 1−Φ[πx]     if RR = 0

and φ(·) and Φ(·) are the standard normal density and distribution functions, respectively (e.g.,
Gourieroux et al., 1987). In the parlance of the program evaluation literature, equation (7) is a
two-sided selection model with no exclusion restrictions. Since the correlation of the error terms in
the R&R probit and citation model is ρ = A1/2 , when the editor has a relatively informative signal
the coefficient on the residual from the probit model will be larger and the gap in expected citations
between papers that are invited for revision and those that are rejected will be larger. From our
sample of reviewed submissions we can estimate equation (7) and obtain an estimate of ρσφ : given
an estimate of σφ from the residual variance of equation (6) we can then estimate ρ.10
  10 The estimates of λ and λ obtained from estimating (7) are numerically identical to the estimates from (6), since
                        1       R
the first order conditions for the probit coefficients imply that the generalized residuals are orthogonal to (x1 , xR ) –



                                                            8
    Figure 1b illustrates the implications of equation (7). We plot on the x-axis the probability of
an R&R decision, which depends on the index πx, and on the y-axis expected citations. Without
conditioning on R&R status the expected relationship between observable quality and citations is
upward sloping (assuming λx is positively correlated with πx, which is highly plausible). For papers
with RR = 1 the predicted relationship lies above the unconditional line but is flatter, with a larger
gap between the conditional and unconditional expected citations on the far left where a positive
R&R verdict signals that the editor’s signal is large and positive and therefore φ is likely to be
positive. For rejected papers the relationship is also flattened, but among these papers the gap is
largest on the far right, where a rejection decision signals that the editors signal is large and negative
and therefore φ is likely to be negative.

Comparisons of Papers with the Same Probability of R&R We have shown that when
the editor only cares about quality (i.e., τ1 = 0 in equation 3) and citations are an unbiased measure
of quality (i.e., η1 = 0 in equation 5) the coefficients of the R&R probit (other than the coefficient
of the constant) are strictly proportional to the corresponding coefficients of the citation model,
i.e., π1 = λ1 /σv and πR = λR /σv . This citation-maximizing case has the important implication
that among all papers receiving a favorable R&R decision, expected citations depend only on the
conditional probability of an R&R decision:

                                                 p(x) ≡ Φ [πx] .

To see why, consider the expected citations for papers with RR=1 based on equation (7):

                           E [log c|x, RR = 1] = λ0 + λ1 x1 + λR xR + ρσφ g(πx)

                 φ[πx]
where g(πx) = Φ[πx]    is the selectivity bias among R&R’d papers.11 Now consider any two R&R’d
papers with the same value for p(x). These papers must have the same value for the covariate index
π1 x1 +πR xR , and thus the same value for λ1 x1 +λR xR = σv (π1 x1 +πR xR ). Thus they have the same
expected citations. The assumption of citation maximizing behavior by editors therefore implies:

                                        E [log c|x, RR = 1] = G(p(x))                                          (8)

where G(z) = λ0 + σv Φ−1 [z] + ρσφ g(Φ−1 [z]) is a strictly increasing continuous function.
    Equation (8) leads to a simple, intuitive test for the citation maximizing hypothesis: we fit a
model for the probability of R&R, then classify papers into cells based on their propensity to receive
an R&R verdict, and compare average citations for papers with different values of an individual
covariate, such as a measure of the author’s previous publication record. Under citation maximiza-
tion, p(x) is a sufficient statistic for expected citations among all papers with R&R=1, and there
should be no difference in expected citations for papers in a given cell. If, on the other hand, editors
are using a different threshold for different authors (i.e., τ1 6= 0) or editors care about quality but
see Gourieroux et al. (1987).
  11 If the latent errors in the model are not normally distributed the functional form of the g() function will be

different but it will still only depend on the covariate index πx.


                                                        9
citations are a biased measure of quality (i.e., η1 6= 0) then we expect to see differences in expected
citations for papers with the same R&R propensity.


2.2      The Desk Reject Decision
Having analyzed the R&R decision, we now consider the earlier desk rejection decision. At this stage
the only observable information is x1 . We assume that conditional on x1 paper quality is

                                                 log q = ψ0 + ψ1 x1 + ω                                                     (9)

where ω is a normally distributed error component with mean 0 and standard deviation σω . At the
desk reject stage, based on an initial reading of the paper, the editor observes a signal

                                                           s0 = ω + ε

where ε is normally distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation σε . Conditional on this infor-
mation, the editor’s estimate of the expected quality of the paper is

                                       E[log q|x1 , s0 ]     = ψ0 + ψ1 x1 + A0 s0
                                                                  σω2
                                            where A0         =          .
                                                               σω + σε2
                                                                2


Define v0 = A0 s0 : this is a normally distributed random variable with mean 0 and standard deviation
        1/2
σv0 =A0 σω that is observed by the editor but is unknown to outside observers. We assume the
editor assigns a paper for review (i.e., does not desk reject the paper) if

                                   E[log q|x1 , s0 ] = ψ0 + ψ1 x1 + v0 ≥ γ0 + γ1 x1

which has the same form as the decision rule at the R&R stage.12 This rule leads to a simple probit
model for the probability of non-desk-rejection (N DR = 1), conditional on the characteristics x1 :

                                                               ψ0 − γ0 + (ψ1 − γ1 )x1
                                  P [N DR = 1|x1 ] = Φ[                               ].                                  (10)
                                                                        σ v0

    Combining equation (9) with our earlier assumptions on the discounting of citations as a measure
of quality leads to a model for observed citations conditional on x1 :

                                          log c = ψ0 − η0 + (ψ1 + η1 )x1 + ω                                              (11)
  12 An optimal desk reject rule compares the option value of refereeing a paper to the cost of refereeing. Assume as

in equation (3) that the R&R decision rule compares the conditional expectation of log quality, given x1 , xR and a
later signal s to some threshold τ (x1 ). Then the optimal rule for not desk rejecting (N DR) is
                              Z Z
                     N DR ⇔         max[0, E[q|x1 , s0 , xR , s] − τ (x1 )]f (xR , s|x1 , s0 )dxR dS − C > 0

where f (xR , s|x1 , s0 ) is the joint density of (xR , s) conditional on the information observed at the desk reject stage, and
C is the cost of refereeing. We assume this can be approximated by a cutoff rule of the form E[log q|x1 , s0 ] > γ0 +γ1 x1 .




                                                              10
which can be estimated by OLS. Under assumptions A1 and A2 above, γ1 = η1 = 0, and the coeffi-
cients of the observed characteristics x1 in the NDR probit model (10) will be strictly proportional
to the coefficients in (11). More generally, the NDR decision can reflect a combination of quality
and editorial preferences, and citations can reflect a combination of quality and discounting effects.
    As at the R&R stage, we can also ask how much information is obtained by the editor in the
initial reading that leads to the desk reject decision. Using standard formulas we obtain

                          E [log c|x1 , N DR] = ψ0 − η0 + (ψ1 + η1 )x1 + ρ0 σω × r0                             (12)

                                                                                                                1/2
where r0 is the generalized residual from the NDR probit model and ρ0 = correl[ω, v0 ] = A0 .
Similar to equation (7) at the R&R stage, we can estimate equation (12) and thus ρ0 .
   We can also compare the realized mean citations for different types of papers that receive a
positive NDR decision for an alternative test of the citation maximizing hypothesis. Using the same
arguments as in the derivation of equation (8), it follows that the expected number of citations for
NDR papers with a given probability of desk rejection will be the same, regardless of the values of the
individual covariates, when the editor seeks to maximize citations. Under the alternative hypothesis
that the editor is favoring certain types of papers, however, the average number of citations received
by non-desk-rejected papers that do or do not have this characteristic will differ.


3     Data
Data Assembly. We obtained permission from the four journals in our sample to assemble an
anonymized data set of submissions that for each paper combines information on the year of sub-
mission, approximate field (based on JEL codes at submission), the number of co-authors and their
recent publication records, the summary recommendations of each referee (if the paper was re-
viewed), citation information from Google Scholar and the Social Science Citation Index, and the
editor’s decisions regarding desk rejection and R&R status.
    Our data assembly process relies on the fact that all four journals use the Editorial Express (EE)
software system, which stores information about past submissions in a set of standardized files that
can be accessed by a user with managing editor permissions. We wrote a program that extracted
information from the EE files, queried the GS system, and merged publication histories for each
author from a data base of publications in major journals (described below). The program was
designed to run on a stand-alone computer under the supervision of an editorial assistant and create
an anonymized output file that is stripped of all identifying information, including paper titles,
author names, referee names, and exact submission dates. For additional protection the citation
counts and publication records of authors are also top-coded.13 We constructed our data bases for
the Review of Economics and Statistics (REStat) and the Quarterly Journal of Economics (QJE)
in April 2015, and the data base for the Review of Economic Studies (REStud) in September 2015.
The data base for the Journal of the European Economic Association (JEEA) was constructed over
  13 The top-code limit is lower for REStud than the other journals. We adjust for this using an imputation procedure

based on the mean of citations at the other journals for papers that are above the REStud topcode.



                                                         11
several months up to and including September 2015.
    Summary Statistics. We have information on all new submissions (i.e., excluding revisions)
to each of the four journals from their date of adoption of the EE system until the end of 2013,
allowing at least 18 months for the editor to reach an initial R&R decision. As shown in Table 1 we
have data beginning in 2005 for the QJE (N=10,824) and REStud (N=8,335), beginning in 2006 for
REStat (N=5,767), and beginning in 2003 for JEEA (N=4,942).
    Table 1 and Figure 2a present information on the editorial decisions for the papers in our sample.
Desk rejections are more common at the QJE and REStat (60% and 54% of initial submissions
respectively) than at REStud or JEEA (20% and 24%, respectively). The R&R rate is lowest at
the QJE (4%) and highest at REStat (12%). We do not keep track of the revision stages that occur
after an initial R&R decision though we do have information on final publication status for REStud
and JEEA. Among papers submitted up to 2011 the final publication rate for papers that received
a positive R&R verdict was approximately 90% at JEEA and 75% at REStud.
    Figure 2b and Columns 6-10 of Table 1 provide information on a key input to the editorial
process: the referee recommendations for papers that are not desk-rejected. The EE system allows
referees to enter one of 8 summary recommendations ranging from definitely reject to accept.14 The
modal recommendation is “reject” at all four journals; a majority of recommendations (ranging from
54% at REStat to 73% at QJE) are definitely reject or reject.15
    We use the JEL codes provided by the author(s) to determine whether the paper belongs to one
of 15 field categories listed in Table 1. To account for multiple field codes we set the indicator for
a field equal to 1/J where J is the total number of fields to which the paper is assigned. The most
common fields are labor, macro, and micro. The field distributions vary somewhat across journal,
with a higher share of theory submissions at REStud and a higher share of labor economics at QJE.
    An important variable is the publication record of the author(s) at the time of submission. To
code this variable, we extracted all articles published in 35 high-quality journals between 1991 and
2014. The set of journals (shown in Appendix Table 1) includes the leading general interest journals
as well as top field journals in a majority of fields. We construct the total number of papers published
by a given author in these journals in a 5-year window ending in each year from 1995 to 2013, as well
as the total number in the top 5 economics journals. We then assign these counts to each co-author
and take the highest publication record of all co-authors, setting the count to 0 if we can find no
previous publications. For example, a paper written by a team in which the most prolific coauthor
published 4 papers in the 35 journals in the 5 years up to and including the year of submission is
coded as having 4 papers. We also keep track of the number of coauthors, since this is a positive
predictor of citations among published papers (Card and DellaVigna, 2013).
    As shown in Table 1 and Figure 2c, 46% of submissions in our overall sample were submitted
by authors with no previous publications (or whose names could not be matched to our publication
database), while 17% were submitted by authors with 4 or more publications. Submissions at the
QJE tend to come from the most prolific authors, followed by REStud, then REStat and JEEA.
  14 The top two categories are conditionally accept and accept. Since these recommendations are rare, we pool both

under the accept category.
  15 Welch (2014, Table 3) shows the distributions of referee recommendations at 6 economics journals (including the

QJE and 5 others) and 2 finance journals. These distributions are quite similar to the ones in our data.



                                                        12
    A final key piece of information is the number of citations received by a paper. We recorded
citations as of April 2015 for QJE and REStat and as of August 2015 for REStud and JEEA. For our
main measure we use Google Scholar, which provides information regardless of whether a manuscript
is published or not. This is particularly important in our context because we are measuring citations
for some of the papers in our sample only 2-3 years after the paper was submitted, and we want
to minimize any mechanical bias arising because papers that are rejected take some time to be
published in other outlets, or may never be published. As a robustness check, we also use counts of
citations from the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI), which are reported in Google Scholar but
are only available for published papers (and only count citations in other published works).
    We merge citation counts to papers using the following procedure. First we extract a paper’s
title from EE and query GS using the allintitle function, which requires all words in the EE title
to be contained in the GS title. We capture the top 10 entries found under the allintitle search,
and verify that a given GS entry has at least one author surname in common with the names of
authors in EE. Then the GS and SSCI citation counts for all entries with a matching name are
summed to determine total citations. Papers with no match in Google Scholar are coded as having
zero citations. In Online Appendix Table 8, however, we show that our main results are robust to
an alternative choice in which papers with no match in GS are dropped from the analysis.
    Working with citations raises two issues. First, citation counts are highly skewed: about 30% of
submitted papers have no citations, with an even higher rate among recent submissions. Second,
citations to a given paper rise with the passage of time. We use two complementary approaches to
address these issues. For our main specifications we use the inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh) of the
citation count and include journal-year fixed effects. The asinh function closely parallels the natural
logarithm function when there are 2+ citations, but is well defined at 0.16 Appendix Figure 1a
shows the distribution of asinh(citations) in our sample, with a spike at 0 (corresponding to 30%
of papers with 0 cites) and another mode at around 3 (corresponding to around 10 cites). Under
this specification, we can interpret the coefficients of our models as proportional effects relative to
submissions from the same journal-year cohort (i.e., as measuring log point effects). As an alternative
we assign each paper its citation percentile within the pool of papers submitted to the same journal
in the same year. To eliminate heaping we randomly perturb the number of citations received by
each paper, smoothing out the 30% of papers with 0 citations (see Appendix Figure 1b).


4     Empirical Results
4.1    Models for Citations and The R&R Decision
Summarizing Referee Opinions

How informative are referee recommendations about future citations? We consider the 15,177 papers
that were not desk-rejected and were assigned to at least two referees. This choice reflects the fact
that in many cases assignment to a single referee is equivalent to desk rejection. In particular, papers
 16 Asinh(z)=ln(z
                        √
                    +       1 + z 2 ). For z≥ 2, asinh(z)≈ ln(z) + ln(2), but asinh(0)=0.




                                                              13
at REStud assigned to only one referee have a 99% rejection rate. We therefore exclude the 2,271
papers assigned to one referee, though the estimated coefficients in our main models are very similar
regardless of whether we include or exclude these papers at all journals or only at REStud.
    Figures 3a and 3b show how citations are related to referee recommendations. To construct
these figures we take each paper/referee combination as an observation and calculate mean citations
by the referee’s summary recommendation, weighting observations by the inverse of the number of
referee recommendations for the associated paper. Figure 3a uses asinh of the number of citations,
while Figure 3b uses the citation percentile within the same journal×year submission cohort.
    Both figures show a clear association between referee recommendations and citations, though the
effect is somewhat nonlinear, with a relatively large jump between Definitely Reject and Reject, and
a negligible change between Strong Revise and Resubmit and Accept. The slope of the relationship
is quite similar across journals, suggesting a similar informativeness of referees across journals. The
levels of the citation measures differ, however, with the highest citation levels at the QJE and the
lowest at JEEA. The differences in the citation percentile measures are driven by differences in the
degree of selectivity of the papers that are reviewed relative to the overall submission pool at each
journal. This selection process is strongest at the QJE, where only 40% of papers are reviewed and
the average citation citation percentile for all reviewed papers is 65, and weakest at JEEA, where
about 65% of papers are reviewed and the average citation percentile of these papers is 53.17
    Figures 3a and 3b relate mean citations to the opinions of individual referees. How do citations
vary with the collective opinions of the entire team of referees? Figure 3c presents a heat map of
mean citations for papers with 2 reports, showing the data for each of the 7Ö7=49 possible cells
for the two referee’s recommendations.18 The figure reveals that average citations depend on the
average opinions of the referees. For example, papers receiving two Reject recommendations have a
mean asinh(citations) of 2.5, while papers with two Strong R&R recommendations have a mean of
4.1. Papers with one Reject and one Strong R&R fall in the middle with a mean of 3.2. In Online
Appendix Figure 2c we present parallel evidence for papers with 3 reports, creating a heat map
using all possible pairs of recommendations. These data support the same conclusions.
    In light of this evidence, we summarize the referee recommendations using the fractions of rec-
ommendations for a given paper in each of the 7 categories. For example, if a paper with 3 reports
has two referees recommending Reject and one referee recommending Weak R&R then the fractions
are 2/3 for Reject, 1/3 for Weak R&R and 0 for all other categories. This simple procedure has the
benefit that can be used irrespective of the number of reports.
    Column 1 in Table 2 reports the estimates of an OLS regression model for asinh(citations)
that includes journal × year fixed effects and measures of the fractions of referee reports in each
category. As in the figures, the estimates suggest a strong positive effect of referee enthusiasm on
mean citations. The increases in the estimated coefficients between categories are substantially larger
than the slopes in Figure 3b, reflecting the fact that the model yields partial regression coefficients
  17 With  40% of papers reviewed, the expected citation percentile if the desk rejection process perfectly eliminated
the bottom tail is 80, while with a 65% review rate the expected citation percentile under perfect selection is 67.5.
Using these as benchmarks, the efficiency of the desk rejection is 65/80=0.81 at QJE and 53/67.5=0.79 at JEEA.
  18 The referees’ recommendations are modestly positively correlated, with rank order correlations of around 0.25

for 2-referee papers. Welch (2014) shows similar correlations for referee recommendations at a broader sample of
economics and finance journals.


                                                         14
whereas the figure is essentially showing univariate coefficients for each category of report.
    To document the validity of our averaging specification we return to the subsample of papers
with two reports, and display in Figure 3d the predicted citations from the model in column 1 of
Table 2 in each of the 49 cells. Comparing these predictions with the actual citations in Figure 3c
shows that the model does a very good job of summarizing the two recommendations. The model
also does well for papers with 3 reports, as shown by comparing Online Appendix Figures 2c and
2d. Moreover, as shown in Online Appendix Table 4 (columns 1-3) when we compare the coefficients
of the referee category variables for papers with 2, 3, and 4 referees, the coefficients are remarkable
similar.

Other Determinants of Citations

Next we consider other possible determinants of citations, including the recent publication record
of the authors, the number of authors and the field of the paper. Without controlling for referee
recommendations, these variables are strong predictors of citations (column 2 of Table 2). An
increase in the number of author publications from 0 to 4 or 5, for example, raises citations by
about 100 log points, a large (and highly statistically significant) effect. The effect of the number
of authors is not as large, though still sizable (and highly significant). Relative to a single-authored
paper (the base category) a paper with 3 co-authors has 24 log points more citations (roughly 27%
more). There are also systematic differences in citations for different fields (see Online Appendix
Table 2): papers in theory and econometrics have the lowest citations, while papers in international
and experimental economics have the highest citations. These differences are broadly consistent with
patterns in the existing literature based on published papers (e.g., Card and DellaVigna, 2013).
    To what extent do these effects persist after controlling for referee recommendations? As noted
in Section 2, if the referee reports are sufficient statistics for quality, and citations are unbiased
measures of quality, then the other covariates should have no effect on citations after controlling for
the referees’ recommendations. Within the framework of our model, variables that remain significant
predictors of citations indicate that the referees either believe that citations should be discounted
for certain groups to properly measure quality, or that certain types of papers should be more highly
rated holding constant their quality.
    Column 3 in Table 2 presents a full specification with both referee recommendations (xR in our
notation) and the other controls (x1 ). The referee variables remain highly significant predictors, with
coefficients attenuated by about 15 percent relative to the specification with no controls in column
1. Interestingly, the other controls also remain significant in the joint model. For example, papers
by authors with 4-5 recent publications have about 85 log points higher citations than those with
0 recent publications. Interpreted through the lens of our model, this implies that referees evaluate
papers as if they were substantially discounting the citations received by more prolific authors. There
is a similar effect for papers with more co-authors and papers in more-cited fields.




                                                  15
The Revise and Resubmit Decision

Having examined the predictors of citations, we turn to the predictors of the R&R decision. As
discussed in Section 2, under the joint assumptions that editors only care about the expected quality
of papers and that citations are an unbiased measure of quality, the coefficients in a probit model
for the R&R decision should be proportional to the coefficients in an OLS model for citations
that includes the same variables. Under more general assumptions, however, this proportionality
prediction will break down.
    We first present some graphical evidence. Figure 4a (which is constructed like Figure 3a using
paper×referee observations) shows that the probability of an R&R is strongly increasing in the
recommendation of any one referee. To examine how editors aggregate multiple recommendations,
we show a heat map in Figure 4b of the probability of an R&R verdict for all 49 possible combinations
of the referee recommendations when there are 2 referees. This probability is essentially zero with
two negative recommendation, rises to 25 percent with two Weak R&R recommendations, and to
80 percent or higher with two R&R recommendations.19 Similar patterns are present looking at all
possible pairs of recommendations for papers with three referees (Online Appendix Figure 3a).
    Columns 4-6 of Table 2 present the estimated coefficients for probit models that parallel the cita-
tion models in columns 1-3, using only the referee recommendations (column 4), only the other con-
trol variables (column 5), and finally both sets of variables (column 6). As might be expected given
the patterns in Figure 4a, the model with only the referee recommendations and journal×submission
year controls is remarkably successful, with a pseudo R2 of 0.48.20 The quality of fit is apparent
in the comparison between Figure 4c which graphs predicted probabilities for each of the possible
referee combinations for 2-referee papers, and Figure 4b, which shows the actual probabilities. The
relatively close fit of the model across the cells is also true when we look at pairs of reports for
papers with 3 referees (see Online Appendix Figures 3a-b).
    Column 5 presents a model with only the x1 (paper characteristic) variables. The R&R rate is
increasing with the number of previous publications of the author team, but does not appear to be
systematically affected by the number of coauthors, despite the effect of these variables on citations.
The same is true of the field variables. Specifically, a comparison of the field effects in the R&R
model and the citation model (reported in columns 1 and 3 of Online Appendix Table 2) shows little
relation between the relative citations received by papers in a field and the relative likelihood the
paper receives an R&R decision.
    Column 6 presents the full specification of (4) with both the referee variables and the other
covariates. The addition of the latter variables raises the pseudo-R2 of the probit very slightly
(from 0.48 to 0.49), with most of the extra explanatory power coming from the author publication
variables, which continue to exert a positive effect on the R&R rate, even controlling for the referee’s
recommendations. As in column 5, the number of authors has no systematic effect.
    Coefficient Plots. With these results in hand, we turn to an examination of the relative
  19 Welch (2014) compares referee recommendations and editorial decisions for an anonymous journal and shows that

editorial decisions are highly related to the referees’ opinions.
  20 The journal-year fixed effects contribute very little to the fit, with a pseudo-R2 of 0.03 when they are the only

controls.




                                                         16
magnitude of the coefficients of the various paper characteristics in the citation model and the
R&R decision model. Our focus is on evaluating predictions P1, which state that if the editor is
maximizing citations, the coefficients in these two models will be strictly proportional.
    Figures 5a-b plot the coefficients from the R&R probit model (Column 6 of Table 2) against
the corresponding coefficients from the citation model (column 3 of Table 2). For visual clarity,
Figure 5a displays only the coefficients on the referee recommendation variables and on the author
prominence variables, while Figure 5b shows all the coefficients. For interpretive purposes, the figures
also show the best-fitting lines through the origin for various subgroups of coefficients. Under the
null hypothesis of the model, these lines should all approximately have the same slope.
    The referee recommendation coefficients in Figure 5a are remarkably aligned: referee categories
that are associated with higher citations are also associated with a higher probability of an R&R
decision. For example, the large jump in citations in moving from Weak Revise and Resubmit to
Revise and Resubmit is mirrored by a large rise in the probability of R&R, while the negligible impact
of moving from Strong R&R to an Accept recommendation on citations is also reflected by negligible
effect on the probability of R&R. From this pattern one might conclude that the decision-making of
editors is closely aligned to the views of the referees, and both are focused on higher citations.
    When it comes to the other paper characteristics, however, the parallelism between citations and
the R&R decision breaks down. As shown in Figure 5a, for example, measures of author publications
exert a much smaller effect than would be expected given their impacts on citations. The red line
displays the degree of proportionality between the author publication variables in the R&R model
and the citation model. The slope is only about one fifth the slope of the black line which shows
the degree of proportionality between the referee recommendation coefficients in the models.
    This conclusion is confirmed by a close examination of the coefficients in columns 3 and 6 of
Table 2. The coefficients of the referee variables are about twice as big in the R&R model as they
are in the citation model, implying in the context of our model that the standard deviation of the
latent error in the editor’s decision model (σv ) is about 0.5 (since πR = βR /σv ). In contrast, the
coefficients of the author publication variables are only about 40% as large in the R&R model as
the citation model. The two ratios differ by a factor of about 5, as is visible in Figures 5a and 5b.
    Figure 5b also display the coefficients of two other groups of variables: those associated with the
number of authors and those associated with field. Both sets of variables have a significant effect
on citations, yet editors put essentially no weight on the number of authors, nor do the coefficients
on the field indicators appear to line up with their effects on citations (compare the coefficients in
columns 2 and 4 of Online Appendix Table 2). Evidently, editors are putting much higher relative
weight on the referee recommendations than on other variables that also predict citations.
    Do these patterns differ by journal? Figures 6a-d show that several key patterns are common
across all 4 journals. (The underlying coefficients are reported in Online Appendix Table 3). First,
within each group of variables, the coefficients line up nicely on a line. Second, the line for referee
recommendations is systematically steeper than for other variables, implying that editors give more
weight to the referee recommendations than to any of the other variables in forming their R&R
decisions. Third, at all journals the measures of author publications have a particularly large and
systematic impact on citations, but a much smaller relative impact on the R&R decision. This gap


                                                  17
is particularly notable at REStud and REStat, where the editors appear to assign no weight to
any variable other than the referee recommendations. At these journals, the R&R models seem to
suggest that the editors simply follow the referees, with no attempt to undo any biases that referees
exhibit in evaluating papers from different types of authors or from different fields.
    Other Citation Measures. A potential concern with the findings in Table 2 and Figures
5 and 6 is that the results are affected by our use of the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
in modeling citations. To address this concern in Table 3 we reestimate the citation model using
alternative transformations. Column 1 shows our base specification, reproduced from column 3 of
Table 2. Column 2 uses our percentile citation measure, which controls for differences in citations
across journal-year cohorts very flexibly by computing citation percentiles within cohorts. Column 3
uses a transformation motivated by the hypothesis that editors focus exclusively on the probability
that a paper becomes a “major hit” and is among the most highly cited papers in their submission
pool. Specifically, we define a paper to be top cited if it is in the top p percent of citations in a
journal-year cohort, where p is set to the R&R rate for that journal and year. We then estimate a
probit model to predict the probability of being top cited. We also consider a specification in column
4 using log(1 + citations) as an alternative to the asinh specification. Finally, in column 6 we re-
estimate our citation model using SSCI citations. Since SSCI citations only accrue to published
papers, we restrict the sample to submissions in the years from 2006 to 2010 to ensure enough time
for publication. To check the robustness of our main specification to the choice of sample, column 5
shows a model for asinh(GS citations) fit to the 2006-2010 sample, which looks very similar to the
baseline model in column 1.21
    The results are very consistent across the alternative citation measures, with coefficients that
are nearly proportional across specifications. For example, the coefficients in column 3 have a
correlation of 0.998 with the coefficients in column 1, implying that the same index of observed paper
characteristics predicts both mean asinh of citations and the probability of being in the upper tail
of citations. In all cases referee recommendations are strong predictors of the measure of citations,
with coefficients that are roughly proportional to the coefficients in the R&R probit, but of different
scales depending on the citation measure. All the models also indicate significant positive effects of
the author publication variables on the measure of citations, with a relative magnitude about 50%
as large as the effects of the referee variables. Since the author publication variables enter the R&R
probit model with coefficients only about 10% as large as the referee variables, we conclude that
editors under-weight author publications by a factor of about 5 in their R&R decision, regardless
of whether editors are maximizing expected asinh GS citations (column 1), the expected percentile
of GS citations (column 2), the probability of being in the top tail of GS citations (column 3), or
the expected asinh or percentile of SSCI citations (columns 6-7). The only notable difference across
specifications is that the number of authors has a small and insignificant effect on SSCI citations,
compared to a significant positive effect on GS citations.
    Additional Measures of Author Publications. In our baseline specification we measure
author productivity by the number of articles published in 35 high-impact journals over the 5-year
  21 As shown in Online Appendix Table 5, when we re-estimate our baseline R&R probit model using data from

2006-2010 the estimates are very similar to those from the whole sample period.



                                                    18
period prior to submission. To probe the robustness of our under-weighting conclusion we checked
three additional measures of productivity. The first is the count of publications in the previous 5
years in top-5 economics journals (REStud, QJE, the American Economic Review, Econometrica,
and the Journal of Political Economy, excluding the Papers and Proceedings of the AER). The
second is the count of publications in our 35-journal sample in the 6 to 10 years prior to submission.
The third is an indicator for the prominence of the authors’ home institutions, which may proxy for
the quality of their past work or their promise as scholars (in the case of young researchers).
    Table 4 presents citation models and R&R probit models in which we augment our baseline mod-
els from Table 2 (reproduced in columns 1 and 4) with these additional measures. The specifications
in columns 2 and 5 include indicators for the number of author publications in top 5 journals. Since
top-5 publications are relatively infrequent, we censor our measure at 4 publications in the past 5
years. As is evident from the estimates in column 2, measures of previous top-5 publications are
important predictors of citations: a paper from an author team with 2 recent top-5 publications is
associated with an extra 43 log points of citations, even conditional on all the other variables. They
also strongly affect the R&R decision. Nevertheless, their effect on the R&R decision relative to the
effect of the referee recommendation variables is much smaller than in the citation model, suggest-
ing a significant under-weighting of top-5 publications by editors relative to a citation-maximizing
benchmark (see Online Appendix Figure 4f).
    We also report the estimated effects of publications in the 35 high-impact journals in the period
6-10 years before submission. Although papers from authors with more publications in this earlier
time frame do not receive significantly more citations (controlling for their recent publications),
earlier publications do have a small positive effect on the R&R decision. Moreover, controlling for
earlier publications and recent top-5 publications, the effects of recent publications in the broader
35 journal sample are all small and insignificantly different from 0.
    Finally, in columns 3 and 6 we report the impacts of a measure of institutional prominence for
the author team at the time of submission, distinguishing between US institutions (coded into 3
groups), European institutions (coded into 2 groups) and institutions in the rest of the world (coded
into 2 groups). We use the rankings in Ellison (2013) to classify US institutions, while for non-US
institutions we use the 2014 QS World University Rankings for Economics.22 Since we only collected
institutional prominence variables for REStud and JEEA, the models in columns 3 and 6 are fit to
the subsample of submissions at these two journals.23
    The results in column 3 show that institutional prominence is an important predictor of citations,
even conditional on a broad set of measures of the authors’ publication record. For example, having
at least one coauthor at a top-10 US economics department at the time of submission increases
citations by 52 log points, while having a coauthor at an 11-20 ranked US institution increases
citations by 44 log points. Institutional affiliations also affect the R&R decision (column 6), but as
with other characteristics included in x1 their relative impact on the R&R decision is much smaller
  22 The institutional prominence dummies for each paper are defined within region, so that the dummies for each

region sum to at most one, and the sum of the institutional dummies ranges from 0 to 3. Similar to our measure
of author publications, we take the top-ranked U.S. institution among coauthors when defining the U.S. institution
dummies, and the top-ranked European institution when defining the European dummies.
  23 Estimates of the models in columns 2 and 5 for these two journals are very similar to the ones for the full sample.




                                                          19
than the relative impact of the referee variables (see Online Appendix Figure 4g).
    A particularly interesting set of findings concern the effects of institutional affiliation in Europe.
Conditional on the referee recommendations, having a co-author at a top-10 department in Europe
increases citations by 36 log points, a large and highly significant effect. Yet this affiliation has no
significant effect on the R&R decision. Since REStud and JEEA are based in Europe, and many
of the editors are drawn from top-10 European departments, this extreme downweighting cannot
be explained by a lack of information about the relative standing of different schools. It appears
that these two journals are “leaving citations on the table” by implicitly raising the threshold for
an R&R decision when the author is from a top European department.

Value Added of the Editor

Our simple model suggests that the difference in citations between papers that receive an R&R
decision and those that are rejected provides a measure of the editor’s “value added” or, more
formally, of the correlation between the editor’s private signal and unobserved paper quality. Figure
7a presents the empirical analogue of the simulation in Figure 1b. For each paper we predict the
probability of a revise-and-resubmit decision using the specification in Column 6 of Table 2. We then
sort papers into deciles by this predicted probability, splitting the top decile into two top groups,
and plot mean citations for papers with a positive and negative decision. We also show the number
of papers in each probability range with each decision.
    As shown along the x−axis of the Figure, for papers in the bottom 5 deciles of predicted citations
the probability of an R&R is near zero, reaching just 1% in the fifth decile. The probability is still
only 18% in the 8th decile, but increases sharply to 37% in the 9th decile and equals 90% for papers
in the top 5 percent of submissions. The vertical gap between the mean citations for R&R’s and
rejected papers is relatively large – on the order of 60-80 log points. A simple calibration based on
the vertical gap for papers with around a 50% probability of R&R implies that the correlation of
the editor’s signal with true quality is around 0.22.24 The vertical gap is also wider to the left, as
predicted by our model: the editor has to receive a very positive signal for papers with relatively low
observable quality in order to reach a positive R&R decision.25 Online Appendix Figure 7a displays
the same data as in Figure 7a along with the predicted fit from our model, showing that the model
does a relatively good job of capturing the patterns in Figure 7a.
    Another salient feature of Figure 7a is that even among papers that receive a positive R&R
recommendation, expected citations are increasing in the strength of the observable predictors. For
example, mean asinh(citations) for R&Rs in the top group in the figure (the top 5% of predicted
citations) is about 4.1, while the mean for those in the 7th group (the top 60-70% of predicted
citations) is about 3.6 – a gap of 50 log points. Thus, the close calls where the editor appears to have
made a positive decision despite only lukewarm enthusiasm from the referees (and no offsetting x01 s)
yield lower average citations than cases where the referees are very positive (and the editor agrees).
  24 As shown by equation (7), the gap in expected citations between R&R and rejected papers when the probability

of R&R equals 0.5 is φ(0)/ (Φ(0)(1 − Φ(0)) ρσφ ≈ 1.6ρσφ .
  25 The visual interpretation of Figure 7a is affected by the scaling of the x−axis, which has highly unequal differences

in the probability of R&R, unlike Figure 1b, which has evenly spaced probabilities.




                                                           20
This is consistent with the model and stresses the informativeness of referee recommendations.
    Publication Bias in Value Added? A concern with our measure of editors’ value added is
that some of the gap in citations between papers with RR=1 and those with RR=0 is mechanical.
Papers that receive an R&R are likely to be published relatively quickly, while those that are rejected
have to be submitted and evaluated at other outlets, and may never get published. To the extent
that published papers attract more attention and garner more citations than unpublished papers,
this will bias upward our estimate of the information content in the editor’s private signal. To
assess this issue we compare the value added plots for recent submissions (2012-13) versus older
submissions (2006-10). Given the lags in publication, submissions from 2012 and 2013 are unlikely
to have been published by mid-2015, when citations were measured).26 Thus, the mechanical bias
is unlikely to have emerged among these papers.
    Figure 7b shows that the difference between citations—our measure of value added—is indeed
smaller for more recent submissions. Even for these submissions, however, the difference in citations
between rejected papers and R&Rs is still 30 log points and statistically significant (Column 3 in
Online Appendix Table 6), with an implied correlation of 0.13 between the editor’s private signal and
the citations received by the paper. This suggests that there may indeed be some mechanical bias in
the correlation between R&R status and citations, though this explains only about half the average
correlation. In any case, this bias does not explain the under-weighting of paper characteristics –
including the author publication record – in the editor’s R&R decision, relative to the weights of
these characteristics in predicted citations.


4.2     Desk Rejections
While our main focus is the R&R decision, in this section we present a brief discussion of the desk
rejection decision, building on the framework suggested by our simple model. An empirical analysis
of this stage is useful given that more than half of the submissions to many journals are desk rejected,
and that the previous empirical literature has largely ignored desk rejections.27
    Using the full sample of 29,868 submitted papers, we compare predictors of citations with pre-
dictors of the decision to not desk reject (NDR) the paper. Author publications and the size of the
author team are important predictors of citations (column 1 of Online Appendix Table 7). As would
be expected if the NDR process selects papers based in part on the editor’s private information
about potential citations, the impacts of these variables are larger than when we estimate the same
specification using only the subset of papers assigned to referees. For example, the coefficients of the
publication measures in column 1 of Online Appendix Table 7 are approximately 1.3 times larger
than the coefficients in the model in column 2 of Table 2, while the coefficients of the team size vari-
ables are about 1.1 times larger. These two sets of variables, plus field dummies and journal×year
  26 In this time period, for example, the Journal of the European Economic Association had a publication queue of

about 1.5 years.
  27 On the theoretical side, Vranceanu et al. (2011) present a model in which papers with a poor match to the

editorial mission of the journal are desk-rejected, but quality per se is irrelevant. Bayar and Chemmanur (2013)
present a model in which the editor sees a signal of quality, desk rejects the lowest-signal papers, desk accepts the
highest-signal papers, and sends the intermediate cases to referees. Schulte and Felgenhauer (2015) present a model
in which an editor can acquire a signal before consulting the referees or not.




                                                         21
fixed effects have a combined R-squared of about 0.23 in predicting GS citations. Thus, there is
considerable information in observed paper characteristics that can be used to predict citations.
    A probit model for NDR, reported in column 2 of Online Appendix Table 7, show that editors
use the prior publication record of authors in making their initial NDR decision, but put little
systematic weight on the number of co-authors or the field of the papers. A plot of the coefficients
from the NDR probit against those of the citation model therefore shows systematic deviations from
null hypothesis of citation maximization (Online Appendix Figure 6), with editors downweighting
information in the number of coauthors and field relative to the information in prior publications.

Value Added of the Editor at the Desk Reject Stage

How much information does the editor have at the desk-rejection stage? This is a potentially
important question because the desk rejection process is sometimes characterized as arbitrary or
uninformed. Figure 8a plots mean citations for four groups of papers in various quantiles of the
predicted probability of NDR. We show mean asinh(citations) for papers that are desk rejected
(the red line at the bottom) and those that are not desk rejected (the blue line) as well as separate
lines for NDR paper that are ultimately rejected at the R&R stage (the green line) and those that
receive a positive R&R decision (the orange line at the top of the figure).
    The figure reveals large gaps in mean citations between desk-rejected and NDR papers, and
between papers that are not desk rejected and then receive a positive or negative R&R.28 On
average, NDR papers receive about 75 log points more citations than those that are desk rejected,
implying that the editor obtains substantial information from scrutinizing a paper before making
the desk reject decision. In the context of our model this gap implies that the correlation between
the editor’s initial signal s0 and future citations is about 0.32, and that s0 reveals about 10% of the
unexplained variance of citations given the observed characteristics at the desk reject stage.29
    The gap between NDR papers that are ultimately given an R&R and those that are rejected
is also large – around 125-175 log points. This gap reflects the discriminatory power of the entire
second stage of the review process, including the inputs of the referees and the editor’s private signal
at the R&R stage. For example, comparing papers that are reviewed by the referees and had an
80% probability of NDR based on x1 , those that are ultimately R&R have mean asinh(citations)
of 4.0 while those that are ultimately rejected have a mean of 2.25 - implying about 5.7 times more
citations for the R&R group.
    Finally, the gap in average citations between desk rejected papers and those that are NDR but
ultimately rejected is about 60 log points. This gap is interesting because both sets of papers are
rejected - thus, there is no mechanical publication effect biasing the comparison. This gap can be
decomposed as the sum of 75 log point gap in citations attributable to the NDR decision, minus a
15 log point gap attributable to the “bad news” of a rejection in the second stage. Viewed this way,
the editor’s signal at the desk reject stage is relatively informative.
  28 The gap between papers that are R&R’d and those that are rejected after review is larger than the corresponding

gap in Figure 7a (for the same set of papers) because of the different ways of grouping papers along the x-axis – by
probability of NDR in Figure 8a (based only on x1 ) and by probability of R&R in Figure 7a (based on x1 and xR ).
  29 Recall that according to our model the signal to total variance ratio is A = ρ2 , where ρ = 0.31 is the implied
                                                                               1   1          1
correlation of the editor’s signal and the citation residual.



                                                        22
    So far, we have seen that author publications are highly predictive of the desk rejection decision.
Since we do not have referee recommendations to benchmark the relative effect of the publication
record, however, it is not clear whether editors over-weight or under-weight authors’ publications in
reaching their decision. Building on the test proposed by equation (8), we evaluate the hypothesis
that desk rejection decisions are consistent with citation maximization by comparing citations for
NDR papers with similar probabilities of desk rejection from more and less prolific authors.
    We present this comparison in Figure 8b, focusing on authors (or author teams) with 4 or more
recent publications versus those with 0 or 1 publications. Mean citations are about 100 log points
higher for papers by more prolific authors, conditioning on NDR status and the quantile of the
predicted probability of NDR. Indeed in most quantile bins the mean citations of desk rejected
papers by more prolific authors have higher mean citations than the non-desk-rejected papers by
less prolific authors. This pattern parallels our results at the R&R stage, where editors significantly
under-weight the citations of more highly published authors, effectively imposing a higher bar (in
terms of expected citations) for these authors. At both stages there appears to be a higher bar for
authors with a stronger track record.


5    Interpretation and Survey
To summarize our findings so far: at all four journals in our sample, referees and editors appear to
impose a higher bar for papers by more prolific authors (or groups of authors). Figure 9a revisits the
evidence for referees. We display mean asinh(citations) for papers by more and less prolific authors
with a given referee recommendation (using the same classification of prolific as in Figure 8b). If the
referees were evaluating papers based on expected citations the two lines would be similar. Instead,
mean citations for prolific authors are 100 log points higher. In other words, referees evaluate papers
as if the citations received by more prolific authors should be discounted by roughly e1 .
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 quantify this discounting effect for the full set of publication dummies
in our models. We begin in column 1 with a model for asinh(citations), fit to the subsample of
papers that were assigned to at least two referees, that includes only the author publication variables
and journal×year dummies. Relative to the omitted group of authors with no recent publications,
papers from authors with 8+ publications have 139 log points higher citations. When we add in the
referee recommendations and controls for field and number of coauthors (column 2), this gap falls
by about 35 log points, but is still highly significant.
    In the R&R decision model in column 6 of Table 2 we saw that editors put positive weight
on author’s publications (given the referee opinions), effectively “undoing” some of the bias against
more prolific authors. How much does the R&R selection process reduce the effects of the publication
variables? The answer is shown by the models in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, which are fit to the
subsample of papers that receive a positive R&R decision. Editors undo only about 20 percent of the
implicit discounting imposed by referees, reducing the expected citation premium for papers from
authors with 8+ previous publications, for example, from 105 to 82 log points. Interestingly, the
estimated citation premiums for more prolific authors in the subsample of R&R papers are not very
sensitive to whether we include the referee recommendations (as in column 4) or not (in column 3).


                                                  23
     The estimated publication coefficients from the model in column 4 are very similar to the co-
efficients obtained when we implement the test described in Section 2.1, based on comparisons
of citations for papers with the same probability of obtaining an R&R verdict. Specifically, we
estimated a model for asinh(citations) with dummies for papers in each decile of the predicted
probability of an R&R verdict as well as an additional dummy for papers in top vingtile, and indica-
tors for authors’ previous publications. The estimated coefficient for 8 or more publications in this
specification is 0.87 – quite close to the corresponding coefficient the model in column 4. (The other
publication coefficients are also quite close). This confirms that we can clearly reject the hypothesis
of citation-maximizing decision-making by editors.
     To what extent does the citation advantage for papers from more prolific authors change when we
condition on final publication status? While we do not know the publication status for all the R&R’d
papers in our sample, we assume that the vast majority were ultimately published. We therefore
used EconLit to construct a sample of all papers published in the 4 journals in our sample between
2008 and 2015. Assuming an average 2 year delay between first submission and publication, these
papers should correspond to the R&R papers in our sample from 2006 to 2013 (minus the papers
that were rejected after an initial positive R&R verdict). We then constructed the x1 variables for
these published papers, coding author publications at an assumed submission date 2 years before
the publication date, and using the JEL codes in EconLit (which may differ from the codes at initial
submission used in our main analysis). The estimated model for GS citations for these papers, shown
in column 5 of Table 6, reveals a set of estimated publication coefficients that are slightly smaller
than the ones in column 3 for R&R papers, but still relatively large.30
     Finally, for completeness we constructed a third sample of papers published in the top 5 economics
journals between 1997 and 2010, coding the x1 variables for these papers by assuming a 2 year lag
between submission and publication, and using Google Scholar citations as of late 2016. Since
these papers have all been published for at least 6 years, any concerns about publication-status-
related biases are eliminated. Moreover, the model includes journal×year effects which control for
differences in citations accruing to papers in more or less prestigious journals. The citation model for
this sample (reported in column 6) yields estimated author publication effects that are attenuated by
about 20-30% relative to the effects in our R&R sample (column 3), but are still highly significant.


5.1     Interpretations
Our model suggests two main interpretations for the key finding in Tables 2-5 that referees and editors
significantly under-weight the expected citations that will be received by papers of more prolific
authors. The first is that citations are inflated measures of paper quality for prolific authors, leading
referees and editors to discount citations accordingly. There are several potential explanations for
why the number of citations to a given paper could be higher for more prolific authors, controlling
for quality. For one, there are often multiple papers, written around the same time, that contain
  30 We measure Google Scholar citations in late 2016 for these papers using the same search protocols as for our main

sample. We find 1,534 published papers in EconLit at the four journals, compared to 2,209 R&R recommendations.
We believe the relative size of the published sample is reasonable, given that given that not all of the R&R papers
are published and that the EconLit sample probably excludes most papers submitted to JEEA in 2003-05.




                                                         24
similar ideas. More prolific scholars may have broader networks of colleagues, students, etc., who
know their work and cite it rather than a similar paper by some less prolific scholar. A closely related
idea – Merton’s (1968) “Matthew effect” – is that people tend to cite the best known author when
there are several possible alternatives. A second possibility is that more prolific authors have access
to working paper series and other channels that publicize their work. This is particularly likely to
inflate their relative citations in the first few years after papers are written. To the extent that
current citations beget future citations, however, any such initial advantage can lead to a permanent
gap in citation rates for more and less prolific authors.
    An alternative interpretation is that citations may be an appropriate measure of quality, but
referees and editors impose a higher bar for more prolific authors. Such a process may be due to
a desire to keep the door open to less established scholars (i.e., affirmative action) or a desire to
explicitly prevent established authors from publishing marginally acceptable papers (i.e., animus).31
We note that there are at least two pieces of evidence in the existing literature that support this
interpretation. The most direct evidence is Blank’s (1991) analysis of blind versus non-blind refer-
eeing at the American Economic Review, which showed that blind refereeing increased the relative
acceptance rate of papers from authors at top-5 schools. A second finding, closely related to the
analysis in Table 9, is that published papers written by authors who were professionally connected
to the editor at the time of submission tend to have more rather than less citations (Laband and
Piette, 1994; Medoff, 2003; Brogaard, Engelberg and Parsons, 2014).
    Before we turn to some survey-based evidence designed to distinguish between these two inter-
pretations, however, we briefly discuss a third possibility that is sometimes raised in the editorial
context: elite favoritism.32 According to this hypothesis, more accomplished authors are favored in
the publication process by other prolific authors who review their work positively, and by editors
who are typically in the same professional networks. If one takes citations as unbiased measures of
quality, we clearly find substantial evidence against the elite favoritism hypothesis. It is possible,
however, that the citations received by more prolific authors are highly inflated, and that after ap-
propriate discounting (e.g., a discount of >100 log points) we would see that more prolific authors
actually face a lower bar in the editorial process.
    A plausible test of the elite favoritism hypothesis is to examine whether papers by prolific authors
are evaluated more positively by other prolific scholars. Though all the editors in our sample have
strong publication records, placing them squarely in the prolific category, the prior publication
records of the referees vary widely. It is therefore interesting to test whether the citation gap in
Figure 9a differs when the referee has a strong publication record (and is therefore a potential member
of the elite) or not.33 The comparison, shown in Figure 9b, gives no evidence of elite favoritism: the
gap in citations between papers of prominent and non-prominent authors is about the same whether
the recommendation comes from a prolific referee or a non-prolific referee. Interestingly, a similar
conclusion was reached in the seminal study by Zuckerman and Merton (1971), which showed similar
  31 A related possibility is that editors may believe that less prolific authors are more likely to deliver a responsive
revision if invited to provide one.
  32 This hypothesis is often raised informally by commentators who are skeptical of the integrity of the peer review

process. See Campanario (1998a, 1998b) and Lee et al. (2013) for some context.
  33 Berk, Harvey and Hirshleifer (2017) argue on the basis of interviews with former editors that relatively junior

scholars are often harsher in all their reviews.


                                                           25
assessments of papers by more and less prominent authors by more and less prominent referees.


5.2     Survey Evidence on Quality vs. Citations
Using information on citations and the R&R decision we cannot distinguish between the two main
explanations for the down-weighting of citations for papers written by more prolific authors. The
two alternatives can be distinguished by data that allow us to measure quality independently of
citations. In this section we present evidence from a survey designed with this purpose in mind.
    The survey aims to replicate the quality assessment of referees and editors, using pairs of pub-
lished papers. Specifically, the survey respondents compare two published papers that differ by the
publication record of the author(s) at the time of submission, but are otherwise matched in terms
of journal quality, publication year, and field. This contrast is designed to mirror the R&R decision
faced by a journal editor in selecting among the submissions. It also mirrors our empirical specifica-
tions which include fixed effects for broad fields of the paper, as well as for each year-journal cohort.
The comparison of papers within a field also makes the evaluation easier for the survey respondents,
and resembles the evaluation of referees who typically assess submissions in their field.
    To identify pairs of papers, we consider articles published from one of the traditional top-5
journals in economics between 1999 and 2012, excluding AER Papers and Proceedings articles,
notes, and comments. We code articles in the subfields of (i) unemployment; (ii) taxation; (iii)
crime; (iv) education; (v) family economics; and (vi) behavioral economics.34 We also code the
articles as (mainly) theoretical or empirical.
    Following the same procedure as in our main analysis sample, we measure the publications of
authors in the same set of 35 high-impact journals in the 5 years prior to submission. Given the
delays between submission and publication, we assume that papers were submitted 2 years prior to
the year of publication. We then take, as in our main analysis, the maximum across all coauthors.
We classify an author or author team as prolific if there is at least one coauthor with 4 or more
publications in the 5 years prior to the assumed submission date. Likewise, we classify the author
or team as non-prolific if all co-authors have no more than 1 publication in this period. Notice that
some of the authors coded as non-prolific at the assumed submission year may be coded as prolific
in later years. This is as intended and reflects the procedure we used in our main analysis and the
information available to the referees and editors at the time of submission.
    We then identify balanced pairs of papers – one written by a prolific author, one by a non-prolific
authors – published in one of the top-5 journals35 in the same year, in the same field, and with the
same theory or empirical component. To simplify our design we exclude papers by authors with
intermediate publication records. We exclude pairs that have too large a differential in citations
(a ratio of citations outside the interval from 0.2 to 5.0). We also exclude a small number of pairs
that included a paper written by one of us, or that we viewed as too far apart in content. The final
  34 The coding of the fields uses a combination of keywords. We search for the keywords in either the title of the

paper, or in the description for one of the JEL codes associated with the paper.
  35 In constructing potential pairs we focused on papers from the American Economics Review, the Quarterly Journal

of Economics, and the Journal of Political Economy, which tend to publish articles that are similar in the level of
mathematical formality. For behavioral economics, given the smaller sample of articles, we include one article from
Econometrica.



                                                        26
sample includes 60 pairs of papers, with 8 pairs on the topic of unemployment, 12 pairs on taxation,
6 pairs on crime, 12 pairs on education, 10 pairs on family economics, and 12 pairs on behavioral
economics. The number of distinct papers is 101, since some papers appear as part of two pairs.
    Survey Wording. The survey was administered on the Qualtrics platform, with all the ques-
tions displayed on one page (see Online Appendix Figure 8). The respondents were asked two main
questions about each pair of papers they are asked to consider. The first asks their “opinion in
comparing various features of the two papers,” focusing on four specific criteria: (i) Rigor (theoreti-
cal structure and/or research design); (ii) Importance of Contribution; (iii) Novelty; (iv) Exposition
(organization, clarity, detail, writing). For each criterion the respondent is asked to indicate whether
Paper A is better, Paper A is slightly better, the two papers are about the same, Paper B is slightly
better, or Paper B is better. We randomize the order in which the four criteria are asked, as well as
whether Paper A or Paper B is the paper written by a prolific author.
    Second, the survey informs the respondent of the Google Scholar citations as of August 2016
for the two papers and asks: In light of the        citations accrued by Paper A and your assessment
above, please indicate whether you think that the number of citations for Paper B is (i) about right,
(ii) too high, (iii) too low. We then elicit a quantitative measure of the appropriateness of citations:

     In light of the   citations accrued by Paper A and your assessment above, what do you
     think the appropriate number of citations for Paper B should be?

Let cA and cB denote the actual citations of papers A and B, and let ĉB denote the elicited appro-
priate number of citations for paper B. When paper B is the one written by a prolific author, the
ratio ĉB /cB represents the respondent’s desired discount factor for the citations of the more prolific
author. A value for this ratio that is less than 1 means that the respondent thinks the paper is
“over-cited” relative to paper A, whereas a value greater than 1 means that he or she believes paper
B is “under-cited”. In the alternative case when paper A is the one written by a more prolific author,
the desired discounting factor for citations to the paper by the more prolific author is cB /ĉB .
    The second half of the survey presents the same questions for a second pair of papers, and ends
with an opportunity for the respondents to provide feedback.
    Survey Respondents. The survey population includes faculty and PhD students who specialize
in the fields covered by the papers in the survey. The survey was administered at in late September
and October 2016. Our analysis follows a pre-registered analysis plan, AEARCTR-0001669.
    Out of 93 emails sent to 73 faculty and 20 PhD students, 74 surveys were completed, 55 by faculty
and 19 by PhD students, for an overall response rate of 80 percent. Each respondent compared 2
pairs of papers in their field, yielding 74 × 2 = 148 comparisons covering 58 distinct pairs.

Estimating the Mean Discount for Citations of More Prolific Authors

For paper pair j, let Rj represent the ratio of the number of citations for the paper written by the
prolific author to the number of citations for the paper written by the non-prolific author. Using
the respondent’s answer to the question about the appropriate number of citations to paper B, we




                                                  27
construct the respondent’s quality-adjusted citation ratio as:

                            R
                            bj    = b
                                    cB /cA if paper B is by the prolific author
                                  = cA /b
                                        cB if paper A is by the prolific author.

We interpret Rbj as the respondent’s assessment of the ratio of the quality of the paper by the prolific
author (qP ) to the the quality of the paper by the non-prolific author (qN ), i.e.,

                                                  R
                                                  bj = qP /qN .


Our model asserts that the relation between quality and citations is s q = cδ. Normalizing δ = 1 for
papers by non-prolific authors, it follows that

                                                    R
                                                    bj = δRj .                                                  (13)

Thus, we fit the simple regression model:

                                          log R
                                              bj = d0 + d1 log Rj + ε.                                          (14)

With a constant discount factor for citations to papers by more prolific authors, as specified by
equation (13), we should estimate d0 = log (δ) and d1 = 1.
    A slightly more general model of the relationship between citations and quality is q = cθ δ, which
allows a potentially concave or convex mapping from quality to citations (holding constant the
discount factor). It is straightforward to show that all the implications of the model developed in
Section 2 remain unchanged when θ 6= 1.36 In this case, however, equation (13) becomes:

                                                    bj = δRjθ
                                                    R

and the predicted value for the coefficient d1 in equation (14) is d1 = θ.
    Figure 10a illustrates two possible patterns of results using simulated data. We bin papers into
deciles by the citation variable (log Rj ) and plot the average of the y variable (log Rbj ) within each
bin. The dotted red line illustrates a case with, to a first approximation, no quality discounting: the
regression line runs through the origin. The continuous blue line shows simulated data, assuming
quality discounting for a value of δ = 0.75, implying an intercept for the regression of α = −0.28.
    Figure 10b shows a bin-scatter of our actual data. Following our pre-analysis plan we winsorize
the dependent variable at the 2nd and 98th percentiles. The average quality-adjusted citation ratios
are clearly correlated with the actual citation ratios, with a slope close to 0.7 and an estimated
intercept close to 0. Panel A of Table 6 provides a series of estimates of the model specified by
equation (14), with a simple OLS regression in Column 1 and a specification in Column 2 in which
  36 The only change is that the coefficients in the citation model, equation (6), take on the values λ = (β − η )/θ,
                                                                                                       0    0   0
λ1 = (β1 + η1 )/θ, and λR = βR /θ and the residual in the citation model becomes θ−1 φ. Under citation maximizing
behavior the coefficients of the R&R probit are still proportional to the coefficients in the citation model, but the
factor of proportionality is θ/σv .



                                                         28
we weight the responses for a given paper pair by the inverse of the number of respondents who
evaluated the pair, thus giving equal weight to pairs evaluated by different numbers of respondents.
In Column 3 we limit the sample to pairs with more comparable citations (−0.5 ≤ log Rj ≤ 0.5).
Under either specification, we obtain a precise estimate of no quality discounting: the intercept
dˆ0 = −.02 (s.e. 0.05) implies δ̂ = 0.98.
    In columns 4 and 5 we fit separate models for respondents who are either graduate students and
younger faculty with relatively few publications (column 4) or faculty who would be classified as
prolific (i.e., have published 4 or more papers in the past 5 years in one of the 35 journals in Online
Appendix Table 1). The results show that any discounting of the relative citations of more prolific
authors comes, if anything, from the prolific faculty. This provides no evidence of elite favoritism
and suggests that any discounting may stem in part from competitiveness among prolific authors.
    Qualitative Ratings. For paper pair j, the survey respondents also assess the relative strength
of the two papers on a five-point scale, which we re-scale from -2 to +2 so positive values correspond
to a higher rating for the paper by the prolific author. As shown in Figure 10c, there is at best a
weak relationship between the respondents’ assessments of the relative strengths of the papers and
their relative citations log Rj , with the the strongest relationship for relative importance (plotted
with red dots). None of the scatters suggest a negative intercept, as would be expected if citations
for more prolific authors are upward biased relative to quality.
    Panel B of Table 6 present a series of regression models in which we relate the relative strength
of the paper by the prolific author in a given pair to the relative citation measure and a constant.
Consistent with Figure 10c, only the model for “Importance” (column 2) has an R-squared coefficient
above 0.05. Again, the key coefficient for our purposes is the constant, which we interpret as the
discount factor applied to the relative citations of the paper by the prolific author in the particular
domain. None of the estimated constants are large or even marginally significant, confirming the
main result in Panel A. Overall, our survey results provide no evidence that papers by prolific authors
receive more citations than those by non-prolific authors, controlling for their relative quality.


6    Conclusion
Editors’ decisions over which papers to publish have major impacts on the direction of research in a
field and on the careers of researchers. Yet little is known about how editors combine the information
from peer reviews and their own prior information to decide which papers are published.
    In this paper, we aim to provide systematic evidence using data on all submissions over an 8-
year period for 4 high-impact journals in economics. We analyze recommendations by referees and
the decisions by editors, benchmarking them against a simple model in which editors maximize the
expected quality of the papers they publish, and citations are an ex-post measure of quality.
    We show that this simple model model is consistent with some of the key features of the editorial
decision process, including the systematic relationship between referee assessments, future citations,
and the probability of an R&R decision, and the fact that R&R papers receive higher citations that
those that are rejected, conditional on the referees’ recommendations.
    Nevertheless, there are important deviations from the citation-maximizing benchmark. On the


                                                  29
referee side, certain paper characteristics are strongly correlated with future citations, controlling for
the referee assessments of a paper. This suggests that referees impose higher standards on certain
types of papers, or that that they are effectively discounting the future citations that will be received
by these papers. At best the editors only partially offset these tendencies – indeed at two of the four
journals in our sample it appears that the editors essentially follow the referees.
    We focus our attention on one of the most important determinants of citations - the publication
record of the authors at the time of submission. Referees appear to substantially discount the future
citations that will be received by more prolific authors and the editors offset the referees only slightly.
Thus, among the papers that receive a revise-and-resubmit decision, those written by more prolific
authors receive many times more citations, on average, than those written by less prolific authors,
controlling for the referee assessment.
    We consider two main interpretations. Citations may be an inflated measure of paper quality for
prolific authors, leading referees and editors to discount citations accordingly. Alternatively, citations
may be an appropriate measure of quality, but referees and editors may be using affirmative action
to support less prolific authors. While our main analysis cannot separate the two interpretations,
we present evidence from a survey of economists asked to evaluate the quality of pairs of papers.
The survey results are most consistent with the affirmative action interpretation.
    We view this just as a step in the direction of understanding the functioning of scientific journals,
with many questions remaining. For example, are there similar patterns of citation discounting in
other disciplines? Okike, Hug, and Kocher (2016) provide some evidence from a medical journal of
favoritism towards prolific authors, a finding different from ours. Also, can a simple model explain
the decision of editors to wait for another report or decide with what is at hand? We hope that
future research will get at these and other questions.




                                                    30
References
Bayar, Onur and Thomas J. Chemmanur. 2013. “A Model of the Editorial Process in Scientific
  Journals.” Working Paper.

Berk, Jonathan B., Campbell R. Harvey and David Hirshleifer. 2017. “How to Write an Effective
  Referee Report and Improve the Scientific Review Process.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  31(1): 231-244.

Blank, Rebecca M. 1991. “The Effects of Double-Blind versus Single-Blind Reviewing: Experimental
  Evidence from The American Economic Review.” American Economic Review, 81(5): 1041-1067.

Brogaard, Jonathan, Joseph Engelberg and Christopher Parsons. 2014. “Networks and Productivity:
  Causal Evidence from Editor Rotations.” Journal of Financial Economics, 111(1): 251-270.

Campanario, Juan Miguel. 1998a. “Peer Review for Journals as It Stands Today – Part 1.” Science
  Communications, 19(3): 181-211.

Campanario, Juan Miguel. 1998b. “Peer Review for Journals as It Stands Today – Part 2.” Science
  Communications, 19(4): 277-306.

Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. 2013. “Nine Facts about Top Journals in Economics.” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 51(1): 144-161.

Cherkashin, Ivan, Svetlana Demidova, Susumu Imai and Kala Krishna. 2009. “The inside scoop:
  Acceptance and rejection at the journal of international economics.” Journal of International
  Economics, 77(1): 120-132.

Chetty, Raj, Emmanuel Saez, and Laszlo Sandor. 2014. “What Policies Motivate Pro-Social Behav-
  ior? An Experiment with Referees at the Journal of Public Economics.” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28(3), 169-188.

Ellison, Glenn. 2002. “The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process.” Journal of Political
  Economy, 110(5): 947-993.

Ellison, Glenn. 2002b. “Evolving Standards for Academic Publishing: A q-r Theory.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 110(5): 994-1034.

Ellison, Glenn. 2012. “Assessing Computer Scientists Using Citation Data.” Working Paper.

Ellison, Glenn. 2013. “How Does the Market Use Citation Data? The Hirsch Index in Economics.”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 63-90.

Fisman, Raymond, Jing Shi, Yongxiang Wang, and Rong Xu. Forthcoming. “Social Ties and Fa-
  voritism in Chinese Science”, Journal of Political Economy.

Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, Eric Renault and Alain Trognon. 1987. “Generalised Resid-
 uals.” Journal of Econometrics, 34(1-2): 5-32.


                                              31
Griffith, Rachel, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aviv Nevo. 2009. “Review of the Review: A Compar-
  ison of the Review of Economic Studies with its Peers.” Unpublished Working Paper.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1994. “Facts and Myths about Refereeing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 8(1): 153-163.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., George E. Johnson and Burton A. Weisbrod. 1982. “Scholarship Citations
  and Salaries: Economic Rewards in Economics.” Southern Economic Journal, 49(2): 472-481.

Hilmer, Michael J., Michael R. Ransom, and Christiana E. Hilmer. 2015. “Fame and the fortune
  of academic economists: How the market rewards influential research in economics.” Southern
  Economic Journal, 82(2): 430-452.

Hofmeister, Robert and Matthias Krapf. 2011. “How Do Editors Select Papers, and How Good are
  They at Doing It?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(1): article 64.

Laband, David N. and Michael J. Piette. 1994. “Favoritism versus Search for Good Papers: Empirical
  Evidence Regarding the Behavior of Journal Editors.” Journal of Political Economy, 102(1): 194-
  203.

Larivière, Vincent, Véronique Kiermer, Catriona J. MacCallum, Marcia McNutt, Mark Patterson,
  Bernd Pulverer, Sowmya Swaminathan, Stuart Taylor, Stephen Curry. 2016. “A simple proposal
  for the publications of journal citation distributions.” bioRxiv preprint.

Lee, Carole J., Cassidy R. Sugimoto, Guo Zhang and Blaise Cronin. 2013. “Bias in Peer Review.”
  Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64(1): 2-17.

Li, Danielle. Forthcoming. “Expertise vs. Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

McFadden, Daniel. 1973. “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior”. In Frontiers
 in Econometrics, edited by Paul Zarembka, 105-142. New York: Academic Press.

Medoff, Marshall H. 2003. “Editorial Favoritism in Economics?” Southern Economic Journal, 70(2):
 425-434.

Medoff, Marshall H. 2006. “Evidence of a Harvard and Chicago Matthew Effect.” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Methodology, 13(4): 485-506.

Merton, Robert K. 1968. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science, 159(3810): 56-63.

Okike, Kanu, Kevin T. Hug, Mininder S. Kocher and Seth S. Leopold. 2016. “Single-blind vs Double-
 blind Peer Review in the Setting of Author Prestige.” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
 Association, 316(12): 1315-1316.

Schulte, Elisabeth and Mike Felgenhauer. 2015. “Preselection and Expert Advice.” Macie Paper
  Series Working Paper.



                                               32
Seglen, Per O. 1997. “Why the impact factor of journals should not be used for evaluating research.”
  BMJ: British Medical Journal, 314(7079): 498-502.

Vranceanu, Radu, Damien Besancenot and Kim Huynh. 2011. “Desk rejection in an academic pub-
  lication market model with matching frictions.” ESSEC Working Paper.

Welch, Ivo. 2014. “Referee recommendations.” Review of Financial Studies, 27(9): 2773-2804.

Zuckerman, Harriet and Robert K. Merton. 1971. “Patterns of Evaluation in Science: Institutional-
  isation, Structure and Functions of the Referee System.” Minerva, 9(1): 66-100.




                                                33
  Figure 1a. Model Prediction I: Predictors of Citation versus Predictors of Editor Decision




                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                         β5   ●
                                                                                                                  β6
Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                       ●
                                                                                           β4



                                                                       ●
                                                                           β3
                                                    ●
                                                        β2



                                                                                                β8
                                     ●
                                         β1                                     β7




                                              OLS Coefficients on Citation Variable

                             Figure 1b. Model Prediction II: Value Added of the Editor




     Notes: Figure 1a plots, for simulated values, the coefficients for a citation regression (x axis) and an R&R probit (y axis). If the
     coefficients all line up on one line, the evidence is consistent with editors maximizing citations; if the coefficients are on multiple lines,
     the evidence implies a deviation from this model. Figure 1b reports simulated data from the model for papers that (hypothetically)
     receive and R&R versus those which do not, for a given value of the probability of R&R. The vertical distance between the red and blue
     line provides a measure of the editor private information about the paper quality.


                                                                    34
                                                                                  Figure 2. Summary Statistics
        Figure 2a. Distribution of Editorial Decisions                                                       Figure 2b. Distribution of Referee Recommendations
  0.7




                                                                         QJE                                                                                                                         QJE
                                                                         REStud                                                                                                                      REStud




                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                         REStat                                                                                                                      REStat
  0.6




                                                                         JEEA                                                                                                                        JEEA




                                                                                                                   0.4
  0.5
  0.4




                                                                                                                   0.3
  0.3




                                                                                                                   0.2
  0.2




                                                                                                                   0.1
  0.1




                                                                                                                   0.0
  0.0




             Desk Reject               Reject                   R&R                                                            Def. Reject   Reject        No Rec.   Weak R&R   R&R   Strong R&R   Accept



                                                                                  Figure 2c. Distribution of Author Prominence

                                                                                                                                                      QJE
                                                                                                                                                      REStud
                                                                                                                                                      REStat
                                                                   0.4




                                                                                                                                                      JEEA
                                                                   0.3
                                                                   0.2
                                                                   0.1
                                                                   0.0




                                                                              0        1          2         3            4−5           6−7            8+




Notes: Figure 2 displays a few key summary statistics by journal. Figure 2a plots the distribution of the editor’s decision and Figure 2b shows the distribution of referee recommendations. Figure 2c
plots the distribution of author publications in 35 high-impact journals in the 5 years leading up to submission, for the papers in our dataset. The unit of observation is a paper, and for papers with
multiple coauthors, we take the maximum publications among coauthors.


                                                                                                      35
                                            Figure 3. Referee Recommendations and Citations
                                              Figure 3a. Impact on Asinh of Citations

                   4.5

                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                ●


                   4.0
                                                                                  ●


                                                          ●
                                                                       ●

                   3.5
Asinh(Citations)




                                            ●
                   3.0



                   2.5            ●




                                                                                            ●       QJE
                                                                                                    REStud
                   2.0                                                                              REStat
                                                                                                    JEEA


                   1.5
                              DefReject   Reject       NoRec      WeakRR         RR        StrongRR          Accept
                                                              Referee Reports

                                                Figure 3b. Impact on Citation Percentile


                         80
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                               ●

                                                                                  ●



                                                                       ●

                         70                               ●
   Citation Percentile




                                            ●



                         60

                                  ●




                         50                                                                 ●       QJE
                                                                                                    REStud
                                                                                                    REStat
                                                                                                    JEEA


                         40
                              DefReject   Reject       NoRec      WeakRR         RR        StrongRR          Accept
                                                              Referee Reports



                                                                  36
                   Figure 3c. Citation and Combination of Reports, Papers with 2 Reports, Data



                                 2.9               3.3         4.3       3.6          4.1         4.5          4.5      Accept




                                 2.9               3.2           4       3.7           4          4.1          4.5      StrongRR




                                 2.6               2.9         3.8       3.4          3.8            4         4.1      RR




                                 2.7               2.8         2.9       3.1          3.4         3.7          3.6      WeakRR




                                 2.4               2.6         2.8       2.9          3.8            4         4.3      NoRec




                                    2              2.5         2.6       2.8          2.9         3.2          3.3      Reject




                                 1.4                 2         2.4       2.7          2.6         2.9          2.9      DefReject
                                DefReject




                                                  Reject




                                                                                                              Accept
                                                                                      RR
                                                               NoRec




                                                                        WeakRR




                                                                                                StrongRR
          Figure 3d. Citation and Combination of Reports, Papers with 2 Reports, Model Prediction



                                       2.9            3.5        3.8     3.9          4.2      4.3          4.5        Accept




                                       3.1            3.5        3.8     3.8           4       4.2          4.3        StrongRR




                                       2.7            3.2        3.6     3.6          3.9         4         4.2        RR




                                       2.4            2.9        3.1     3.4          3.6      3.8          3.9        WeakRR




                                       2.3            2.8        3.1     3.1          3.6      3.8          3.8        NoRec




                                            2         2.5        2.8     2.9          3.2      3.5          3.5        Reject




                                       1.5                 2     2.3     2.4          2.7      3.1          2.9        DefReject
                                      DefReject




                                                     Reject




                                                                        WeakRR




                                                                                      RR




                                                                                              StrongRR




                                                                                                           Accept
                                                                NoRec




Notes: Figures 3a and 3b show the weighted average citation measure for a paper receiving a given recommendation. The unit of observation is
a referee report, and observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that each paper receives equal weight.
Standard errors are clustered at the paper level. Figure 3a uses citation percentile as the citation measure, whereas figure 3b uses the Asinh of
citations. The higher level of the line for QJE in figure 3a reflects in part the higher desk-rejection rate at the QJE, while in figure 3b it also shows
that reviewed papers at the QJE tend to receive higher citations. Figures 3c and 3d display evidence at the paper level, focusing on papers with
exactly 2 referee reports. Figure 3c shows a heat map of actual citations for all combinations of 2 reports whereas figure 3d does the same using
predicted citations from a regression using only fraction of referee recommendations and year-journal fixed effects. Darker colors in the heat
map correspond to higher values of citation.


                                                                                 37
          Figure 4. Referee Recommendations and the Probability of Revise and Resubmit
                         Figure 4a. Referee Report and R&R Rate, By Journal




          0.6



                                                                                                                              ●
Pr(R&R)




                                                                                                            ●
          0.4
                                                                                        ●




                                                       ●
          0.2
                                                                           ●
                                                                                                   ●            QJE
                                                                                                                REStud
                                                                                                                REStat
                                                                                                                JEEA
                                         ●
                    ●
          0.0
                DefReject       Reject               NoRec            WeakRR           RR         StrongRR                 Accept
                                                           Referee Reports


          Figure 4b. Combinations of Referee Recommendations and R&R, 2-Report Papers



                   0.136        0.32         0.684           0.646             0.87    0.944           1          Accept




                   0.167        0.357        0.829           0.796             0.909   0.92       0.944           StrongRR




                   0.065        0.156        0.434           0.669             0.793   0.909       0.87           RR




                   0.052        0.052        0.22            0.242             0.669   0.796      0.646           WeakRR




                   0.02         0.03         0.157           0.22              0.434   0.829      0.684           NoRec




                   0.003        0.003        0.03            0.052             0.156   0.357       0.32           Reject




                         0      0.003        0.02            0.052             0.065   0.167      0.136           DefReject
                    DefReject




                                Reject




                                                                                                   Accept
                                                             WeakRR
                                             NoRec




                                                                               RR




                                                                                       StrongRR




                                                                      38
         Figure 4c. Combinations of Referee Recommendations and R&R, 2-Report Papers, Model



                         0.195         0.327        0.663        0.757          0.923       0.966        0.963      Accept




                         0.226         0.375        0.737        0.788          0.937       0.975        0.966      StrongRR




                         0.108         0.211        0.557        0.633          0.863       0.937        0.923      RR




                         0.024         0.06         0.253        0.324          0.633       0.788        0.757      WeakRR




                         0.014         0.039        0.188        0.253          0.557       0.737        0.663      NoRec




                         0.001         0.004        0.039         0.06          0.211       0.375        0.327      Reject




                               0       0.001        0.014        0.024          0.108       0.226        0.195      DefReject
                          DefReject




                                       Reject




                                                                  WeakRR




                                                                                RR




                                                                                             StrongRR




                                                                                                          Accept
                                                     NoRec




Notes: Figure 4 displays visual evidence of the correlation between referee reports and the editor’s review-and-resubmit (R&R) decision. Figure
4a shows the weighted R&R rate for a paper receiving a given recommendation. The unit of observation is a referee report, so for example the
value of the Accept category should be interpreted as the R&R rate for papers with (at least 1) referee recommending Accept, taking into account
that the other referee(s) recommendations likely differ. Observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that
each paper receives equal weight, and standard errors are clustered at the paper level. Figures 4b and 4c display evidence at the paper level,
focusing on papers with exactly 2 referee reports. Figure 4b shows a heat map of actual R&R rates for all combinations of 2 reports whereas figure
4c does the same using predicted R&R probabilities from a probit regression using only fraction of referee recommendations and year-journal
fixed effects. Darker colors in the heat map correspond to probabilities of R&R.




                                                                           39
           Figure 5. The Relative Effect of Referee Recommendations and Paper Characteristics on
                             Citations and the Probability of Revise and Resubmit
                Figure 5a. Coefficients for Referee Recommendations and Author Publications


                                                                                  Referee Reports
                                                                              ●
                                                                                  Author Publications


                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                   frStrongRR
                                                                                                                                                                    frAccept
                                        Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                                        frRR


                                                                      3                                                                             frWeakRR
                                                                                                                                              frNoRec


                                                                                                                             frReject
                                                                                                                            pub3   pub8
                                                                                                                                  pub67
                                                                                                                                pub45 ●
                                                                                                                                          ●


                                                                                                                          pub2
                                                                                                                             ●    ●


                                                                                                                       pub1
                                                                                                                         ●

                                                                      0                                            ●




                                                                     −3
                                                                                       −1                  0                          1                 2                 3
                                                                                                        OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)
  Figure 5b. Coefficients for Referee Recommendations, Author Publications, Number of Authors and
                                               Fields

                                                                              Referee Reports
                                                                          ●
                                                                              Author Publications
                                                                              No. of Authors
                                                                              Field Fractions

                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                    frStrongRR
                                                                                                                                                                     frAccept
                Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                                            frRR


                                                      3                                                                                             frWeakRR
                                                                                                                                              frNoRec


                                                                                                                  frReject
                                                                                              histdev            pub3   pub8
                                                                                                                       pub67
                                                                                                                     pub45
                                                                                                                                          ●


                                                                                              fin
                                                                                                                                      ●


                                                                                          micro                pub2
                                                                                                                                  ●


                                                                                       theory io              auth4
                                                                                                                             ●

                                                      0                                        pub
                                                                                                macro
                                                                                               other       pub1
                                                                                                  labor auth2
                                                                                                           auth3
                                                                                                 healthurblaw
                                                                                                 missingfield
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                         ●



                                                                                             metrics
                                                                                            lab




                                             −3
                                                                                     −1                   0                           1                     2                 3
                                                                                                        OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)

Notes: Figure 5 plots the coefficients from the main specifications of the citation and R&R regressions (Columns 3 and 6 in Table 2). Best fit lines
through each group of coefficients are also shown (weighted by the inverse variance of the probit coefficient from the R&R regression). Figure 5a
shows that while both referee reports and author publications are both predictive of ex-post citations, the editors’ R&R decision is influenced
much more by referee reports than by author publications, relative to the extent to which these variables predict citations (as evidenced by the
steeper slope of the line for referee reports). Figure 5b shows the coefficients for number of authors and fields in addition.


                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                        Figure 6. The Relative Effect of Referee Recommendations and Paper Characteristics on
                                                                                   Citations and the Probability of Revise and Resubmit – By Journal
                                                                             QJE                                                                     REStud

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Referee Reports
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Author Publications
                                                 Referee Reports                                                                                                                                         No. of Authors
                                             ●
                                                 Author Publications                                                                                                                                     Field Fractions
                                                 No. of Authors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         frStrongRR
                                                 Field Fractions                                                                                                                             6

                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    frAccept
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 frRR




                                                                                                                                                               Probit Coefficients on R&R
                                                                                                                                          frAccept
           Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                             frStrongRR
                                                                                                                                   frRR                                                                                                                                                  frWeakRR
                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                      frNoRec                                                                                                                                                  frNoRec
                                         3
                                                                                                                           frWeakRR


                                                   hist metrics                frReject                                                                                                                                                         frReject
                                                                   dev
                                                              missingfield           pub8
                                                                                      pub67
                                                                                   pub45
                                                                                                              ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     micro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fin dev healthurblaw           pub8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pub67
                                                   theory micro
                                                           io     fin
                                                               macro        pub2pub3                                                                                                                                                    auth3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pub1 pub3pub45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●

                                                               labor                                                                                                                                                                  auth2 auth4
                                                                                                                  ●                                                                                                                                                    ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pub2
                                                                                                  ●


                                                            other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                             0                      theory
                                                                                              ●                                                                                                                                              ●                        ●



                                         0           lab    healthurblaw
                                                           pub             pub1   ●
                                                                                      ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pubio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             macro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               labor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●



                                                                           auth4
                                                                         auth3
                                                                        auth2                                                                                                                                                 missingfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          metrics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lab


                                        −3                                                                                                                                                  −3
                                                      −1                 0                                1                    2               3                                                               −1                    0                                     1                 2                 3
                                                                       OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)                                                                                                                     OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)

                                                                                              REStat                                                                                                                                                      JEEA

                                                 Referee Reports                                                                                                                                         Referee Reports
                                             ●
                                                 Author Publications                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Author Publications
                                                 No. of Authors                                                                                                                                          No. of Authors
                                                 Field Fractions                                                                                                                                         Field Fractions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                frAccept
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          frStrongRR
                                         6                                                                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                                                 frStrongRR
           Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                                               Probit Coefficients on R&R
                                                                                                                                    frAccept                                                                                                                                       frRR
                                                                                                                              frRR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               frWeakRR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         frNoRec
                                         3                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                         frWeakRR
                                                                                                                      frNoRec

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        frReject
                                                                                      frReject                                                                                                                               metrics hist         pub8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pub45pub67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pub
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   labor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●


                                                                              auth4
                                                               io labdev histauth2pub2   pub67
                                                                                        pub45
                                                                                     pub3
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fin      other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lab     pub3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pub2
                                                                               auth3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    theory micro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●


                                                                                        pub8                                                                                                                                 devmacro
                                                                                              ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pub1
                                                                                          ●

                                         0                    other           pub1                                                                                                           0                                         auth2
                                                                                                      ●


                                                                     healthurblaw                                                                                                                                              iohealthurblaw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            auth4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●


                                                                   missingfield                                                                                                                                                          auth3
                                                                              ●


                                                           micro
                                                           fin
                                                         macro      pub
                                                                metrics labor                                                                                                                                                 missingfield
                                                        theory



                                        −3                                                                                                                                                  −3
                                                       −1                 0                                   1                    2               3                                                          −1                 0                                1                      2                 3
                                                                       OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)                                                                                                                    OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)



Notes: Figure 6 plots the coefficients from the main specifications of the citation and R&R regressions as in Figure 5b, separately by journal. Best fit lines through each group of coefficients are also
shown (weighted by the inverse variance of the probit coefficient from the R&R regression).

                                                                                                                                                          41
 Figure 7. The Relationship Between the Editor’s Revise and Resubmit Decision and Realized Citations
                   Figure 7a. Plot by Quantiles in probability of revise-and-resubmit



                                               4.5
                                                                                                                                                             667
                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                             526
                                               4.0



                                                                                                                                   576            ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                     108
                                                                                                            41         ●    253
                                                                                                  22                                                          92
                                               3.5




                                                                                                            ●                ●
                                                                                                  ●                                                           ●
                            Asinh(Citations)




                                                                                                                                   942       233
                                                                                                                                    ●             ●
                                                                                                                     1410   1264
                                               3.0




                                                                                                                       ●     ●


                                                                                                1495       1477
                                                                                                  ●         ●
                                                                                      1510
                                               2.5




                                                                           1514         ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                  1516
                                                                       ●
                                               2.0




                                                      1515
                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                              ●           Rejected
                                                                                                                                                          R&R
                                               1.5




                                                                                                                                              ●



                                                      3e−04       0.001    0.002      0.004     0.01       0.03      0.08   0.18   0.37      0.64            0.9
                                                                                   Average Predicted Probability of R&R
                                                                                                   ^ = 0.222
                                                                                                   ρ

                                                                Figure 7b. Separating Bias due to Publication
                                       4.5




                                                                                                                                                  301          429
                                                                                                                       60    144    330               ●           ●
                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                              ●         ●
                                       4.0




                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                            24                                                    59
                                                                                                             ●                                                    ●

                                                                                                                                    540
                                       3.5




                                                                                                                      748
                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                  124
                                                                                                                       ●     664                      ●
                                                                                                                                                               106
                 Asinh(Citations)




                                                                                                 763                          ●     147           125
                                                                                                           742
                                       3.0




                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                      773                              23                                         12
                                                                                        ●                                           193           55
                                                                           817                                               337
                                                                  837        ●
                                                                                                                              65
                                       2.5




                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                      378

                                                      832                                                  440
                                                                                                 425
                                       2.0




                                                       ●                              430
                                                                           391
                                                                  372
                                       1.5




                                                                                                                                    ●       Rej, 2006−2010
                                                      375                                                                                   Rej, 2012−2013
                                                                                                                                    ●       R&R, 2006−2010
                                                                                                                                            R&R, 2012−2013
                                       1.0




                                                     3e−04       0.001     0.002     0.005      0.01       0.04      0.08   0.18   0.38       0.66            0.91
                                                               Average Predicted Probability of Receiving R&R (Unrestricted Model)
                                                                                        ^ early = 0.287,
                                                                                        ρ                  ^ late = 0.132
                                                                                                           ρ

Notes: Figure 7 shows the average Asinh(citations) by deciles of predicted probability of R&R where the top decile is further split into two ventiles.
Figure 7a considers separately papers that were rejected and those that the editor granted a revise-and-resubmit (using papers from the entire
sample period), and figure 7b breaks these two groups of papers down further into whether they were submitted between 2006 and 2010, or
between 2012 and 2013 (leaving out papers submitted in other years). The smoothing lines are obtained via cubic fits to all data points. The
estimate of the editor signal described in the text is shown at the bottom of figure 7a, whereas the editor signal is estimated separately for the
early and late period within a single regression by interacting the editor signal term with dummies indicating whether the paper was submitted
in the earlier or later period.



                                                                                                      42
     Figure 8. The Relationship Between the Editor’s Desk Rejection Decision and Realized Citations
                   Figure 8a. Plot by Quantiles in probability of avoiding desk-rejection



                                                                                                                                                            ●

                                                                                                                     ●
                                                    4



                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                           ●                                      ●
                                                                                                 ●                                       ●

                                                                                    ●     ●                                                                 ●

                                                                      ●                                                                                     ●
                                                             ●
                                 Asinh(Citations)
                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                  ●

                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                          ●      ●                                       ●
                                                                                                           ●                                                ●
                                                                                    ●     ●                          ●          ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                      ●             ●                      ●
                                                                      ●                                                         ●
                                                             ●                                                       ●                            ●
                                                             ●
                                                    2




                                                                                                                                         ●

                                                                                          ●      ●
                                                                                    ●                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●         ●
                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                     ●      Desk−Rejected
                                                                                                                     ●      Not Desk−Rejected
                                                    1




                                                             ●                                                       ●      Not Desk−Rejected, then Rejected
                                                                                                                     ●      Not Desk−Rejected, then R&R

                                                         0.18     0.26         0.36     0.46   0.56       0.65   0.73         0.79      0.88     0.94      0.97
                                                                          Average Predicted Probability of Avoiding Desk−Rejection
                                                                                                 ^ = 0.317
                                                                                                 ρ0

    Figure 8b. Plot by Quantiles in probability of avoiding desk-rejection, split by author publications
                                      4




                                                                                                206                  492        458
                                                                                                          517
                                                                                                                                                            1163

                                                                                                                                         645
                                                                                                                                                   940
                                      3




                                                                                                                                136
                                                                                                                                                   177
                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                              810       1080    114       274        210                  126
              Asinh(Citations)




                                                                                ●        ●                                               1417                   40
                                                                 569                                                                         ●
                                                        343       ●
                                                                                                                                                      74
                                                         ●
                                                                                               1054                            1426
                                      2




                                                                                                 ●               1159               ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                              1609      1333              1027
                                                                                ●
                                                                                         ●                 ●                             226
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                 1840                           988                             411
                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                  ●                                                  536            ●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                          648
                                                        2071
                                      1




                                                                                                           ●
                                                         ●


                                                                                                                 ●         Desk−Rejected, Author Pub: 0−1
                                                                                                                           Desk−Rejected, Author Pub: 4+
                                                                                                                 ●         Not Desk−Rejected, Author Pub: 0−1
                                                                                                                           Not Desk−Rejected, Author Pub: 4+
                                      0




                                                        0.17     0.24         0.31      0.41   0.53       0.63       0.7       0.77      0.85     0.93       0.97
                                                        Average Predicted Probability of Avoiding Desk−Rejection (Unrestricted Model)
                                                                                                 ^ = 0.326
                                                                                                 ρ 0

Notes: Figure 8 shows the average Asinh(citations) by deciles of predicted probability of non-desk-rejection, where the top decile is further split
into two ventiles. Figure 8a considers separately papers that were desk-rejected, those that were not but were rejected later on, and those that
ultimately received an R&R (using all papers in our data). Figure 8b breaks the desk-rejected and non-desk-rejected papers down further into
whether the authors’ recent publications were in the 0-1 or 4+ range (leaving out papers submitted by authors with 2-3 recent publications). The
smoothing lines are obtained via cubic fits to all data points. The estimate of the editor signal described in the text is shown at the bottom of both
figures.



                                                                                                     43
                                                        Figure 9. Discounting of Citations of Prolific Authors, Referees
                                                                            Figure 9a. All Referees




                                                                                                                                    ●
                                        4                                                                               ●

                                                                                                         ●

                                                                             ●
                                                                                            ●
                     Asinh(Citations)




                                                                     ●                                                              ●

                                                                                                                        ●
                                        3
                                                                                                         ●
                                                    ●

                                                                                            ●


                                                                             ●


                                                                     ●
                                        2
                                                                                                     ●        Author Pub: 0−1
                                                                                                     ●        Author Pub: 4+

                                                    ●




                                             DefReject         Reject      NoRec      WeakRR             RR         StrongRR    Accept
                                                                                   Referee Reports
                                                             Figure 9b. Split by Prolific and Non-Prolific Referees




                              4                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                          ●

                                                                             ●
                                                                                            ●
           Asinh(Citations)




                                                                 ●                                                                      ●

                              3                                                                                             ●

                                                ●
                                                                                                          ●

                                                                                            ●


                                                                             ●


                              2                                  ●                              ●    Auth Pub: 0−1, Ref Pub: 0−1
                                                                                                ●    Auth Pub: 4+, Ref Pub: 0−1
                                                                                                     Auth Pub: 0−1, Ref Pub: 4+
                                                                                                     Auth Pub: 4+, Ref Pub: 4+
                                                ●




                                            DefReject         Reject      NoRec       WeakRR             RR          StrongRR      Accept
                                                                                   Referee Reports
Notes: Figure 9 shows the weighted Arsinh(citations) for a paper receiving a given recommendation. Figure 9a shows the results separately for
authors with 0-1 recent publications and authors with at least 4 recent publications, while figure 9b splits these two categories further into
whether the report was provided by a referee with 0 -1 recent publications or by a referee with at least 4 recent publications. The unit of
observation is a referee report, and observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that each paper receives
equal weight. Standard errors are clustered at the paper level.


                                                                                       44
                                                  Figure 10. Evidence on Citation Discounting from Survey of Economists
                                          Figure 10a. Assessed Relative Citations versus Actual Citation Ratio, Theoretical Cases


                                                                        1.0
                                                                        0.5
                                            Survey Log Citation Ratio

                                                                        0.0




                                                                                                         Extent of Discount
                                                                        −0.5




                                                                                                                                                         Example of results indicating no discount
                                                                        −1.0




                                                                                                                                                         Example of results indicating discount

                                                                                −1.0              −0.5                            0.0                            0.5                        1.0
                                                                                                                       Actual Log Citation Ratio



                                                                        Figure 10b. Assessed Relative Citations versus Actual Citation Ratio, Decile Bins
                                          1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                          1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
Log Citation Ratio Elicited from Survey




                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                          0.5




                                                                                                                                                         ●

                                                                                                                                               ●
                                          0.0




                                                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                                   ●                    ●
                                          −0.5




                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                             Intercept = −0.02 (0.05)
                                          −1.0




                                                                                                                                                             Slope = 0.71 (0.07)
                                          −1.5




                                                                               −1.5     −1.0                −0.5                  0.0                  0.5                    1.0                1.5
                                                                                                                       Actual Log Citation Ratio
                                                                                               Plotted points correspond to mean within each decile of log citation r atio.




                                                                                                                               45
                                    Figure 10c. Qualitative Assessment of Paper Pairs, Decile Bins
                      1.5
                      1.0




                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                        ●


                                                                                                                               ●
                      0.5




                                                                                                                       ●
Feature Comparisons




                                                                                  ●                     ●


                                                                                              ●
                      0.0




                                                                   ●


                                                                                        ●
                      −0.5
                      −1.0




                                        ●
                                                                                                   Rating for Exposition (Prolific VS Non−Prolific)
                                                                                             ●     Rating for Importance (Prolific VS Non−Prolific)
                      −1.5




                                                                                                   Rating for Rigor (Prolific VS Non−Prolific)
                                                                                                   Rating for Novelty (Prolific VS Non−Prolific)

                             −1.5      −1.0                −0.5                   0.0                  0.5                    1.0           1.5
                                                                         Log Citation Ratio
                                              Plotted points correspond to means within each decile of log citation r atio.




Notes: Figures 10a-c show a few key results from the survey, where we asked respondents to compare pairs of papers that were similar except
that one was by a prolific author and the other was by a non-prolific author at the approximate time of submission. Figure 10a is created using
simulated data, illustrating two possible scenarios. One possibility, illustrated by the red points (corresponding to deciles of the actual log citation
ratio of the paper pairs used for the survey) and the best fit line through the points, is that subjects on average indicate that relative citations
merited by the paper by the prolific versus that by the non-prolific authors was about right, in which case citations roughly correspond to quality
(i.e. citations for prolific authors need not be discounted relative to those for non-prolific authors to obtain an unbiased measure of quality).
Another possibility, illustrated by the blue points and line, is that subjects may on average indicate that the paper by the prolific author receive
too many citations relative to the paper by the non-prolific author. In this case, citations by prolific authors will need to be discounted relative to
citations by non-prolific authors in order to obtain an unbiased measure of quality. The negative of the estimated intercept indicates the extent
to which citations for prolific authors are inflated. Figure 10b shows the actual survey results, which are more in line with the former
interpretation, since the estimated intercept is statistically insignificant and close to zero. We winsorized the top and bottom 2% of survey
responses of the log citation ratio which subjects thought was justified (as per our pre-analysis registration). Figure 10c displays the results the
section of our survey where we asked subjects to compare papers on a scale of -2 to 2 on four dimensions – exposition, importance, rigor and
novelty. We plot the average comparisons separately for these four dimensions as a function of the actual log citation ratio between each paper
pair, after converting responses so that positive values indicate an evaluation in favor of the paper by the prolific author. The positive slope of all
four lines indicate that papers with more citations were also typically judged more positively on each of the four dimensions. The estimated
intercepts being close to zero suggests that similar papers by prolific and non-prolific authors that receive similar citations are typically
comparable on these four dimensions, a finding that is in line with figure 10b.




                                                                               46
Table 1. Summary Statistics For All Submissions and Non-Desk-Rejected Papers
                                                         All Papers                                      Non-Desk-Rejected Papers
   Journals in Sample:                All       QJE       REStat      JEEA       REStud           All       QJE       REStat      JEEA      REStud
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)
Google Scholar Citations
   Percentile (Journal/Year)         50.0        50.0       50.0       49.9        50.0          59.5       65.4       58.6        53.6       59.0
                                    (28.9)      (28.9)     (28.9)     (28.9)      (28.9)        (28.0)     (26.3)     (28.3)      (29.0)     (27.6)
   Asinh Citations                   2.11        2.19       2.03       2.23        1.99          2.74       3.21       2.62        2.47       2.57
                                    (1.86)      (1.95)     (1.76)     (1.82)      (1.81)        (1.84)     (1.88)     (1.76)      (1.83)     (1.78)
Editorial Decisions
   Not Desk-Rejected                 0.58       0.40        0.46       0.76        0.80          1.00       1.00       1.00        1.00       1.00
   Received R&R Decision             0.08       0.04        0.12       0.11        0.08          0.15       0.11       0.26        0.14       0.13
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
   Publications: 0                   0.46       0.46        0.48       0.45        0.44          0.32       0.24       0.38       0.39        0.30
   Publications: 1                   0.17       0.16        0.20       0.18        0.15          0.17       0.16       0.20       0.18        0.16
   Publications: 2                   0.11       0.10        0.11       0.12        0.11          0.13       0.12       0.13       0.13        0.12
   Publications: 3                   0.08       0.08        0.07       0.09        0.09          0.11       0.11       0.10       0.11        0.12
   Publications: 4-5                 0.09       0.10        0.08       0.08        0.11          0.14       0.17       0.11       0.10        0.15
   Publications: 6-7                 0.04       0.05        0.03       0.04        0.05          0.07       0.09       0.05       0.05        0.07
   Publications: 8+                  0.04       0.05        0.02       0.03        0.05          0.07       0.10       0.04        0.04       0.07
Number of Authors
   1 author                          0.38       0.38        0.30       0.37        0.42          0.31       0.26       0.27       0.34        0.35
   2 authors                         0.39       0.38        0.41       0.41        0.38          0.42       0.42       0.43        0.42       0.42
   3 authors                         0.19       0.19        0.23       0.18        0.17          0.21       0.24       0.24        0.19       0.19
   4+ authors                        0.05       0.06        0.06       0.03        0.04          0.05       0.08       0.06        0.04       0.04
Field of Paper
   Development                       0.05       0.06        0.05       0.04        0.04          0.05       0.06       0.05       0.04        0.04
   Econometrics                      0.07       0.04        0.11       0.04        0.09          0.06       0.02       0.09       0.03        0.09
   Finance                           0.07       0.09        0.04       0.04        0.07          0.06       0.08       0.03       0.04        0.07
   Health, Urban, Law                0.05       0.07        0.05       0.03        0.03          0.05       0.08       0.05       0.03        0.03
   History                           0.01       0.02        0.01       0.01        0.01          0.01       0.02       0.01        0.01       0.01
   International                     0.06       0.07        0.05       0.06        0.06          0.06       0.07       0.05       0.06        0.05
   Industrial Organization           0.05       0.05        0.05       0.05        0.05          0.05       0.04       0.05        0.05       0.06
   Lab/Experiments                   0.02       0.03        0.01       0.03        0.02          0.03       0.03       0.01        0.03       0.03
   Labor                             0.11       0.13        0.11       0.11        0.08          0.12       0.18       0.11        0.12       0.09
   Macro                             0.10       0.11        0.07       0.10        0.12          0.10       0.09       0.07        0.10       0.11
   Micro                             0.11       0.12        0.05       0.10        0.13          0.11       0.12       0.05        0.10       0.13
   Public                            0.05       0.06        0.03       0.05        0.05          0.05       0.06       0.03       0.05        0.05
   Theory                            0.09       0.08        0.02       0.07        0.17          0.10       0.06       0.02       0.07        0.19
   Unclassified                      0.06       0.08        0.05       0.05        0.05          0.05       0.07       0.05       0.05        0.04
  Missing Field                      0.11       0.02        0.30       0.23        0.02          0.10       0.01       0.33        0.20       0.01
Referee Recommendations
   Fraction Definitely Reject                                                                    0.12       0.13       0.10        0.11       0.14
   Fraction Reject                                                                               0.54       0.60       0.44        0.50       0.56
   Fraction with No Rec'n                                                                        0.06       0.03       0.06       0.10        0.05
   Fraction Weak R&R                                                                             0.10       0.09       0.13        0.11       0.10
   Fraction R&R                                                                                  0.10       0.08       0.16        0.11       0.09
   Fraction Strong R&R                                                                           0.04       0.03       0.07        0.04       0.03
   Fraction Accept                                                                               0.03       0.03       0.05        0.04       0.03
   Years                           2003-13 2005-13 2006-13 2003-13 2005-13                     2003-13 2005-13 2006-13 2003-13 2005-13
   Number of Observations 29,868 10,824                    5,767      4,942       8,335        15,177      4,195       2,391      3,280      5,311
Notes: Table presents information on mean characteristics of all submitted papers (columns 1-5), and for non-desk-rejected papers (columns 6-10).
The sample of non-desk-rejected papers also excludes papers with only 1 referee assigned. The Google Scholar citation percentile is computed
within a year-journal cohort of submissions. To avoid ties, we randomly jitter the citations before calculating percentiles. Author publications are
based on publications in a set of 35 high-impact journals (Appendix Table 1) in the 5 years prior to submission. In case of multiple authors, the
measure is the maximum for all coauthors. Field is based on JEL codes at paper submission. Indicators of fields for a paper that lists N codes are set
to 1/N. For example, a paper with JEL codes that match labor and theory will be coded 0.5 for labor and 0.5 for theory.


                                                                         47
Table 2. Models for Realized Citations and Revise-and-Resubmit Decision
                                        OLS Models for Asinh of               Probit Models for Receiving Revise-
                                        Google Scholar Citations                    and-Resubmit Decision
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
      Reject                             0.83                       0.67           0.87                            0.87
                                        (0.06)                     (0.06)         (0.16)                          (0.16)
      No Recommendation                  1.26                       1.02           2.79                            2.79
                                        (0.10)                     (0.10)         (0.17)                          (0.18)
      Weak R&R                           1.78                       1.50           3.16                            3.16
                                        (0.08)                     (0.08)         (0.16)                          (0.17)
      R&R                                2.37                       1.96           4.64                            4.62
                                        (0.08)                     (0.08)         (0.17)                          (0.18)
      Strong R&R                         2.76                       2.34           5.58                            5.56
                                        (0.11)                     (0.11)         (0.19)                          (0.20)
      Accept                             2.78                       2.39           5.39                            5.35
                                        (0.12)                     (0.12)         (0.20)                          (0.20)

Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
    1 Publication                            0.40                   0.27                           0.26            0.06
                                            (0.04)                 (0.04)                         (0.04)          (0.06)
    2 Publications                           0.66                   0.50                           0.36            0.17
                                            (0.05)                 (0.05)                         (0.05)          (0.06)
    3 Publications                           0.88                   0.65                           0.56            0.27
                                            (0.05)                 (0.05)                         (0.05)          (0.06)
    4-5 Publications                         1.11                   0.85                           0.68            0.33
                                            (0.05)                 (0.05)                         (0.05)          (0.06)
    6-7 Publications                         1.29                   0.98                           0.81            0.43
                                            (0.06)                 (0.06)                         (0.05)          (0.08)
    8+ Publications                          1.39                   1.05                           0.90            0.49
                                            (0.06)                 (0.06)                         (0.06)          (0.08)
Number of Authors
   2 authors                                          0.19          0.22                          -0.12           -0.05
                                                     (0.04)        (0.03)                         (0.03)          (0.05)
      3 authors                                       0.24          0.31                          -0.16           -0.02
                                                     (0.04)        (0.04)                         (0.04)          (0.06)
      4+ authors                                      0.40          0.45                          -0.05            0.07
                                                     (0.07)        (0.06)                         (0.06)          (0.09)

Indicators for Field of Paper             No          Yes           Yes             No             Yes             Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year              Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
  2              2
R / pseudo R                             0.20        0.20          0.26            0.48            0.07            0.49
Notes: See notes to Table 1. The sample for all models is 15,177 non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees
assigned. All models include indicators for journal-year cohort. Dependent variable for OLS models in columns 1-3 is asinh of
Google Scholar citations. Dependent variable in probit models in columns 4-6 is indicator for receiving revise and resubmit
decision. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

                                                              48
Table 3. Models for Alternative Measures of Citations
                                    OLS     OLS Model Probit Model OLS Model                          OLS Model OLS Model OLS Model
                                 Model for    for GS     for Top   for Log(1+                             for    for Asinh  for SSCI
                                 Asinh(GS Citation Decile of GS        GS                             Asinh(GS     (SSCI     Citation
                                 Citations) Percentile  Citations  Citations)                         Citations) Citations) Percentile
    Sample Years                 All Years       All Years         All Years        All Years          2006-2010        2006-2010        2006-2010
                                     (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)
Fractions of Ref. Recommendations
   Reject                  0.67                    10.87              0.39              0.57               0.72             0.27             6.12
                          (0.06)                   (0.91)            (0.07)            (0.05)             (0.08)           (0.05)           (1.30)
    No Recommendation                1.02          16.22              0.68              0.88               1.10             0.75            14.55
                                    (0.10)         (1.58)            (0.10)            (0.09)             (0.14)           (0.10)           (2.28)
    Weak R&R                         1.50          23.64              0.94              1.30               1.54             0.82            15.41
                                    (0.08)         (1.27)            (0.09)            (0.07)             (0.11)           (0.08)           (1.87)
    R&R                              1.96          30.81              1.31              1.71               2.10             1.32            24.90
                                    (0.08)         (1.23)            (0.09)            (0.07)             (0.11)           (0.08)           (1.86)
    Strong R&R                       2.34          36.30              1.58              2.06               2.53             1.88            33.03
                                    (0.11)         (1.71)            (0.11)            (0.10)             (0.15)           (0.12)           (2.50)
    Accept                           2.39          36.85              1.55              2.11               2.63             2.24            40.14
                                    (0.12)         (1.76)            (0.11)            (0.11)             (0.15)           (0.14)           (2.59)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
    1 Publication                    0.27           4.20              0.18              0.23               0.27             0.11             1.67
                                    (0.04)         (0.66)            (0.05)            (0.03)             (0.06)           (0.04)           (0.97)
    2 Publications                   0.50           7.90              0.33              0.43               0.57             0.28             5.54
                                    (0.05)         (0.73)            (0.05)            (0.04)             (0.06)           (0.05)           (1.08)
    3 Publications                   0.65           10.18             0.40              0.56               0.64             0.27             5.57
                                    (0.05)         (0.77)            (0.05)            (0.04)             (0.07)           (0.05)           (1.18)
    4-5 Publications                 0.85          13.14              0.53              0.74               0.88             0.51             9.99
                                    (0.05)         (0.71)            (0.05)            (0.04)             (0.06)           (0.05)           (1.10)
    6-7 Publications                 0.98          14.76              0.68              0.86               0.97             0.49             8.98
                                    (0.06)         (0.91)            (0.06)            (0.05)             (0.08)           (0.07)           (1.44)
    8+ Publications                  1.05          15.64              0.72              0.93               1.04             0.65            10.71
                                    (0.06)         (0.92)            (0.06)            (0.05)             (0.09)           (0.08)           (1.51)

Number of Authors
    2 authors                        0.22           3.62              0.08              0.18               0.31             0.07             1.72
                                    (0.03)         (0.54)            (0.04)            (0.03)             (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.79)
    3 authors                        0.31           5.26              0.14              0.26               0.45             0.10             2.72
                                    (0.04)         (0.66)            (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.06)           (0.04)           (0.99)
    4+ authors                       0.45           7.45              0.29              0.39               0.47             0.05             -0.11
                                    (0.06)         (1.01)            (0.06)            (0.06)             (0.10)           (0.08)           (1.73)

    No. of Observations            15,177          15,177           15,177            15,177              8,208            8,208            8,208
      2               2
    R / pseudo R                     0.26           0.19              0.15              0.27               0.24             0.19             0.11
Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 2. The samples for this table includes non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. All models
include journal-year dummies and controls for field(s). Models in columns 1-5 use Google Scholar (GS) citations. Models in columns 6-7 use SSCI
Citation counts. Since SSCI only counts citations in published papers, we restrict the sample to submissions from 2006-2010 to allow time for papers to
accumulute citations in published works. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                          49
Table 4. Models for Citations and R&R with Additional Measures of Author and Institutional
                                      OLS Models for Asinh of GS Citations                           Probit Models for R&R Decision

                                    Full Sample Full Sample JEEA/REStud                         Full Sample Full Sample JEEA/REStud
                                           (1)               (2)                (3)                   (4)               (5)                (6)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
   Reject                     0.67                          0.66               0.66                  0.87              0.87               0.86
                             (0.06)                        (0.06)             (0.07)                (0.16)            (0.16)             (0.23)
      No Recommendation                   1.02              0.97               0.83                  2.79              2.76               2.75
                                         (0.10)            (0.10)             (0.13)                (0.18)            (0.18)             (0.26)
      Weak R&R                            1.50              1.44               1.40                  3.16              3.14               3.49
                                         (0.08)            (0.08)             (0.11)                (0.17)            (0.17)             (0.25)
      R&R                                 1.96              1.89               1.78                  4.62              4.61               5.00
                                         (0.08)            (0.08)             (0.11)                (0.18)            (0.18)             (0.26)
      Strong R&R                          2.34              2.24               2.11                  5.56              5.52               6.08
                                         (0.11)            (0.11)             (0.16)                (0.20)            (0.20)             (0.29)
      Accept                              2.39              2.25               2.15                  5.35              5.30               5.63
                                         (0.12)            (0.12)             (0.17)                (0.20)            (0.20)             (0.30)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals up to 5 years before submission
      1 Publication                       0.27              0.25               0.25                  0.06             -0.01              -0.02
                                         (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.05)                (0.06)            (0.06)             (0.08)
      2 Publications                      0.50              0.43               0.51                  0.17              0.03              -0.09
                                         (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.06)                (0.06)            (0.07)             (0.09)
      3 Publications                      0.65              0.52               0.50                  0.27              0.07              -0.07
                                         (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.07)                (0.06)            (0.07)             (0.10)
      4-5 Publications                    0.85              0.63               0.63                  0.33              0.06              -0.10
                                         (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.07)                (0.06)            (0.08)             (0.10)
      6-7 Publications                    0.98              0.63               0.59                  0.43              0.07              -0.11
                                         (0.06)            (0.07)             (0.10)                (0.08)            (0.10)             (0.14)
      8+ Publications            1.05                       0.58               0.64                  0.49              0.04              -0.17
                                (0.06)                     (0.08)             (0.11)                (0.08)            (0.10)             (0.14)
Author Publications in Top 5 Journals
      1 Publication                                         0.29               0.20                                    0.21               0.19
                                                           (0.04)             (0.05)                                  (0.05)             (0.07)
      2 Publications                                        0.44               0.28                                    0.26               0.25
                                                           (0.06)             (0.08)                                  (0.07)             (0.10)
      3+ Publications                             0.57          0.36                                                   0.44               0.41
                                                (0.06)         (0.09)                                                 (0.08)             (0.11)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals up to 6-10 years before submission
   1-3 Publications                              -0.11         -0.14                                                   0.15               0.30
                                                (0.03)         (0.05)                                                 (0.05)             (0.07)
      4+ Publications                                       0.06               0.03                                    0.16               0.34
                                                           (0.05)             (0.06)                                  (0.06)             (0.09)
Rank of Authors' Institution
   US: 1-10                                                                    0.51                                                       0.25
                                                                              (0.05)                                                     (0.06)
      US: 11-20                                                                0.43                                                       0.30
                                                                              (0.06)                                                     (0.08)
      Europe: 1-10                                                             0.35                                                       0.05
                                                                              (0.05)                                                     (0.07)
      Rest of the World: 1-5                                                  -0.26                                                       0.23
                                                                              (0.12)                                                     (0.18)
Number of Observations                  15,177            15,177              8,591                 15,177            15,177             8,591
  2              2
R / pseudo R                              0.26              0.27               0.25                  0.49              0.49               0.51
Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 2. The sample includes non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. All models include controls
for field(s) and dummies for journal-year. Ranking of authors's institutions for US institutions are taken from Ellison (2013), while the rankings for
Europe and the rest of the world are taken from the QS 2014 rankings. Information on authors' institutions are only available for REStud and JEEA.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.

                                                                         50
Table 5. Referee Discounting of Author Publications in Citation Regressions
                                                      OLS Models for Asinh of Google Scholar Citations
        Data Set:                            Editorial Express Submissions         Published Papers from Econlit
                                           All non-Desk-                          Publications in Publications in
                                              rejected         Submission with    Our 4 Journals, Top-5 Journals,
        Sample:                            Submissions              R&R               2008-15         1997-2012
                                            (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)                 (5)                    (6)

Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
    1 Publication                  0.40       0.27                      0.23         0.18                0.03                   0.00
                                  (0.04)     (0.04)                    (0.12)       (0.12)              (0.14)                 (0.07)
    2 Publications                 0.66       0.50                      0.20         0.18                0.10                   0.13
                                  (0.05)     (0.05)                    (0.14)       (0.13)              (0.16)                 (0.07)
    3 Publications                 0.88       0.65                      0.58         0.53                0.51                   0.20
                                  (0.05)     (0.05)                    (0.13)       (0.13)              (0.14)                 (0.08)
    4-5 Publications               1.11       0.85                      0.78         0.72                0.43                   0.27
                                  (0.05)     (0.05)                    (0.11)       (0.11)              (0.13)                 (0.07)
    6-7 Publications               1.29       0.98                      0.59         0.55                0.47                   0.32
                                  (0.06)     (0.06)                    (0.14)       (0.14)              (0.16)                 (0.08)
    8+ Publications                1.39       1.05                      0.88         0.82                0.61                   0.46
                                  (0.06)     (0.06)                    (0.15)       (0.15)              (0.15)                 (0.08)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
        Reject                                          0.67                        -0.56
                                                       (0.06)                       (0.41)
        No Recommendation                               1.02                        -0.39
                                                       (0.10)                       (0.44)
        Weak R&R                                        1.50                        -0.27
                                                       (0.08)                       (0.41)
        R&R                                             1.96                         0.17
                                                       (0.08)                       (0.40)
        Strong R&R                                      2.34                         0.45
                                                       (0.11)                       (0.41)
        Accept                                          2.39                         0.37
                                                       (0.12)                       (0.41)
Indicators for Number of
Authors                                    Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Indicators for Field of Paper              Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year                Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Sample Size                              15,177       15,177           2,209        2,209               1,534                  5,266
    2
R                                          0.20         0.26            0.25         0.27                0.26                  0.32
Notes: See notes to Table 1. The sample for models in Columns 1 and 2 is 15,117 non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees
assigned. The models in Columns 3 and 4 include only papers which ultimately received an invitiation to Revise and Resubmit. The sample in
Column 5 includes the sample of papers published in one of the 4 journals considered in the years 2008-2015. This sample, obtained from
Econlit, matches approximately the sample of papers receiving an R&R invitation, assuming a 2-year delay between submission and
publication. The sample in Column 6, also from Econlit, includes all papers published in the traditional jop-5 economics journals between 1997
and 2012, assuming also a 2-year delay between submission and publication. The dependent variable is asinh of Google Scholar citations.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                     51
Table 6. Within-Pair Models for Assessment of Relative Quality of Papers

Panel A: Relationship Between Preferred Citation Ratio and Actual Citation Ratio
                                                 Models for Log of Elicited Citation Ratio from Survey Respondents:
                                                                                            Pairs with          Responses by
                                                                     Full Sample           Log(Relative         PhD Students
                                                                   (Weighed Least          Citations) in           and Non-      Responses by
                                                Full Sample           Squares)               [0.5, 0.5]         Prolific Faculty Prolific Faculty
                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)

Log of Actual Citation Ratio                         0.71                  0.70                  0.57                  0.64                 0.74
                                                    (0.07)                (0.07)                (0.19)                (0.09)               (0.10)

Constant                                            -0.02                  -0.01                 -0.03                 0.02                 -0.10
                                                    (0.05)                (0.05)                (0.06)                (0.06)               (0.08)


No. of Pairs of Papers Evaluated                     148                    148                    65                    76                  34

R-squared                                            0.53                  0.56                  0.09                  0.50                 0.63
Notes: Table reports regression models (fit by OLS for models in columns 1,3,4,5 and weighted least squares for model in column 2) in which the
dependent variable is the log of the respondent's preferred citation ratio for the paper in a given pair written by the more prolific author, and the
dependent variable is the log of the actual relative citation ratio. See text for derivation of preferred citation ratio. Sample includes respondent-pair
observations for sample indicated in column heading. Weight for model in column 2 is the inverse number of responents who evaluated the specific pair
of papers, so each distinct pair is equally weighted. Standard errors (clustered by paper pair) in parentheses.




Panel B: Relationship Between Relative Quality (in 4 Dimensions) and Relative Citations
                                              Dimension of Relative Quality (5 point scale from -2 to 2):
                                                Exposition           Importance                 Rigor               Novelty
                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Log of Actual Citation Ratio                         0.20                  0.70                  0.17                  0.35
                                                    (0.18)                (0.14)                (0.16)                (0.16)

Constant                                             0.05                  -0.04                 -0.04                 -0.03
                                                    (0.14)                (0.13)                (0.13)                (0.17)

No. of Pairs of Papers Evaluated                     148                    148                   148                   148
R-squared                                            0.02                  0.17                  0.01                  0.04
Notes: Table reports regression models fit by OLS in which the dependent variable is the log of the respondent's preferred citation
ratio for the paper in a given pair authored by the more prolific author, and the dependent variable is the respondent's relative
assessment of the quality of the paper in a given pair in the dimension indicated by the column heading on the log of the relative
citation ratio. Respondents compare papers in a pair using a 5 point Likkert scale which is converted to a linear scale ranging from -
2 to 2, with a more positive number indicating a preference for the paper by the prolific author. Sample includes 148 respondent-
pair observations. Standard errors (clustered by paper pair) in parentheses.




                                                                           52
                                           Online Appendix Figure 1. Distribution of Citation Variables
                                           Online Appendix Figure 1a. Distribution of Asinh of Citations

                   0.30
                   0.25
                   0.20
         Density
                   0.15
                   0.10
                   0.05
                   0.00




                               0                1            2                     3                  4                    5        6         7
                                                                               Asinh(Citations)


                                           Online Appendix Figure 1b. Distribution of Percentile Citation
                                    0.05
                                    0.04
                                    0.03
                          Density
                                    0.02
                                    0.01
                                    0.00




                                           0           20                     40                      60                       80       100
                                                                   Google Scholar Citation Percentiles
                                                         A small amount of noise is added to citations in order to break ties .


Notes: Online appendix figure 1 shows the distribution of the two main citation measures we use: the percentile citation by journal-year cohort
and the Arsinh of Google Scholar citations. Panel 1a shows the distribution for the percentile measure, which is close to uniform given the
definition of this variable, and the fact that we jitter sightly the citations to break ties. Panel 1b shows the distribution for Asinh(Citations), which
exhibits bunching at the lower end (which is unsurprising given that almost 32 percent of papers in our sample have zero citations). Citation
itations are top-coded at 500 (200 for REStud), which is about 6.9 after the Arsinh transformation.


                                                                                       53
                              Online Appendix Figure 2. Referee Recommendations and Citations, Robustness
                                      Online Appendix Figure 2a. Robustness using Fraction top-cited
                          0.5




                          0.4
Fraction Top−Cited




                          0.3
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                 ●


                                                                                        ●

                          0.2

                                                              ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                                             ●       QJE
                                                                                                     REStud
                          0.1                                                                        REStat
                                                  ●                                                  JEEA
                                      ●




                                DefReject    Reject     NoRec         WeakRR        RR      StrongRR          Accept
                                                                  Referee Reports
                                            Online Appendix Figure 2b. SSCI Citations, 2006-10



                                                                                                                ●



                                                                                                 ●
  Asinh(SSCI Citations)




                          2                                                         ●



                                                          ●


                                                                           ●




                                              ●

                          1
                                                                                             ●       QJE
                                  ●
                                                                                                     REStud
                                                                                                     REStat
                                                                                                     JEEA



                              DefReject     Reject     NoRec          WeakRR        RR      StrongRR          Accept
                                                                  Referee Reports

                                                                      54
                             Online Appendix Figure 2c. Heat Map for paper with 3 reports



                                  2.9          3.1       3.5          3.6          3.7        3.9         4.2    Accept




                                  2.5          3.1       3.5          3.4          3.7        3.7         3.9    StrongRR




                                  2.7          3.1       3.4          3.3          3.7        3.7         3.7    RR




                                  2.5          2.8         3          3.3          3.3        3.4         3.6    WeakRR




                                  2.6          2.8       3.1            3          3.4        3.5         3.5    NoRec




                                  2.1          2.5       2.8          2.8          3.1        3.1         3.1    Reject




                                  1.8          2.1       2.6          2.5          2.7        2.5         2.9    DefReject
                                 DefReject




                                              Reject




                                                                     WeakRR




                                                                                   RR




                                                                                            StrongRR




                                                                                                        Accept
                                                         NoRec




                Online Appendix Figure 2d. Heat Map for paper with 3 reports, Model prediction


                                    2.8         3.3       3.7         3.7          3.8          4        4.2     Accept




                                    2.7         3.2       3.4         3.5          3.7       3.9           4     StrongRR




                                    2.6           3       3.4         3.3          3.7       3.7         3.8     RR




                                    2.4         2.8       3.1         3.2          3.3       3.5         3.7     WeakRR




                                    2.4         2.8         3         3.1          3.4       3.4         3.7     NoRec




                                    2.1         2.5       2.8         2.8           3        3.2         3.3     Reject




                                    1.8         2.1       2.4         2.4          2.6       2.7         2.8     DefReject
                                  DefReject




                                              Reject




                                                                                                        Accept
                                                                                            StrongRR
                                                                     WeakRR




                                                                                   RR
                                                         NoRec




Notes: Online Appendix Figures 2a-d provide robustness checks of the correlation between referee reports and citations displayed visually in
Figures 3a-d in the text. Panels a and b plot the weighted average citation measure for a paper receiving a given recommendation. The unit of
observation is a referee report, and observations are weighted by the number of referee reports for the paper to ensure that each paper receives
equal weight. Standard errors are clustered at the paper level. Panel a uses top-cited as the dependent variable, where a paper is defined as top-
cited if its citations are in the top X% of its journal-year cohort (and X is defined as the percentage of papers receiving R&R’s in that journal-year
cohort). Panel b uses SSCI citations, and given that these take longer to accrue than Google Scholar citations, we restrict our attention to papers
submitted between 2006 and 2010. Panels c and d display evidence at the paper level, focusing on papers with exactly 3 referee reports. Panel c
shows a heat map of actual citations for all combinations of 3 reports whereas figure d does the same using predicted citations from a regression
using only fraction of referee recommendations and year-journal fixed effects (Column 1 of Table 2). All possible combinations of 2 reports out
of the 3 reports for each paper are considered, and darker colors in the heat map correspond to higher values of citation.




                                                                              55
                Online Appendix Figure 3a. R&R Probability, Heat Map for paper with 3 reports




                            0.12             0.24       0.53     0.535          0.788     0.813       0.811       Accept




                            0.202            0.263      0.583    0.565          0.74      0.831       0.813       StrongRR




                            0.105             0.2       0.463    0.427          0.714      0.74       0.788       RR




                            0.061            0.09       0.269    0.264          0.427     0.565       0.535       WeakRR




                            0.056            0.082      0.205    0.269          0.463     0.583        0.53       NoRec




                            0.003            0.019      0.082    0.09            0.2      0.263        0.24       Reject




                            0.003            0.003      0.056    0.061          0.105     0.202        0.12       DefReject
                             DefReject




                                             Reject




                                                        NoRec




                                                                 WeakRR




                                                                                RR




                                                                                           StrongRR




                                                                                                        Accept
               Online Appendix Figure 3b. Heat Map for paper with 3 reports, Model prediction



                               0.137         0.251      0.491    0.574          0.744     0.82        0.81       Accept




                               0.185         0.284      0.511    0.551          0.734    0.827        0.82       StrongRR




                               0.114         0.194      0.422    0.434          0.653    0.734        0.744      RR




                               0.048         0.093      0.256     0.28          0.434    0.551        0.574      WeakRR




                                 0.05        0.079      0.193    0.256          0.422    0.511        0.491      NoRec




                                 0.01        0.022      0.079    0.093          0.194    0.284        0.251      Reject




                               0.004          0.01       0.05    0.048          0.114    0.185        0.137      DefReject
                                                                  WeakRR
                                 DefReject




                                               Reject




                                                                                RR




                                                                                          StrongRR




                                                                                                      Accept
                                                         NoRec




Notes: Online appendix figure 3 checks the robustness of the correlation between referee reports and editor R&R displayed visually in Figures
4b-c in the text. Unlike in Figures 4b-c which focus on papers with 2 reports, we focus here on papers with 3 reports. Panel a shows a heat map
of actual R&R rates for all combinations of 2 reports whereas figure b does the same using predicted R&R probabilities from a regression using
only fraction of referee recommendations and year-journal fixed effects (Column 3 in Table 2). All possible combinations of 2 reports out of the
3 reports for each paper are considered, and darker colors in the heat map correspond to higher R&R probabilities



                                                                           56
Online Appendix Figure 4. The Relative Effect of Referee Recommendations and Paper Characteristics
               on Citations and the Probability of Revise and Resubmit, Robustness
            Online Appendix Figure 4a. Using Percentile Citations as Citation measure

                                     6         Referee Reports
                                               Author Publications
                                                                                                                                            frStrongRR
                                           ●


                                               No. of Authors
                                               Field Fractions
                                                                                                                                            frAccept

                                                                                                                                   frRR
        Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                     4


                                                                                                                             frWeakRR
                                                                                                              frNoRec

                                     2




                                                                                 frReject
                                                               hist                   pub8
                                                                                     pub67
                                                                                    pub45
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                          ●



                                                            fin
                                                        micro    dev            pub3
                                                                              pub2
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                              ●



                                                     theory other
                                                             io              auth4
                                                                          pub1
                                                                                  ●

                                     0                        pub labor auth2
                                                              macro        auth3
                                                                healthurblaw
                                                                missingfield
                                                                              ●




                                                           metrics
                                                           lab

                                         −20                             0                                        20                         40
                                                                     OLS Coefficients on Citation Percentiles

                                                 Online Appendix Figure 4b. Using top-cited as Citation measure


                                   6           Referee Reports
                                               Author Publications
                                                                                                                                              frStrongRR
                                           ●


                                               No. of Authors
                                               Field Fractions
                                                                                                                                            frAccept

                                                                                                                                     frRR
      Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                   4


                                                                                                                                frWeakRR
                                                                                                                           frNoRec

                                   2




                                                                                            frReject
                                                                                 hist             pub8
                                                                                                  pub67
                                                                                               pub45
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                     micro    fin dev       pub3
                                                                                          pub2
                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                              ●



                                                      theory             io               auth4
                                                                                        pub1
                                                                                                  ●

                                   0                                  pub macrolabor auth2
                                                                              other
                                                                          healthurblaw auth3
                                                                            missingfield
                                                                                          ●




                                                                     metrics
                                                                       lab

                                                        −1                        0                                            1                   2
                                                                         Probit Coefficients on Top−Cited


                                                                                      57
                                  Online Appendix Figure 4c. Using Asinh(SSCI Citations), only years 2006-2010


                              6
                                           Referee Reports
                                       ●
                                           Author Publications
                                           No. of Authors                                                                                     frStrongRR
                                           Field Fractions                                                                                           frAccept

                                                                                                                            frRR
Probit Coefficients on R&R




                              4



                                                                                                                frWeakRR
                                                                                                              frNoRec
                              2




                                                                          frReject
                                                                                 pub8
                                                                              pub67
                                                                                                     ●


                                                                     hist
                                                                                     ●



                                                                     auth4pub3
                                                                          pub2 pub45     ●


                                                              dev
                                                                            ●


                                                         finmicro
                                                       theory other   pub1
                                                                    healthurblaw
                                                                      auth3
                                                                             ●


                                                                 missingfield
                                                                     auth2
                                                                        ●
                              0                                labor
                                                           io
                                                         macro
                                                          metricspub
                                                                  lab

                                  −1                                0                                                 1                       2
                                                                 OLS Coefficients on Asinh(SSCI Citations)

             Online Appendix Figure 4d. Using Asinh(Google Scholar Citations), only years 2006-2010


                              6
                                           Referee Reports
                                       ●
                                           Author Publications
                                           No. of Authors                                                                                         frStrongRR
                                           Field Fractions                                                                                          frAccept

                                                                                                                                       frRR
 Probit Coefficients on R&R




                              4



                                                                                                                            frWeakRR
                                                                                                                      frNoRec
                              2




                                                                               frReject
                                                                                     pub8
                                                                                    pub67
                                                                                                                  ●


                                                   hist
                                                                                                              ●


                                                                              pub3
                                                                           auth4
                                                                             pub2 pub45                   ●


                                                               dev
                                                                                                 ●


                                                theory  fin healthurblaw
                                                              other     pub1
                                                                           auth3
                                                                                             ●


                                                    micro     missingfield
                                                                         auth2
                                                                                 ●
                              0                                 labor
                                                           iopub
                                                            macro
                                                      metrics
                                                         lab

                                                 −1                     0                                     1                    2                  3
                                                                   OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)


                                                                                                     58
                    Online Appendix Figure 4e. Using Asinh(Google Scholar Citations), only years 2012-2013


                                                                   Referee Reports
                                                               ●
                                                                   Author Publications
                                                                   No. of Authors
                                                                   Field Fractions                                                                                                frStrongRR
                                                                                                                                                                                        frAccept
                               5.0                                                                                                                                     frRR
  Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                                      frWeakRR
                                                                                                                                                frNoRec
                               2.5




                                                                                                      frReject
                                                                                io
                                                                              micro  fin
                                                                                  macrodev
                                                                                         hist                  pub8
                                                                         theory                             pub45
                                                                                                                pub67
                                                                                                                                        ●



                                                                                pub   labor       pub1
                                                                                       healthurblaw      pub3             ●
                                                                                                                                    ●       ●


                               0.0                                            othermissingfield
                                                                                              auth2
                                                                                               auth3 pub2
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                             ●


                                                                                metrics
                                                                               lab                auth4


                                                                        −1                          0                                       1                                      2
                                                                                              OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)

Online Appendix Figure 4f. Including top 5 publications and older publications in regression (not
                    showing coefficients for number of authors and fields)


                                                                        Referee Reports
                                                                    ●
                                                                        Recent Publications
                                                                        Recent Top 5
                                                                        Older Publications

                                                         1.0
                           Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                                                                 frReject



                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                      top5_3

                                                                                                                                                     top5_2
                                                                                                                               top5_1
                                                                                      pub610_13 pub610_4
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                pub3  pub67
                                                                                                                                                                      pub45
                                                                                                                                                                   pub8
                                                                                                                                                                            ●●


                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                     pub2         ●

                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                          pub1




                                                        −0.5

                                                               −0.3                           0.0                             0.3                                     0.6                    0.9
                                                                                                OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)

                                                                                                                 59
  Online Appendix Figure 4g. Including top 5 publications, older publications, and institution rank in
 regression (JEEA and REStud papers only, not showing coefficients for number of authors and fields)


                                               Referee Reports
                                          ●
                                               Recent Publications
                                               Recent Top 5
                                               Older Publications
                                               Institution Rank

                                  1.0
    Probit Coefficients on R&R




                                                                                                                                frReject



                                  0.5
                                                                                                top5_3
                                                                           pub610_4
                                                       pub610_13                                     ellison1120
                                                qs14row15                                  top5_2          ellison110
                                                                                      top5_1
                                                                                                   qs14europe110
                                  0.0                                                   ●
                                                                                            pub1          ●
                                                                                                              pub3
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                               pub2 pub67
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                      pub45
                                                                                                                        ●



                                                                                                                      pub8  ●




                                 −0.5

                                        −0.3                         0.0                     0.3                  0.6                         0.9
                                                                       OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)
Notes: Online Appendix Figure 4a-g present a number of robustness checks for the patterns displayed in the coefficient plots of main figures 5a-
b in the text. Instead of using the Asinh(Citations) as the dependent variable in the citation regression, panels a, b and c use citation percentile,
top-cited and Arsinh(SSCI Citations) respectively. Panels d and e consider papers that were submitted during different periods of the sample –
respectively, in 2006-2010 and in 2012-2013. Panels f and g explore the effect of including other measure of author prominence in the regressions
– namely recent publications in the top 5 economic journals, older publications (6 to 10 before submission) and the rank of the author’s institution.
We only collected information on institutional rank for JEEA and REStud, hence the separate plot in panel g incorporating this measure. Across
these robustness plots, the key pattern where the positive slope for the referee reports is steeper than for all the other groups variables is stable.
In panels f and g, the slope for top 5 publications is steeper than that for other measures of institutional prominence, suggesting that editors’
R&R decisions are affected more by authors’ recent top 5 publications, than other measure of author prominence (relative to the impact of these
variables on citations).




                                                                                      60
 Online Appendix Figure 5. Discounting of Citations of Prolific Authors, Referees (Citation Percentiles)


                         80
                                                                                                                  ●                  ●


                                                                                               ●


                                                                            ●

                                                         ●
                         70
                                            ●
   Citation Percentile




                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                  ●


                                  ●                                                            ●
                         60
                                                                            ●




                         50
                                            ●
                                                         ●


                                                                                           ●        Author Pub: 0−1
                                                                                           ●        Author Pub: 4+

                         40
                                  ●



                              DefReject   Reject     NoRec            WeakRR                   RR           StrongRR             Accept
                                                                Referee Reports
Notes: Online appendix figure 5 checks the robustness of the main figure 9a, using the citation percentile as the measure of citations instead of
Asinh(Citations). The key result that conditional on referee recommendation, ex-post citations for prolific authors are higher on average, remains
unchanged.




                                                                       61
Online Appendix Figure 6. The Relative Effect of Referee Recommendations and Paper Characteristics
                         on Citations and the Probability of Desk Rejection
                            Online Appendix Figure 6a. Pooled sample


                                    ●
                                        Author Publications
                                        No. of Authors
                                        Field Fractions
                                2
  Probit Coefficients on NDR




                                                                                                                        pub8
                                                                                                                        ●




                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                      pub67
                                1
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                  pub45
                                                                             hist                      ●
                                                                                                           pub3
                                                                           labor
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                   pub2
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                        pub1
                                                          theory iopub dev
                                                                       healthurblaw
                                                            micro             auth2
                                                                                 auth4
                                0                               missingfield
                                                                   lab        auth3
                                                                 macro
                                                               fin
                                                             metrics
                                                             other



                               −1

                                                −1                     0                           1                        2
                                                              OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)




                                                                             62
                                                                                                                                          Online Appendix Figure 6b. By Journal
                                                                                     QJE                                                                                                                                               REStud

                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Author Publications
                                             ●
                                                 Author Publications                                                                                                                              No. of Authors
                                                 No. of Authors                                                                                                                                   Field Fractions
                                                 Field Fractions
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                         2




                                                                                                                                                            Probit Coefficients on NDR
           Probit Coefficients on NDR




                                                                                                                                                pub8
                                                                                                                                                ●                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pub67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pub45 pub8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●



                                                                                                                                              pub67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pub3
                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●




                                         1
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                          pub45                                           1
                                                                                      hist                            ●
                                                                                                                          pub3                                                                                             theory io                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pub2
                                                                                                               pub2                                                                                                                      labor     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pub1
                                                                                    labor
                                                                                                           ●



                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                    pub1
                                                                   theory iopub                                                                                                                                          micro      lab healthurblaw
                                                                     micro
                                                                                dev
                                                                                healthurblaw                                                                                                                              finpubmetrics auth2
                                         0                               missingfield  auth2
                                                                                          auth4
                                                                                       auth3                                                                                              0                                               auth3 hist
                                                                            lab
                                                                          macro
                                                                        fin                                                                                                                                                      dev
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                macro
                                                                      metrics
                                                                      other                                                                                                                                                                auth4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        missingfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        other

                                        −1                                                                                                                                               −1

                                                         −1                     0                              1                                    2                                                     −1                       0                            1                                2
                                                                       OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)                                                                                                               OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)

                                                                                    REStat                                                                                                                                             JEEA

                                                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Author Publications
                                             ●
                                                 Author Publications                                                                                                                              No. of Authors
                                                 No. of Authors                                                                                                                                   Field Fractions
                                                 Field Fractions
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                         2




                                                                                                                                                            Probit Coefficients on NDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hist
           Probit Coefficients on NDR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pub8

                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                         1
                                                                                                                           pub8   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pub45       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pub67
                                                                                                                         pub67●




                                                                              hist
                                                                              dev
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                   pub3 pub45
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pub3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                   lab                     pub2                                                                                                                                                   pub2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●



                                                                          laborpub
                                                                                                    ●


                                                                 micro
                                                                     io
                                                                      missingfield                                                                                                                                                      labor
                                                      theory fin macro
                                                                 other                pub1  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pub1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●




                                                                        healthurblaw
                                                                  metrics                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dev macro
                                         0                                        auth4
                                                                                  auth2                                                                                                                                             io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pub   auth2
                                                                                 auth3                                                                                                                                           fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        theory micro         auth3auth4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     healthurblaw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                missingfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                metrics  lab


                                        −1                                                                                                                                               −1

                                                         −1                     0                              1                                    2                                                     −1                       0                            1                                2
                                                                       OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)                                                                                                               OLS Coefficients on Asinh(Citations)
Notes: Online Appendix Figure 6a-b plot the coefficients from the main specifications of the citation and non-desk-rejection regressions (Online Appendix Table 6). Best fit lines through each group of
coefficients are also shown (weighted by the inverse variance of the probit coefficient from the non-desk-rejection regression). Panel a shows the results for the pooled sample, whereas panel b shows
the results separately by journal. While author publications, number of authors and fields are all predictive of ex-post citations, the editors’ decision of whether to desk-reject is influenced more by
author publications than by number of authors or fields, relative to the how much these variables predict citations (as the steeper line for author publications indicates).



                                                                                                                                                           63
  Online Appendix Figure 7. The Relationship Between the Editor’s Revise and Resubmit Decision and
                                    Realized Citations – Model Fit
                         Online Appendix Figure 7a. Lines showing model fit

                                       4.5




                                                                                 (Vertical Gap at p=0.5) ≈ 1.60 × σφ × ρ  ρ ≈ 0.2                     667
                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                            526
                                       4.0




                                                                                                                                576             ●
                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                            108
                                                                                                  41          ●       253
                                                                                       22                                                               92
                                       3.5




                                                                                                   ●                   ●
                                                                                        ●                                                               ●
               Asinh(Citations)




                                                                                                                                942         233
                                                                                                                                     ●          ●
                                                                                                           1410      1264
                                       3.0




                                                                                                              ●        ●


                                                                                     1495        1477
                                                                                        ●          ●
                                                                          1510
                                       2.5




                                                                1514        ●
                                                                  ●
                                                        1516
                                                          ●
                                       2.0




                                              1515
                                                ●
                                                                                                                                            ●       Rejected
                                                                                                                                                    R&R
                                       1.5




                                                                                                                                            ●



                                              3e−04    0.001    0.002     0.004       0.01       0.03       0.08     0.18       0.37        0.64       0.9
                                                                       Average Predicted Probability of R&R
                                                                                        ^ = 0.222
                                                                                        ρ



        Online Appendix Figure 7b. Separating bias due to publication, with lines showing model fit
                                        4.5




                                                                                                                                           301         429
                                                                                                             60      144        330          ●          ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                       ●         ●
                                        4.0




                                                                                       14
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                  24                                                   59
                                                                                                   ●                                                    ●

                                                                                                                                540
                                        3.5




                                                                                                            748
                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                           124
                                                                                                             ●       664                     ●
                                                                                                                                                       106
                    Asinh(Citations)




                                                                                      763                              ●        147        125
                                                                                                 742
                                        3.0




                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                           773                               23                                        12
                                                                            ●                                                   193         55
                                                                 817                                                 337
                                                         837      ●
                                                                                                                      65
                                        2.5




                                                          ●
                                                                                                            378

                                               832                                               440
                                                                                      425
                                        2.0




                                                ●                          430
                                                                 391
                                                         372
                                        1.5




                                                                                                                                ●        Rej, 2006−2010
                                               375                                                                                       Rej, 2012−2013
                                                                                                                                ●        R&R, 2006−2010
                                                                                                                                         R&R, 2012−2013
                                        1.0




                                              3e−04     0.001   0.002     0.005       0.01       0.04      0.08      0.18      0.38        0.66       0.91
                                                      Average Predicted Probability of Receiving R&R (Unrestricted Model)
                                                                            ^ early = 0.287,
                                                                            ρ                    ^ late = 0.132
                                                                                                 ρ
Notes: Online Appendix Figures 7a-b shows the average Asinh(citations) by deciles of predicted probability of R&R where the top decile is further
split into two ventiles, and is identical to figure 7 of the main text except for the smoothing lines. The smoothing lines in the online appendix are
obtained via cubic fits to the predicted citations from the model (instead of the actual data, as in the main text). The plotted points still reflect
actual citations.



                                                                                            64
Online Appendix Figure 8. Screenshots from an Example of the Survey




                                65
66
Notes: Online Appendix Figure 8 reproduces the survey, which was administered with the Qualtrics platform and displayed as one page. Omitted
is only the final question on feedback.



                                                                    67
Online Appendix Table 1. List of Journals Used for Prominence Measures
                                               List of Journals
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics           Journal of Economic Theory
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics              Journal of Finance
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics              Journal of Financial Economics
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy             Journal of Health Economics
American Economic Review                               Journal of Industrial Organization
Brookings Papers on Economic Policy                    Journal of International Economics
Econometrica                                           Journal of Labor Economics
Economic Journal                                       Journal of Monetary Economics
Experimental Economics                                 Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
Games and Economic Behavior                            Journal of Political Economy
International Economic Review                          Journal of Public Economics
Journal of the European Economic Association           Journal of Urban Economics
Journal of Accounting and Economics                    Quarterly Journal of Economics
Journal of American Statistical Association            The RAND Journal of Economics
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics            Review of Economics and Statistics
Journal of Development Economics                       Review of Financial Studies
Journal of Econometrics                                Review of Economic Studies
Journal of Economic Growth




                                                     68
 Online Appendix Table 2. Role of Fields for Citations and R&R Decision
                                                                                    Probit Models for
                                           OLS Models for Asinh of                Receiving Revise-and-
                                           Google Scholar Citations                Resubmit Decision
                                                (1)              (2)                   (3)              (4)

Fraction of All Fields Matched (Omitted Category: Theory)
      International                            1.07              1.01                 -0.03            -0.09
                                              (0.09)            (0.09)               (0.09)           (0.12)
      Lab/Experiments                          0.91              0.42                -0.19            -0.48
                                              (0.15)            (0.14)               (0.15)           (0.20)
      Labor                                    0.64              0.77                 -0.18            -0.06
                                              (0.08)            (0.07)               (0.08)           (0.10)
      Health, Urban, Law                       0.58              0.59                -0.19            -0.11
                                              (0.10)            (0.10)               (0.10)           (0.14)
      Development                              0.71              0.76                 0.04             0.17
                                              (0.11)            (0.11)               (0.10)           (0.13)
      History                                  0.49              0.52                 0.53             0.39
                                              (0.22)            (0.20)               (0.18)           (0.24)
      Public                                   0.54              0.56                 -0.04            -0.10
                                              (0.11)            (0.10)               (0.10)           (0.14)
      Industrial Organization                  0.46              0.53                 -0.12            -0.01
                                              (0.10)            (0.10)               (0.10)           (0.13)
      Finance                                  0.51              0.52                 -0.06            0.13
                                              (0.10)            (0.09)               (0.09)           (0.12)
      Macro                                    0.59              0.56                 -0.02            -0.10
                                              (0.08)            (0.08)               (0.08)           (0.10)
      Field Missing                            0.59              0.58                 -0.10           -0.17
                                              (0.09)            (0.08)               (0.08)           (0.11)
      Micro                                    0.30              0.23                 0.00             0.06
                                              (0.09)            (0.08)               (0.09)           (0.11)
      Unclassified                             0.45              0.55                -0.25            -0.11
                                              (0.11)            (0.10)               (0.11)           (0.14)
      Econometrics                             0.45              0.40                -0.16            -0.34
                                              (0.09)            (0.09)               (0.09)           (0.12)

Controls for Referee Reports                   No                Yes                  No                Yes
Controls for Author Pubs.                      No                Yes                  No                Yes
Indicators for Journal-Year                    No                Yes                  No                Yes
  2              2
R / pseudo R                                   0.11             0.261                 0.04             0.49
Notes: See notes to Tables 1 and 2. The sample for this table includes 15,177 non-desk-rejected papers with at
least two referees assigned. Dependent variable for OLS models in columns 1-2 is asinh of Google Scholar citations.
Dependent variable in probit models in columns 3-4 is indicator for receiving revise and resubmit decision. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.

                                                        69
                       Online Appendix Table 3. Predictors of Citations and of Revise-and-Resubmit Decision, By Journal
    Specification:                                                         OLS                                                                             Probit
    Dependent Variable:                                      Asinh of Google Scholar Citations                                          Indicator for Revise-and-Resubmit Decision
    Sample:                                        QJE            REStud        REStat                        JEEA                   QJE           REStud         REStat        JEEA
                                                    (1)              (2)           (3)                         (4)                    (5)             (6)           (7)          (8)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
   Reject                                  0.59                        0.83                0.75                0.39                  0.96               0.74      0.8          1.36
                                          (0.10)                      (0.09)              (0.15)              (0.13)                (0.34)             (0.27)   (0.32)        (0.49)
   No Recommendation                       1.25                        1.05                1.13                0.69                  3.34               2.58     2.71          3.32
                                          (0.26)                      (0.17)              (0.25)              (0.19)                (0.39)             (0.32)   (0.35)        (0.52)
   Weak R&R                                1.61                        1.72                1.29                1.18                  2.84               3.66     2.84          3.64
                                          (0.16)                      (0.13)              (0.18)              (0.18)                (0.35)             (0.30)   (0.32)        (0.52)
   R&R                                     2.01                        2.16                1.86                1.66                  4.42               5.35     4.17          5.02
                                          (0.17)                      (0.14)              (0.17)              (0.18)                (0.36)             (0.32)   (0.33)        (0.52)
   Strong R&R                              2.67                        2.61                2.07                1.94                  5.07               6.46     5.22          6.31
                                          (0.25)                      (0.21)              (0.21)              (0.25)                (0.41)             (0.36)   (0.38)        (0.57)
   Accept                                  2.48                        2.29                2.23                2.34                  5.34               5.58      4.8          6.42
                                          (0.27)                      (0.23)              (0.21)              (0.27)                (0.42)             (0.38)   (0.38)        (0.57)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
   Publications: 1                         0.37                         0.3                0.25                0.17                  0.14               0.11    -0.07          0.01
                                          (0.08)                      (0.07)              (0.09)              (0.09)                (0.14)             (0.11)   (0.12)        (0.13)
   Publications: 2                         0.42                        0.64                0.49                0.44                  0.32              -0.01     0.17          0.33
                                          (0.09)                      (0.08)              (0.11)              (0.09)                (0.15)             (0.12)   (0.12)        (0.12)
   Publications: 3                         0.73                        0.65                0.68                0.51                  0.49               0.14     0.25          0.34
                                          (0.10)                      (0.08)              (0.12)              (0.10)                (0.15)             (0.12)   (0.14)        (0.14)
   Publications: 4-5                        0.9                        0.95                0.85                0.55                  0.55               0.09     0.25          0.62
                                          (0.09)                      (0.08)              (0.12)              (0.11)                (0.14)             (0.11)   (0.13)        (0.13)
   Publications: 6-7                       1.05                        0.96                0.93                0.93                  0.58               0.21     0.41          0.78
                                          (0.11)                      (0.10)              (0.16)              (0.14)                (0.16)             (0.14)   (0.19)        (0.16)
   Publications: 8+                        1.02                        1.17                0.88                  1                   0.76               0.28     0.10          0.86
                                          (0.10)                      (0.10)              (0.17)              (0.16)                (0.15)             (0.13)   (0.19)        (0.17)
Number of Authors
   2 authors                               0.14                        0.23                0.17                0.33                  -0.26              0.06     0.08         -0.09
                                          (0.07)                      (0.06)              (0.08)              (0.07)                (0.10)             (0.08)   (0.10)        (0.09)
   3 authors                               0.21                        0.31                0.28                0.42                  -0.24              0.11     0.15         -0.21
                                          (0.08)                      (0.07)              (0.10)              (0.09)                (0.11)             (0.10)   (0.12)        (0.13)
   4+ authors                              0.36                        0.55                0.23                0.61                  -0.10              0.05     0.38         -0.17
                                          (0.11)                      (0.13)              (0.15)              (0.16)                (0.15)             (0.17)   (0.18)        (0.23)
   Indicators for Field of Paper           Yes                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes               Yes      Yes           Yes
   Indicators for Year                     Yes                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes               Yes      Yes           Yes
   Number of Observations                 4,195                       5,311               2,391               3,280                 4,195              5,311    2,391         3,280
   R-squared                               0.27                        0.24                0.26                0.22
   Pseudo-R^2                                                                                                                        0.46              0.52      0.48          0.51
Notes: The sample for each journal includes all non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees assigned. Robust standard errors in parentheses.


                                                                                                           70
 Online Appendix Table 4. Predictors of Citations and of R&R, By Number of Reports
    Specification:                                    OLS                          Probit
                                                                         Indicator for Revise-and-
    Dependent Variable:                         Asinh of Citations
                                                                            Resubmit Decision
    No. of Reports Received:      2 Reports 3 Reports 4+ Reports     2 Reports 3 Reports 4+ Reports
                                      (1)        (2)       (3)          (5)          (6)        (7)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
   Reject                            0.66       0.69      0.51         0.53       1.17       1.6
                                    (0.07)     (0.11)    (0.31)       (0.23)     (0.26)    (0.47)
   No Recommendation                 0.83       1.01      1.66         2.38       3.24      4.13
                                    (0.13)     (0.20)    (0.45)       (0.26)     (0.31)    (0.55)
   Weak R&R                          1.42       1.45      1.19         2.85       3.63      4.25
                                    (0.11)     (0.14)    (0.36)       (0.25)     (0.27)    (0.52)
   R&R                                1.7       1.93      1.87           4        5.42      5.79
                                    (0.11)     (0.14)    (0.33)       (0.25)     (0.29)    (0.51)
   Strong R&R                        2.17       2.22      2.59         5.16       6.18      6.46
                                    (0.16)     (0.19)    (0.40)       (0.29)     (0.32)    (0.58)
   Accept                            2.32       2.11       2.5         4.96       5.9       6.69
                                    (0.17)     (0.21)    (0.43)       (0.29)     (0.32)    (0.60)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
   Publications: 1                   0.31       0.23      0.15         0.03       0.04      -0.02
                                    (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.14)       (0.10)     (0.09)    (0.16)
   Publications: 2                   0.52       0.45      0.36         0.17       0.16      -0.08
                                    (0.06)     (0.08)    (0.15)       (0.10)     (0.10)    (0.17)
   Publications: 3                   0.62       0.59      0.62         0.32       0.11       0.27
                                    (0.07)     (0.08)    (0.14)       (0.10)     (0.10)    (0.16)
   Publications: 4-5                  0.9       0.71      0.79         0.43       0.19       0.32
                                    (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.14)       (0.10)     (0.10)    (0.15)
   Publications: 6-7                 0.97       0.92      0.79         0.73       0.21      0.20
                                    (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.16)       (0.13)     (0.12)    (0.18)
   Publications: 8+                  1.03       0.99      0.82         0.46       0.35      0.41
                                    (0.10)     (0.09)    (0.15)       (0.14)     (0.12)    (0.17)
Number of Authors
   2 authors                         0.31       0.15      0.03        -0.12      -0.07      0.09
                                    (0.05)     (0.06)    (0.12)       (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.13)
   3 authors                         0.41       0.21      0.26        -0.07       0.05      0.10
                                    (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.13)       (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.15)
   4+ authors                        0.42       0.45       0.4         0.18      -0.17      0.30
                                    (0.10)     (0.11)    (0.16)       (0.15)     (0.15)    (0.19)
   Indicators for Field of Paper     Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
   Indicators for Year               Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes
   Number of Observations           7,238      5,414     1,800        7,238      5,414     1,795
   R-squared                         0.24       0.27      0.33
   Pseudo-R^2                                                          0.57      0.48       0.37
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                           71
Online App. Table 5. Predictors of Citations and R&R Decision, 2006-10 vs. 2012-
    Specification:                                  OLS                                       Probit
                                                                                    Indicator for Revise-and-
    Dependent Variable:                     Asinh of Citations
                                                                                       Resubmit Decision
                                  Papers        Papers                               Papers           Papers
    Sample:                   Submitted from Submitted from                      Submitted from Submitted from
                                 2006-2010     2012-2013                           2006-2010         2012-2013
                                     (1)           (2)                                 (3)              (4)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
   Reject                           0.72          0.49                                  0.79                  0.94
                                   (0.08)        (0.09)                                (0.20)                (0.32)
   No Recommendation                 1.1            1                                   2.58                    3
                                   (0.14)        (0.25)                                (0.23)                (0.41)
   Weak R&R                         1.54          1.37                                  2.98                  3.42
                                   (0.11)        (0.14)                                (0.22)                (0.34)
   R&R                               2.1           1.6                                  4.45                  5.07
                                   (0.11)        (0.14)                                (0.23)                (0.35)
   Strong R&R                       2.53          1.85                                  5.44                  5.83
                                   (0.15)        (0.22)                                (0.25)                (0.41)
   Accept                           2.63          2.13                                  5.17                  5.65
                                   (0.15)        (0.23)                                (0.26)                (0.41)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
   Publications: 1                  0.27          0.27                                  0.10                  0.14
                                   (0.06)        (0.07)                                (0.08)                (0.13)
   Publications: 2                  0.57          0.42                                   0.2                  0.05
                                   (0.06)        (0.08)                                (0.08)                (0.14)
   Publications: 3                  0.64          0.64                                  0.27                  0.22
                                   (0.07)        (0.08)                                (0.09)                (0.13)
   Publications: 4-5                0.88           0.8                                  0.31                  0.32
                                   (0.06)        (0.08)                                (0.08)                (0.13)
   Publications: 6-7                0.97          1.03                                  0.47                  0.28
                                   (0.08)        (0.11)                                (0.10)                (0.17)
   Publications: 8+                 1.04          0.96                                  0.58                  0.43
                                   (0.09)        (0.10)                                (0.10)                (0.17)
Number of Authors
   2 authors                        0.31          0.03                                 -0.01                  -0.08
                                   (0.05)        (0.06)                                (0.06)                (0.10)
   3 authors                        0.45          0.07                                  0.07                 -0.08
                                   (0.06)        (0.07)                                (0.07)                (0.12)
   4+ authors                       0.47          0.25                                  0.22                 -0.16
                                   (0.10)        (0.10)                                (0.12)                (0.16)
    F.e. for Field of Paper               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                  Yes
    F.e. for Journal-Year                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
    Number of Observations               8,208                  3,893                  8,208                 3,893
    R-squared                             0.24                   0.20
    Pseudo-R^2                                                                          0.50                  0.49
Notes: The sample includes all non-desk-rejected papers with at least two reports submitted separately between 2006-2010
(columns 1 and 3), and 2012-2013 (columns 2 and 4). Columns 1 and 3 compare the citation model for papers submitted during
the earlier and later time periods, while columns 2 and 4 make the same comparison for the model of editors' R&R decisions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.


                                                           72
          Online Appendix Table 6. Average Editor Value Added
     Specification:                                                  OLS
     Dependent Variable:                                       Asinh of Citations
                                                                    Papers          Papers
                                                                   Submitted      Submitted
     Sample:                                        All Papers
                                                                  from 2006-      from 2012-
                                                                     2010            2013
                                                        (1)           (2)             (3)
     Indicator for R&R                                  0.65                  0.87                  0.30
     (Average Editor Value Added)                      (0.06)                (0.07)                (0.10)
     1st Decile of Pr(R&R)                              1.76                  1.96                  1.22
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.08)
     2nd Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.17                  2.48                  1.54
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.08)
     3rd Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.34                  2.58                  1.74
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.07)
     4th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.45                  2.76                  1.89
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.07)
     5th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.63                  3.02                  1.94
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.07)
     6th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.62                  2.92                  2.02
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.07)
     7th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.94                  3.25                  2.33
                                                       (0.04)                (0.06)                (0.07)
     8th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              2.94                   3.2                  2.48
                                                       (0.05)                (0.06)                (0.08)
     9th Decile of Pr(R&R)                              3.17                  3.37                  2.71
                                                       (0.05)                (0.07)                (0.09)
     90-95th Percentile of Pr(R&R)                      3.24                   3.4                  2.71
                                                       (0.07)                (0.10)                (0.13)
     95-100th Percentile of Pr(R&R)                     3.47                  3.49                  2.82
                                                       (0.08)                (0.10)                (0.16)
     Observations                                      15,177                8,208                 3,893
     R-squared                                          0.72                 0.76                   0.68
Notes: The sample for column (1) includes all 15,177 non-desk-rejected papers with at least two referees
assigned, whereas columns 2 and 3 only use subsamples of these papers submitted from 2006-2010 and
2012-2013 respectively. The probability of R&R which is used to define the dependent variables in these
regressions are calculated from the fitted values of the probit specification in column (6) of table 2 (fit to all
papers for column (1), and only to the 8,208+3,893=12,101 papers submitted between 2006-2010 or 2012-
2013 for columns (2) and (3). Robust standard errors in parentheses. These regressions correspond
approximately to figures 7a and 7b in the paper, and the coefficient on the indicator for R&R represents
the average value of the gap between the lines for reject and R&R.




                                                       73
Online Appendix Table 7. Predictors of Citations and Desk Rejection
     Specification:                                  OLS Regression                      Probit
                                                                                   Indicator for Paper
                                                    Asinh of Citations
     Dependent Variable:                                                           Not Desk Rejected
                                                              (1)                             (2)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
    Publications: 1                                          0.62                            0.41
                                                            (0.03)                          (0.02)
     Publications: 2                                         0.94                            0.61
                                                            (0.03)                          (0.03)
     Publications: 3                                         1.21                            0.84
                                                            (0.04)                          (0.03)
     Publications: 4-5                                       1.49                            1.09
                                                            (0.04)                          (0.03)
     Publications: 6-7                                       1.74                            1.24
                                                            (0.05)                          (0.05)
     Publications: 8+                                        1.89                            1.46
                                                            (0.05)                          (0.05)
Number of Authors
   2 authors                                                  0.3                            0.05
                                                            (0.02)                          (0.02)
     3 authors                                               0.33                            0.01
                                                            (0.03)                          (0.03)
     4+ authors                                              0.45                            0.03
                                                            (0.05)                          (0.04)
     Indicators for Field of Paper                           Yes                             Yes
     Indicators for Journal-Year Cohort                      Yes                             Yes

     Number of Observations                                 29,868                         29,868
     R-squared                                               0.23
     Pseudo-R^2                                                                              0.21
Notes: This table reports the result of regressions on all papers in our sample. Each regression also includes
fixed effects for each journal-year cohort. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                     74
        Online Appendix Table 8. Excluding Papers with Missing Google Scholar Citations
     Specification:                               OLS Regression OLS Regression                           Probit                   Probit
                                                                                                       Indicator for            Indicator for
                                                             Asinh of Citations                       Paper Not Desk          Paper Receiving
     Dependent Variable:                                                                                 Rejected                  a R&R
                                                                          Papers that were
                                                                                                                             Papers that were
                                                       All Papers            not desk-                    All Papers
                                                                                                                             not desk-rejected
     Sample                                                                   rejected
                                                            (1)                     (2)                        (3)                     (4)
Fractions of Referee Recommendations
     Reject                                                                        0.56                                               0.79
                                                                                  (0.06)                                             (0.16)
     No Recommendation                                                             1.03                                                2.7
                                                                                  (0.10)                                             (0.18)
     Weak R&R                                                                      1.34                                               3.07
                                                                                  (0.08)                                             (0.17)
     R&R                                                                           1.74                                               4.52
                                                                                  (0.07)                                             (0.18)
     Strong R&R                                                                    2.15                                               5.46
                                                                                  (0.10)                                             (0.20)
     Accept                                                                        2.07                                               5.23
                                                                                  (0.11)                                             (0.21)
Author Publications in 35 high-impact journals
    Publications: 1                             0.44                               0.21                       0.32                    0.04
                                               (0.03)                             (0.04)                     (0.04)                  (0.06)
    Publications: 2                             0.72                               0.42                       0.46                    0.10
                                               (0.03)                             (0.04)                     (0.04)                  (0.07)
    Publications: 3                             0.93                               0.53                       0.72                    0.24
                                               (0.04)                             (0.05)                     (0.04)                  (0.07)
    Publications: 4-5                           1.16                               0.69                       0.88                     0.3
                                               (0.04)                             (0.04)                     (0.04)                  (0.06)
    Publications: 6-7                           1.44                               0.88                       1.01                    0.38
                                               (0.05)                             (0.05)                     (0.05)                  (0.08)
    Publications: 8+                            1.61                               0.99                       1.17                    0.44
                                               (0.05)                             (0.05)                     (0.05)                  (0.08)
Number of Authors
    2 authors                                   0.19                               0.16                       -0.12                  -0.04
                                               (0.02)                             (0.03)                     (0.03)                  (0.05)
    3 authors                                   0.26                               0.25                       -0.19                   -0.01
                                               (0.03)                             (0.04)                     (0.04)                  (0.06)
    4+ authors                                  0.42                                0.4                       -0.01                    0.11
                                               (0.05)                             (0.06)                     (0.06)                  (0.09)
     Indicators for Field of Paper                        Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
     Indicators for Journal-Year Cohort                   Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
     Number of Observations                              24,012                  13,581                     24,012                   13,581
     R-squared                                            0.23                    0.29
     Pseudo-R^2                                                                                               0.11                    0.48
Notes: This table reports the results of the main regressions in the paper, excluding observations for which Google Scholar citations were missing.
In the main specifications, these observations were retained and assigned zero citatons.




                                                                        75
