                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MIGRANTS AND THE MAKING OF AMERICA:
                     THE SHORT- AND LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF
                IMMIGRATION DURING THE AGE OF MASS MIGRATION

                                        Sandra Sequeira
                                         Nathan Nunn
                                          Nancy Qian

                                      Working Paper 23289
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23289


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We thank Mohammad Ahmad, Paulo Costa, Ariel Gomez, Daniel Lowery, Daria Kutzenova, Eva
Ng, Matthew Summers, Guo Xu, and Adam Xu for excellent research assistance. We are grateful
for comments received from Ran Abramitzky, Philipp Ager, Leah Boustan, Melissa Dell, Dave
Donaldson, Claudia Goldin, Casper Worm Hansen, Jeff Frieden, Larry Katz, Petra Moser, Gerard
Padro-i-Miquel and Gavin Wright, as well as audiences at numerous seminars and conferences.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sandra Sequeira, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Migrants and the Making of America: The Short- and Long-Run Effects of Immigration during
the Age of Mass Migration
Sandra Sequeira, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 23289
March 2017
JEL No. N31,N32,N61,N62,N71,N72,N91,N92

                                        ABSTRACT

We study the effects of European immigration to the United States during the Age of Mass
Migration (1850-1920) on economic prosperity today. We exploit variation in the extent of
immigration across counties arising from the interaction of fluctuations in aggregate immigrant
flows and the gradual expansion of the railway network across the United States. We find that
locations with more historical immigration today have higher incomes, less poverty, less
unemployment, higher rates of urbanization, and greater educational attainment. The long-run
effects appear to arise from the persistence of sizeable short-run benefits, including greater
industrialization, increased agricultural productivity, and more innovation.


Sandra Sequeira                                Nancy Qian
London School of Economics                     MEDS
s.sequeira@lse.ac.uk                           Kellogg SOM
                                               Northwestern University
Nathan Nunn                                    2001 Sheridan Rd.
Department of Economics                        Evanston, Il 60208
Harvard University                             and NBER
1805 Cambridge St                              nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23289
1. Introduction

An important issue within current American political discourse is the effect that immigrants have

on the communities into which they settle. While this topic has received significant attention,

the focus has generally been on the short-term effects of immigrants.1 We know much less about

their long-run effects. This is particularly important because the short-run and long-run effects

could be very different, in both magnitude and in sign.

   We contribute to an improved understanding of the long-run effects of immigration by taking

a historical perspective.       In particular, we examine migration into the United States during

America’s Age of Mass Migration (from 1850–1920) and estimate the causal effect of immigrants

on economic and social outcomes approximately 100 years later. This period of immigration is

notable for many reasons. First, this was the period in U.S. history with the highest levels of

immigration. Second, the immigrants that arrived during this time were different from previous

waves of immigrants. While earlier immigrants were primarily from western Europe, the new

wave also included large numbers of immigrants from southern, northern, and eastern Europe

who spoke different languages and had different religious practices (Hatton and Williamson,

2005, p. 51, Daniels, 2002, pp. 121–137, Abramitzky and Boustan, 2015).

   Empirically studying the long-run effects of immigration is challenging. A natural strategy

is to examine the relationship between historical immigration and current economic outcomes

across counties in the United States. However, there are important shortcomings of such an

exercise. There may be persistent omitted factors that affected immigration decisions that could

independently influence the outcomes of interest.                 It is also possible that immigrants were

attracted to locations with more growth potential. Alternatively, they may have only been able

to settle in more marginal locations, where land and rents were cheaper and future economic

growth was lower. These concerns would cause the OLS estimates to be biased.

   An important contribution of our analysis is the development of an identification strategy that

overcomes this problem. We propose an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits two

facts about immigration during this period. The first is that after arriving into the United States,

immigrants tended to use the newly constructed railway to travel inland to their eventual place
   1 See Kerr and Kerr (2016) for evidence of the effects of immigrants on entrepreneurial activity; Peri (2012) for
evidence of the effects of immigrants on productivity; Peri and Sparber (2009) for evidence of effects on occupational
specialization; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) for evidence of effects on innovation; Card (2012) for evidence of
effects on average wages; and Card (2009) for evidence on wage inequality.



                                                          1
of residence (Faulkner, 1960, Foerster, 1969). Therefore, a county’s connection to the railway

network affected the number of immigrants that settled in the county. The second fact is that the

aggregate inflow of immigrants coming to the United States during this period fluctuated greatly

from decade to decade.

   Holding constant the total length of time a county was connected to the railway network (in

our analysis we always condition on this), if a county was connected to the railway network

during periods of high aggregate immigration to the United States, then the county will tend

to have had more immigrant settlement. During this time, once a county became connected

to the railway network it almost always stayed connected. Therefore, asking whether a county

was connected during periods with relatively higher or lower aggregate immigrant inflows is

equivalent to asking whether a county became connected to the railway network just prior to a

decade with particularly high aggregate immigration or just prior to a decade with particularly

low aggregate immigration. All else equal, the average inflow of immigrants during the time in

which the county was connected to the railway will be greater in the former case than in the latter

case.

   The benefit of combining the two sources of variation – the timing of the construction of the

railway and the timing of immigration booms – is that the interaction between the two generates

variation that is unlikely to affect our contemporary outcomes of interest through other channels.

Whether a county became connected to the railway just prior to an immigration boom rather than

an immigration lull is unlikely to have a direct effect on our current outcomes of interest other

than through historical immigration to the county.

   To implement our IV strategy, we proceed in three steps. We begin with a “zero-stage” regres-

sion where we examine a panel of counties every census decade from 1850 to 1920, and estimate

the determinants of the share of the population that was foreign-born. The specification includes

county fixed effects and time-period fixed effects. It also includes an interaction between the

aggregate inflow of European immigrants into the United States (normalized by total population)

during the prior ten years and an indicator variable that equals one if the county was connected

to the railway network at the beginning of the ten-year period. This interaction captures the

differential effect of connection to the railway network on immigrant settlement in decades with

high aggregate immigrant inflows relative to decades with low aggregate immigrant inflows. This

interaction is the variable (and variation) that is the basis of our instrument.


                                                  2
   In the zero-stage panel regression, we also control for the railway connectivity indicator and the

aggregate inflow of immigrants (i.e., both components of the interaction term).2 We also include

the following additional covariates: the share of immigrants in the previous decade, population

density, urbanization, an indicator variable for a county being connected to the railway network,

and the interaction of the railway connectivity indicator variable with a measure of aggregate

industrial development.

   In our zero-stage panel regression, we find that the interaction term is a strong predictor

of the settlement of immigrants into a county. The coefficient on the interaction is positive and

statistically significant, which means that counties experienced more immigrant settlement if they

were connected to the railway network and the aggregate flow of immigrants into the country was

high at the time.

   Using the zero-stage estimates, we construct measures of the share of the population that was

foreign born (for each county and decade) that is predicted using the interaction term only. In

other words, the only variation that we interpret as exogenous is the differential effect of being

connected to the railway during an aggregate immigration boom versus being connected during

an aggregate immigration lull. This procedure yields a predicted immigrant share for each county

and decade. Using these estimated shares, we then create, for each county, an average across all

time periods to construct an average predicted immigrant share in each decade from 1860–1920.

Next, we estimate the cross-county relationship between average historical immigrant share (from

1860–1920) and economic outcomes today using the predicted immigrant share as an instrument

for the actual immigrant share.

   There are a number of potential concerns with our identification strategy. First, even though

the direct effect of railway connectivity is controlled for in our zero-stage equation, we find that

our instrument is correlated with how early a county was connected to the railway. As we will

show, there is a small (but significant) difference in the average date of connection for counties

connected prior to boom periods relative to those connected prior to lull periods. To err on the

side of caution, in our 2SLS equations, we control for a measure of when the county became

connected to the railway network.

   A second potential concern is that decades with high aggregate immigration flows may have
   2 In the specification, the aggregate inflow of immigrants drops out of the specification since it is absorbed by decade

fixed effects.




                                                            3
been different in other ways. For example, if high levels of aggregate immigration happened to

have coincided with high levels of industrial development, then the differential effect of connec-

tion to the railway depending on aggregate immigration may be correlated with the differential

effect of connection to the railway depending on industrial development. Given this concern,

our zero-stage specification includes an interaction of the railway connection indicator and an

index of aggregate industrialization in the United States to allow railway connection to have a

differential effect along these lines. This controls for any differential effect of railway connection

that depends on industrialization. Following the same procedure as with our instrument, we

create a measure of predicted immigration using this interaction term, and we control for this

generated variable in all of our IV specifications. Thus, any effects that are due to the timing of

connection to the railway relative to the level of industrialization should be accounted for by this

covariate.

   A third potential concern with our estimates is the possibility that the aggregate flow of

immigrants could have been endogenous to railway expansion. In particular, if immigrant inflows

tended to increase once the railway became connected to counties with a greater future growth

potential, then our instrument would suffer from reverse causality and be invalid. Thus, as a

robustness check, we construct a measure of the predicted flow of European migrants to the

United States that is determined solely by temperature and precipitation shocks in the origin

countries. By using the flow of immigrants determined by origin-country weather shocks, we

can correct for the potential endogeneity of immigrant flows to factors from within the United

States – including the railway expansion. We find that predicted immigrant flows are strongly

correlated with actual flows, and that using the predicted values yields estimates that are nearly

identical to our baseline estimates.

   We find that historical immigration (from 1860–1920) resulted in significantly higher incomes,

less poverty, less unemployment, more urbanization, and higher educational attainment today.

The estimates, in addition to being statistically significant, are also economically meaningful. For

example, according to the estimates for per capita income, moving a county with no historical

immigration (i.e., during 1860–1920) to the 50th percentile of the sample (which is 0.049) results

in a 20% increase in average per capita income today. We also check whether these long-run

economic benefits came alongside long-run social costs. We find no evidence that historical

immigration affects social cohesion as measured by social capital, voter turnout, or crime rates.


                                                  4
   Our analysis also attempts to gain some insight into the potential mechanisms that underlie

our estimates. We first examine whether our estimates reflect the creation of economic benefits

by immigrants or the displacement of economic benefits from locations that received fewer

immigrants to locations that received more immigrants.3 To address this question, we test for

the presence of spillovers effects. If our findings are due to the relocation of economic activity,

we expect to find that immigration to a location has negative effects in nearby regions. Therefore,

we estimate the effect that immigration into a county affects economic outcomes in neighboring

counties, in other counties within the same state, and in other counties within the same state that

are not neighbors. We find no evidence of immigration into a county resulting in a decline in

long-run economic prosperity in nearby counties.

   As a second step in better understanding mechanisms, we ask when the economic benefits of

immigrants began to emerge. It’s possible that in the short-run, immigrants acted as a burden

on the economy and the benefits they brought were only felt in the medium- or long-run.

The immigration backlash and the rise of social and political nativist movements at the time

suggest that there may have been initial costs to immigration. However, our estimates show that

immigration resulted in benefits that were felt soon after their arrival. Immigration resulted in

more and larger manufacturing establishments, greater agricultural productivity, and higher rates

of innovation.

   These findings are consistent with a long-standing narrative in the historical literature sug-

gesting that immigrants benefitted the economy by providing an ample supply of unskilled

labor, which was crucial for early industrialization. Immigration also resulted in a small but

potentially important supply of skilled individuals, who provided knowledge, know-how, skills,

and innovations, which were economically beneficial and particularly important for industrial

development.4

   Having estimated the short-run effects of immigrants, we then turn to an examination of the

full dynamic effects, examining their effects in the short-, medium-, and long-runs. Examining

urbanization rates in each decade from 1920–2000, we find that the vast majority of the benefits
   3 As in Kline and Moretti’s (2014) analysis of the Tennessee Valley Authority, greater early industrialization may be

directly offset by a decrease in industrialization elsewhere in the economy.
   4 On average, immigrants appear to have been less educated than native-born populations. We find that, consistent

with this, immigration is associated with lower levels of education in the short-run (prior to 1920). However, in the
medium- and long-run (1950 and later), we find that historical immigration switches to having a positive effect on
education levels, which increases monotonically over time.




                                                           5
of immigration from 1850–1920 were felt by 1920, and that these benefits persisted, increasing

slightly, until 2000. We find a similar pattern for income and education for the post WWII period

from when there are data.

   This study provides several new findings that help better understand the effects of immigration

in U.S. history. The first is that in the long-run, immigration has provided large economic benefits.

The second is that there is no evidence that these long-run benefits come at the expense of short-

run economic costs. In fact, immigration immediately led to economic benefits that took the

form of higher incomes, higher productivity, more innovation, and more industrialization. These

findings complement recent scholarship examining the selection of immigrants to the United

States (e.g., Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2012, 2013, Spitzer and Zimran, 2013) and their

experiences after arrival (e.g., Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2014), as well as the existing

literature on the importance of the cultural legacies of immigration (e.g., Fischer, 1989, Ottaviano

and Peri, 2006, Ager and Bruckner, 2013, Grosjean, 2014, Bandiera, Mohnen, Rasul and Viarengo,

2016). Our findings of the long-term benefits of immigrants within the United States complement

existing studies that also find long-term benefits of historical immigration in Brazil (Rocha, Ferraz

and Soares, 2015) and Argentina (Droller, 2013).

   Our findings add new long-run evidence to a large empirical literature that examines the

short-run consequences of immigration in the United States (e.g., Borjas, 1994, 1995, 1999, Card,

1990, 2009, 2012, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010, Peri, 2012, Rodriguez-Pose and von Berlepsch,

2014).5 The results also complement Atack, Bateman, Haines and Margo’s (2010) findings that

show that in the United States Midwest from 1850–1860, railways accounted for more than half

of the increase in urbanization rates. Our findings provide evidence for a potential channel

underlying the Atack et al. (2010) result. The railways brought immigrants to the connected

locations which, in turn, increased income and urbanization in those areas.

   Our paper examines the effect of immigrants in general and not the different effects of

immigrants from different countries, which has been the focus of some lines of research (e.g.,

Fischer, 1989, Fulford, Petkov and Schiantarelli, 2015, Burchardi and Hassan, 2015). In theory,

our identification strategy could be used to instrument separately for immigrants from different

countries. Following the same logic as for all immigrants, in theory, one could estimate a
  5 While much of the literature focuses on short-run effects, an exception is Rodriguez-Pose and von Berlepsch (2014)

who also examine the relationship between historical immigration and long-term economic development today.




                                                          6
zero-stage equation that uses variation from the interaction of the total flow of immigrants from a

specific sending-country and a county’s connection to the railway network. However, in practice,

the large number of countries (and thus endogenous variables and instruments) results in first

stage estimates that are weak and counterintuitive.6

   Our paper is structured as follows. We begin with a description of the historical setting of

our analysis. This is followed, in Sections 3 and 4 by an overview of our data and identification

strategy. In Section 5, we report our baseline estimates, and in Section 6 we conduct a variety of

robustness checks. In Section 7, to better understand the mechanisms, we estimate the short- and

medium-run effects of immigrants. We end with concluding thoughts in Section 8.


2. Historical Background

A. Immigration and the Railway

Throughout our period of interest, migration was facilitated by the railways. The best land was

often granted to railway companies by the Federal government in an attempt to promote the

development of uninhabited territories. The railway companies, including the Union Pacific,

Santa Fe, Burlington, Northern Pacific, through a variety of mechanisms, intentionally promoted

the settlement of these tracks of land contiguous to their railway lines (Luebke, 1977, p. 410).

They did this by selling the land cheaply and by encouraging immigrants from Europe to settle

there. Common methods used to accomplish this were the establishment of advertising offices

in Europe and subsidizing migrants’ trans-Atlantic travel. Historian James Hedges (1926, p. 312)

describes these efforts, writing that: “The stream of population which followed the wake of the

railroads of the West was in part the natural consequences of the mere fact of the construction of

the roads, but more largely the result of the strenuous efforts put forth by the railroad companies

themselves.”

   Upon arrival to the United States, railroads were the primary means of transport to the interior.

James Hedges (1926, p. 312) goes on to describe the settlement of the Western United States as “a

story of Mennonites and sects from South Russia, journeying out to the prairies of Kansas, not
   6 In practice, one would have over 30 endogenous immigrant share variables, one for each sending country for

which we have data, and the same number of instruments. Doing this, one finds that the first stages are all very weak.
In addition, in the first-stage equations, immigrant flows often load on the “wrong” instruments e.g., other countries’
instruments are better predictors than the own-country instrument. These issues are most likely due to the collinearity
that is present in the endogenous variables and the instruments.



                                                          7
with wagon and ox-teams but in the drab passenger coaches of early western railroads. It is the

story of Swedes and Norwegians in Minnesota, of Germans in Dakota, Bohemians in Nebraska

and of Hollanders in Iowa, who sought new homes where the railroads led them.” Thus, the

railways were an important means of transport for immigrants moving from the coastal ports of

the east to the interior of the United States.


B. Why Migrants Matter in both the Short- and Long-Run

There are several reasons why immigration during America’s Age of Mass Migration may have

mattered in both the short- and long-runs. The contributions of immigrants are nicely summa-

rized by John F. Kennedy in his book, A Nation of Immigrants, where he writes: “Between 1880

and 1920 America became the industrial and agricultural giant of the world. . . This could not

have been done without the hard labor, the technical skills and entrepreneurial ability of the 23.5

million people who came to America in this period” (Kennedy, 1964, p. 34). We discuss each of

these potential contributions of immigration below.

Provision of unskilled labor: Immigrants may have spurred industrialization by providing a

large supply of unskilled labor. During the Age of Mass Migration, immigrants provided labor

to newly established factories. As historian James Bergquist (2007, pp. 264–265) puts it: “New

Immigration from England, Ireland, and Germany brought many of the working classes to the

growing industrial centers and to the coal-mining regions. Many of the English and Germans

had previous experience in the industrial cities of their homelands.”

   Many have hypothesized that the rapid increase in industrialization in the United States was

fueled by immigrant labor. For example, Foerster (1924, p. 331) writes that “the sixfold increase

in the capital invested in manufactures between the outbreak of the Civil War and the year 1890,

a period in which the population in the country doubled, was largely made possible by the

inpouring immigrants.”

   Evidence that immigration resulted in cheaper labor costs – i.e., low wages – has been put forth

by Goldin (1994). Examining variation across American cities from 1890 to 1903, she finds that

greater immigration was associated with lower wage growth: a one-percentage-point increase

in the foreign-born population is associated with a decrease in wages of about 1.0–1.5 percent.

Interestingly, these effects are found both for less-skilled laborers and more-skilled artisans.



                                                  8
Provision of important skills for industry: Although the vast majority of immigrants worked

in unskilled occupations, an important fraction engaged in more specialized activities. Malone

(1935) reports that among the noteworthy and exceptional individuals summarized in the fifteen

volume Dictionary of American Biography, 12.5% of those born after 1790 were foreign born,

which is higher than the national proportion of foreigners (10.1% in our sample). More recently,

Abramitzky et al. (2014) examine the occupational distribution of immigrants and natives in 1900,

and find that immigrants were as equally likely as natives to be in unskilled occupations, much

less likely to be in farming, and more likely to hold semi-skilled or skilled blue collar occupations

such as carpenters or machinists.

   Some immigrant groups were disproportionately represented in skilled occupations. For

example, in 1870, 37% of German-born workers were employed in skilled occupations (Daniels,

2002, p. 150). Bergquist (2007, p. 194) describes the early migrants from 1870–1920 as often

bringing “skills and knowledge that paved the way to becoming self-sufficient tradesmen”. These

skilled immigrants included carpenters, cabinetmakers, blacksmiths, brewers, distillers, barbers,

tailors, machinists, jewelers, clockmakers, butchers, bakers, sculptors, artists, and musicians.

Immigrants commonly used expertise and/or experience to gain a foothold in particular trades.

   Different immigrant groups tended to bring with them different sets of experiences and skills

that allowed them to specialize in particular occupations. For example, Bergquist (2007, p. 195)

describes the Genoese Italians: “Reflecting their origins in a region with a venerable tradition

in the commercial trades, the Genoese opened saloons and restaurants; they also went into

confectionary and fresh fruit businesses.” Describing Jewish immigrants, he writes that “their

premigration experiences as well as cultural traditions also equipped eastern European Jews and

Armenians with abilities suitable to the retail and professional undertakings” (Bergquist, 2007, p.

195).7

Provision of agricultural know-how: Immigrants represented a small but important proportion

of farm operators (15.3% in 1900 and 10.5% in 1920), with the vast majority of these being owner-

operators (80% in 1920) (Cance, 1925, pp. 102–103). Immigrants also contributed to productivity

improvements within agriculture, bringing with them knowledge about agricultural techniques.

Cance (1925, p. 113), writing just after the end of the Age of Mass Migration, argues that “some
   7 Formal  empirical evidence of skilled immigrants having important effect on industrial development has been put
forth in other contexts. For example, Hornung (2014) finds large positive effects of 17th century Huguenot immigration
into Prussia on the productivity of textile manufacturing.


                                                          9
of the very best of our farmers are immigrants of the first and second generation,” a fact that he

attributed to their “better farm practices” (p. 104).

   The most notable group of immigrant farmers were the Germans, the largest immigrant group

within the farming sector, accounting for 25% of all foreign-born farm-operators in 1920 (Cance,

1925, p. 113). Kollmorgen (1942, pp. 53–54), describes the Pennsylvania Germans: “Not only did

the Pennsylvania German adopt new kinds of crops and better stock, he also perfected and pop-

ularized certain seeds, crops and foods. He was the first to breed the Conestoga horse; he became

known for the variety of vegetables he raised; he played an important part in perfecting several

kinds of wheat and apples. Moreover, he pioneered the rotation and diversification of crops and

in providing good shelter for stock.” A particularly telling example of this is the introduction of

the alfalfa seed, which was widely adopted as an excellent foraging crop in the Northwest. In

1857, the seed was taken to Minnesota from a village in Baden by a German immigrant named

Wendelin Grimm (Saloutos, 1976, p. 66). In his analysis of German immigrant farmers of Texas

in the late 19th century, Jordan (1966, pp. 5–7) documents numerous contemporary reports of the

superiority of German farmers, citing their advanced “intelligence, industriousness, and thrift,”

and describing them as “laborious, persevering, and eager to accumulate.”

   A concrete example of the effect that immigrants had on agricultural innovation can be found

in a study by Gripshover and Bell (2012) that documents innovations in the U.S. onion farming

industry from 1883 to 1939. The authors examine the 97 onion-farming inventions during this

period. They use the micro-census, as well as biographical and genealogical sources, to obtain

as much information as possible on the inventors. They find that of the 81 different inventors, a

significant proportion – 19% – were foreign-born, and 49% were either first- or second-generation

immigrants. The first ever patent for a mechanical “onion-cultivator” was granted in 1883 to

James Peter Turner, an immigrant born in England who moved to the United States in 1850.

Provision of knowledge and innovation: It has been noted that immigrants contributed directly

to the productivity of the United States economy through important technological innovations.

One example of such an innovation is the suspension bridge. John A. Roebling, a German-born

and trained civil engineer, is credited with ushering in the era of the suspension bridge at a

time in U.S. history in which transportation infrastructure was desperately needed. He built

numerous suspension bridges, his most noteworthy being the Niagara Fall Suspension Bridge

and the Brooklyn Bridge (Faust, 1916, p. 10). Other notable engineers include: Charles Conrad


                                                  10
Schneider (born in Saxony), who constructed the famous cantilever bridge across the Niagara

River in 1883; Austrian Gustav Lindenthal, who built the Hell Gate Bridge; and John F. O’Rourke,

an Irish engineer, who built seven of the tunnels under the East and Hudson Rivers, and six of

the tunnels of the New York subway systems (Wittke, 1939, pp. 389–390).

  Another example is Alexander Graham Bell, born in Scotland in 1847, and moved to Boston

in 1871. In 1876, Bell developed an acoustic telegraph that could transmit voices and sounds

telegraphically, and within a year, the Bell Telephone company was established. Other notable

inventors include: David Thomas (Welsh), who invented the hot blast furnace; John Ericsson

(Swedish), who invented the ironclad ship and the screw propeller; Conrad Hubert (Russian),

who invented the flashlight; and Ottmar Mergenthaler (German), who invented the linotype

machine (Kennedy, 1964, pp. 33–34).

  Immigrants also made important contributions to the educational system of the United States

(Faust, 1916, p. 10). For example, the concept of kindergarten was brought to the United States

by German immigrant Friederich Fröbel. Recent research by Paz (2015) finds that the presence

of kindergartens during the kindergarten movement (1890–1910) resulted in an average of 0.6

additional years of total schooling by adulthood and six percent higher income. Further, Ager,

Cinnirella and Jensen (2016) show that not only did kindergartens increase education and incomes

of children, but they also caused parents to have fewer children. The State University system,

which began in Michigan, was modeled after the Prussian state school and university system.

The Michigan model then became the standard for other state schools in the West (Faust, 1916,

p. 11). The current structure of graduate departments at American Universities is also modeled

after the German system. It was first introduced by Johns Hopkins University at its inception in

1876.

  Immigrants also contributed to business innovation. For example, Hatton and Williamson

(2005, p. 94) report that among individuals born from 1816–1850, immigrants are disproportion-

ately represented among the top businessmen in the United States.




                                              11
3. Data

Our zero-stage estimation uses a panel of counties and census decades from 1860 to 1920.8 The

key variables of the analysis are measures of whether a county was connected to the railway

network in each decade and the total inflow of immigrants into the United States.

   Data on a county’s historical connectivity to the railway network were constructed using a

number of historical maps. With these, we digitized and constructed the location of the railway

network for each decade from 1830 to 1920.9 To construct the digitized railway network, we first

obtained an accurate and geo-referenced shape file of the current railway network.10 We then laid

the modern shapefile over a digitized version of a paper map of the most recent historical time

period of interest: 1920. We then proceeded to remove all railway lines that exist today but did

not exist in 1920. We repeated this for each earlier time period in sequence – i.e., 1910, 1900, etc

– at each point removing railway lines that did not exist in the previous decade. This procedure

ensures the greatest precision in digitizing the exact location of the railway lines. Because of

mapping imprecisions from the original historical maps, simply tracing the lines from each paper

map would have generated inaccurate maps of historical railway networks. There were a very

small number of cases where railway lines existed at some point in the past, but are not in the

modern shapefile. In these cases, the historical railway lines were drawn using the geo-referenced

paper maps. Thus, our final dataset contains the locations of all railways that ever exists in the

United States.11

   As a measure of whether a county was connected to the railway network, we use an indicator

variable that equals one if a county’s boundary is intersected by at least one railway line. The

proportion of connected counties steadily increased overtime from just under 20% in 1850 to over

90% in 1920 (see appendix Figure A12 for the proportion in all decades).

   The second important source of information in our analysis is data on aggregate immigration
   8 Although   1860 is the first year of our panel, we measure the presence of the railway one-decade prior. Therefore,
1850 is the earliest period of railway data that we use in our analysis. It is the decade in which the census started
to consistently record whether an individual was foreign-born. The census were obtained through the Natural
Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS), which is available at www.nhgis.org (see Minnesota Population
Center, 2011), and the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), which is available at
www.icpsr.umich.edu (see Haines and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 2010).
    9 Figures A1–A11 of the online appendix show, for time periods from 1850–1920, the digitized and geo-referenced

railway network overlaid on the original paper maps from which the data were obtained.
  10 The shapefile that was used is the 2009 version of the National Transportation Atlas Railroads (NTAR), which is at

a 1:100,000 scale. The data are from the United States Department of Transportation.
  11 Full details of the procedure are further reported in the paper’s online appendix.




                                                          12
                                                                  2.5
                                                                  2
  Total Immigrants (in Millions)

                                                                  1.5
                                                                  1
                                                                  0.5
                                                                  0




                                                                         1820   1840   1860        1880    1900   1920   1940
                                                                                                   Years
(a) Annual flow of immigrants to the United States, 1820–1940. Source: Migration Policy Institute.
                                                                   .15
                                   Migrants/Total US Population
                                                                   .1
                                                                   .05
                                                                   0




                                                                         1820   1840   1860        1880    1900   1920   1940

                                                                                               Decades



(b) Decadal averages of annual flow of immigrants to the United States normalized by total U.S.
population, 1820–1939. Source: Willcox (1929-1931).

Figure 1: Immigration into the United States during the Age of Mass Migration.




                                                                                              13
flows. Using Willcox (1929-1931), we digitized data for the total number of European immigrants

entering the United States each year from 1820 to 1920.12 Using this, we can calculate the total

number of immigrants that arrived in the decade during our time period of interest.13 Annual

aggregate immigration inflows from 1820 to 1940 are shown in Figure 1a (Migration Policy

Institute, 2016). It is clear from the figure that aggregate immigrant flows into the United States

fluctuated significantly from year to year. As shown in Figure 1b, even after normalizing the

flows by the current United States population and aggregating to the decade level (which is the

unit of our analysis) one still observes significant variation over time.14 This volatility, combined

with the expansion of the railway network, is the variation that is the core of our identification

strategy.


4. Empirical Strategy

A. Estimating Equations

Our identification strategy exploits two facts about immigration during the period from 1850 to

1920. First, the total inflow of immigrants fluctuated greatly across decades (recall Figure 1b).

Second, the arriving immigrants tended to use the newly constructed railway to travel inland

to their eventual place of residence (Faulkner, 1960, Foerster, 1969). Therefore, throughout the

period of railway development, the timing of a county’s connection to the railway network in

relation to the aggregate inflow of immigrants at the time affected the number of immigrants that

settled in the county. To capture this source of variation, our analysis begins with the following

zero-stage equation:


 Migrant Shareit = αt + αi + γ Migrant Shareit−1 + δIitRR
                                                        −1
                                                          Access
                                                                 + β Migrant Flowt−1 × IitRR−1Access

                           +θ Industrializationt−1 × IitRR−1Access + Xit−1 Γ + εit ,                                (1)
  12 We  use Willcox (1929-1931) rather than the already-digitized data available from Migration Policy Institute (2016)
because Willcox (1929-1931) reports immigrants by sending country and Migration Policy Institute (2016) does not.
This information is necessary for a robustness check where we predict immigration flows from a country that are due
to sending country weather shocks.
  13 In our analysis, we only consider European immigrants, who comprised the vast majority of immigrants during

this period. Our analysis does not therefore include immigrants from Latin America, Asia or Africa, since immigrants
from these locations account for less than 5% of immigrants into the United States during our period of interest (see
e.g., Abramitzky and Boustan, 2015, Figure 2).
  14 The figure reports immigrant flows by decade and normalized by the total United States population. Flows

reported in decade t refer to flows during that year and the 9 years that follow. For example, 1820 in the figure refers
to flows from 1820–1829. Throughout the paper we maintain this convention unless stated otherwise.




                                                          14
where i indexes counties and t indexes census years (1860, 1870, 1880, 1890, 1900, 1910,

1920); αt denotes decade fixed effects and αi county fixed effects.15 The outcome of interest,

Migrant Shareit , is the share of the population in county i that are foreign born during census

year t. Migrant Shareit−1 denotes a one-decade lag of the dependent variable, which captures

the mechanical relationship between the previous decade’s population of immigrants and this

decade’s population of immigrants.16 Migrant Flowt−1 is the flow of all European immigrants

arriving in the United States normalized by total U.S. population in the decade prior to year

t (e.g., if t = 1860, then Migrant Flowt−1 measures immigrants arriving from 1850–1859), and

IitRR
    −1
      Access is an indicator variable that equals one if county i is connected to the railway network


in decade t − 1 (e.g., if t = 1860, then IitRR
                                             −1
                                               Access is an indicator variable for 1850).


   The core of our identification strategy is the interaction between the aggregate flow of

immigrants into the U.S. and whether a county was connected to the railway network:

Migrant Flowt−1 × IitRR
                      −1
                        Access . The interaction captures the differential effect that connection to


the railway had on immigrant settlement during periods of high aggregate immigration relative

to periods of low aggregate immigration. Thus, we expect the estimate of β in equation (1) to be

positive.

   The two variables that comprise the interaction terms are also included in equation (1). The

coefficient δ for the variable IitRR
                                   −1
                                     Access reflects the estimated effect of access to the railway on


immigrant settlement during a decade when there are no immigrants coming into the United

States. Thus, we expect the estimate of δ to be zero. The variable Migrant Flowt−1 is absorbed by

the time period fixed effects, and thus does not appear explicitly in the equation.

   Given the concern that the timing of connection of the railway may have a direct effect on

long-term development by allowing specialization and industrialization, we also allow the effect

of railway connection to vary differentially depending on the level of aggregate industrial devel-

opment at the time: Industrializationt−1 × IitRR
                                               −1
                                                 Access . Industrialization
                                                                            t−1 is the annual average

during the ten years prior to census year t.17 This interaction term captures any differential

effects that connection to the railway network has depending on the level of aggregate industrial
  15 We  have 49 state fixed effects in total: 48 states (i.e., all states but Hawaii and Alaska) and Washington D.C.
  16 Due  to the presence of a Nickel bias, there is concern that the estimate of γ may be biased, which could have some
effect on the other estimates, and in particular, β. As we discuss below, and report in appendix Table A3, the estimates
of equation (1) are nearly identical without the inclusion of a lagged dependent variable
   17 The level of industrialization is measured using the natural log of the annual industrial production index taken

from Davis (2004). The data are shown in appendix Figure A13.




                                                          15
development at the time.

   Equation (1) also includes a vector of additional control variables, Xit−1 , that are intended to

capture the potential influence that cities and more populous counties had in attracting immi-

grants: log population density, a one-decade lag of an urbanization indicator, and an interaction

of the urbanization indicator with the lagged aggregate immigrant flow variable. The controls are

important given the potential effect that the railway had on population growth and urbanization.

   After estimating equation (1), we construct our instrument by first calculating the immigrant

share in each county and period that is predicted by the interaction between the aggregate inflow
                                                                            \
of migrants and whether the county was connected to the railway network: Migrant Shareit =
                     RR Access , where β
              t−1 × Iit−1
b Migrant Flow
β                                      b is the estimate of β from equation (1).
                                                                  \
   We thus have predicted measures for each county and decade, Migrant Shareit . Using this, we

construct a predicted migrant share that is averaged over the seven census years from 1860–1920.

Thus, the measure is given by:
                                                        T
                                                    1
                             \ Share =
                        Avg Migrant i
                                                    T   ∑ βb Migrant Flowt−1 × IitRR−1Access ,
                                                        t=1

where T is the total number of time periods. Since some counties were still in the process of

being formed during this period, our panel is unbalanced with counties entering over time.18
                       \ Share , we use the average immigrant share for all census years
When constructing Avg Migrant i

from 1860 to 1920 for which the county is in existence.
                                                       \ Share as an instrument for
   We implement our IV procedure using 2SLS, with Avg Migrant i

the actual average migrant share from 1860–1920. This procedure is an example of the use of

a “generated regressor”, e.g., a variable constructed from predictors of an estimated equation.

When estimating 2SLS using generated instruments, under very weak assumptions, the point

estimates are consistent and the 2SLS standard errors and test statistics are asymptotically valid.

For more information see Pagan (1984) and Wooldridge (2002, pp. 116–117).

   Our 2SLS equations are given by equations (2) and (3), where equation (2) is the first stage and

equation (3) is the second stage.

                                           \ Share + ωRR Durationis + Xis Ω + is
          Avg Migrant Shareis = ζs + µAvg Migrant                                                                     (2)
                                                  is

                              Yis = ξs + ψAvg Migrant Shareis + πRR Durationis + Xis Π + νis                          (3)
  18 In1860, there are 1,600 counties in our sample, there are 1,974 counties in 1870; 2,216 in 1880; 2,468 in 1890; 2,728
in 1900; 2,797 in 1910; and 2,946 in 1920.


                                                              16
where i indexes counties and s states. Yis is a contemporary outcome of interest; e.g., current per

capita income, poverty, unemployment, education, etc. These variables are generally measured

in 2000. Avg Migrant sharei is the average migrant share in county i in census years from 1860
                  \ Share is the predicted average migrant share constructed from the
to 1920; and Avg Migrant is

zero-stage estimates of equation (1).

   In equations (2) and (3), ζs and ξs denote state fixed effects, which are intended to capture

broad differences between counties due to, for example, differences in geography or historical

experience. RR Durationis is the number of years, as of 2000, that a county has been connected to

the railway network. The variable is included to address the possibility that our instrument may

be correlated with early connection to the railway network, which could have an independent

long-run effect on our outcomes of interest.

   The vector Xi includes the remaining covariates. These include the latitude and longitude

of a county’s centroid, which account for potential relationships between our instrument and a

county’s east/west or north/south orientation relative to other counties in the state. Also included

is a second generated regressor that is meant to account for any potential effects that the timing of

a county’s connection to the railway may have had due to the level of industrialization at the time.

Thus, we include the following generated instrument from the zero stage estimates of equation

(1):   1
       T   ∑Tt=1 b
                 θ Industrializationt−1 × IitRR
                                              −1
                                                Access , where θ̂ is the estimated coefficient from zero-stage


equation (1) and T is the number of census years from 1860–1920 for which county i is in the

sample.


B. Identification and Potential Threats to Inference

Our IV strategy exploits the differential effect that a county’s connection to the railway network

has in decades with high aggregate immigration relative to decades with low aggregate immigra-

tion. During the period of analysis, once a county became connected to the railway network it

generally stayed connected. Therefore, whether a county was connected during periods with

relatively high aggregate immigration is primarily determined by whether a county became

connected to the railway network just prior to a decade with high aggregate immigration rather

than just prior to a decade with low aggregate immigration.

   Thus, the primary source of variation that underlies our estimates is whether a county was first

connected to the railway network prior to an immigration boom period or prior to an immigration


                                                       17
lull period. To provide a better sense of this variation, Figure 2 presents examples of pairs of

counties that are within the same state (recall that we control for state fixed effects), but became

connected to the railway at different times. Within each pair, one county became connected just

prior to a high-immigration decade (i.e., a boom) and the other became connected just prior to

a low-immigration decade (i.e., a lull). Counties connected just prior to a boom decade (1850s,

1880s, and 1900s) are shaded red (dark) and counties connected just prior to a lull decade (1860s,

1870s, and 1890s) are shaded yellow (light). Also reported in the figure is the subsequent average

migrant share for the census years from 1860 to 1920. The examples illustrate how the exact

timing of a county’s connection to the railway network can have significant effects on the extent

of subsequent immigration into a county.

   An important question regarding the validity of our empirical strategy is the comparability

of counties that were connected just prior to immigration booms and lulls. In Table 1, we

compare baseline economic, demographic, and geographic characteristics that might have been

correlated with the placement of the railroads or the settlement of migrants, and ultimately,

with our outcomes of interest today. We find that the two sets of counties were very similar at

baseline (i.e., 1840). Panel A reports differences in the share of foreign-born in 1820 and 1830.

Panel B reports differences in a wide range of economic characteristics, including the share of the

population in commerce, share of the population in agriculture, share of the population in mining,

per capita investments of capital in manufacturing, value of agricultural output per capita, value

of agricultural crops per capita, the number of post offices per 1,000 inhabitants, newspapers per

1,000 inhabitants, or the presence of a connection to a canal or naturally navigable waterway.

In panel C, we examine geographic characteristics, namely whether a county is located in the

Midwest/West, or in the South.

   Overall, we find that for the vast majority of characteristics, there is little to no significant

difference between the two groups. However, we do find statistically significant differences in

how early the railway was connected and the share of counties in the Midwest or West. These

differences underscore the importance of our inclusion of date of connection to the railway

network and state fixed effects as controls in our 2SLS regression estimates.

   A concern for our empirical strategy arises from the fact that the railways may have promoted

long-term economic growth through mechanisms other than the transportation of immigrants. As

the United States industrialized, counties that became connected to the railway network during


                                                18
                                                            8%
                                                        Morrow, OR
                                                           1890
               38%
           Clatsop, OR
               1900
                                                           7%
                                                      Washington, ID
                                                          1890
                                                                                14%
                                                                             Lincoln, ID
                                                                                1900
                                                                                             27%
                                                                                           Cache, UT
                                                                                             1880
                                                                                                                                              16%
                                                                                                                                                                            30%
                                                                                                                                           Chaffee, CL
                                                                                                                                                                         Barton, KS
                                                                                                                                              1880
                                                                                                                                                                            1880
                                                                                                                  12%
                                                                                                                Grand, UT
                                              34%                                                                 1890
                                            Mono, CA
                                                                                                                          5%                                                4%
                                              1880
                                                                                                                     Archuleta, CL                                       Barber, KS
                                                                                                                         1890                                              1890
                                                               17%
                                                            Ventura, CA                                                            8%
                                                               1890                                                            Lincoln, NM
                                                                                                                                  1890

                                                                                                                                                                      2%
                                                                                                                                 34%                             Coleman, TX
                                                                                                                               Grant, NM                             1890
                                                                                                                                 1880




                                                                                                                            Ü
           Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                      33%
                                                                                                                                                                                  La Salle, TX
                    Lull county: 1860, 1870, 1890                                                                                                                                    1880
                    Boom county: 1850, 1880, 1900


                                                                    (a) Map of the Western United States.

                  32%
               Douglas, MN        17%                                                               31%
                  1880          Cass, MN                                                        Cheboygan, MI
                                  1870                                                              1880



                                                                                                                           25%
                                                                                                                        Niagara, NY                               3%
                                                                                                5%
                                                                                                                           1850                              Schoharie, NY
                                                                                             Eaton, MI
                                                                                               1870                                                              1870
                    23%                     7%                                                                      8%
                Palo Alto, IA            Jasper, IA                                                             Crawford, PA
                    1880                   1860                                                                    1860
                                                                                                      34%                                              29%
                                                                                                 Cuyahoga, OH                                        Essex, NJ
                                                                                                      1850                                             1850
                                                                      25%
                                                                                    19%       16%
                                                                   La Salle, IL
                                                                      1850      Campbell, KYAllen, IN
                                                                                              1850                  27%
                                                                                    1850
                                                                                                               Allegheny, PA                            5%
                                                                          1%
                                                           22%                                                      1850                             Ocean, NJ
                                                                      Wayne, IL                        4%
                                                      Gasconade, MO                                                                                    1870
                                                                        1870                       Hocking, OH
                                                          1850
                                                                                                      1870
                                                                                    1%
                                 1%                                           Washington, IN
                             Camden, MO                                            1870          1%
                                1870                                                          Boyle, KY   0%
                                                                                                1870 Alexander, NC
                                                                                                         1890




                                                                                                 1%
                                                                          4%                 Oconee, SC                                          2%
                                                                       Bibb, AL                 1870              5%
                                                                                                                                           New Hanover, NC
                                                                         1880                               Charleston, SC
                                                                                                                                                1850
                                                                                                                 1850

                                    0.7%
                                Catahoula, LA
                                    1890                           0.3%
                                                                Clarke, AL
                                                                                                                 0.8%
                                                                   1890
                                                                                                              Alachua, FL
                                                                                                                 1870
                              3%
                         Calcasieu, LA




                                                                    Ü
                             1880

                                                                                                                       4%
                                                                                                                                               Legend
                                                                                                                   Orange, FL
                                                                                                                      1880
                                                                                                                                                         Lull county: 1860, 1870, 1890
                                                                                                                                                         Boom county: 1850, 1880, 1900


                                                                     (b) Map of the Eastern United States

Figure 2: Illustration of the variation behind the identification strategy. Pairs of counties within
the same state are shown. One county was connected just prior to an immigration boom and the
other county was connected just prior to an immigration lull. Reported next to each county is the
average immigration share from 1860–1920, the county name, and the first full decade in which
the county was connected to the railway.


                                                                                                         19
Table 1: Examining differences in baseline characteristics between lull- and boom-connection
counties.
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                                                                                                     Equality of       Chi
                                                           Boom-Connection Counties                Lull-Connection Counties             Means       Square
                                                           Obs     Mean      Std Dev               Obs      Mean      Std Dev          p -value     p -value
Demographic Composition:
  Foreign Share of the Population, 1820                    490         0.005         (0.011)       204         0.004       (0.010)       0.160
  Foreign Share of the Population, 1830                    629         0.004        (0.0005)       286         0.003       (0.001)       0.070
Economic Characteristics:
  Decades connected to the Railway (as of 2000)           1,421         134         (0.474)       1,090         123        (0.341)       0.000
  Urban Share, 1840                                        795         0.934        (0.372)        408         0.786       (0.210)       0.728
  Population Density, 1840                                 781        0.180          (1.107)       386        0.071        (0.107)       0.010
  Share of the Population in Commerce, 1840                763        0.005          (0.006)       316        0.004        (0.007)       0.452
  Share of the Population in Agriculture, 1840             781        0.247          (0.123)       386        0.256        (0.127)       0.252
  Share of the Population in Mining, 1840                  781        0.0009        (0.0048)       386        0.0009      (0.0053)       0.990
  Capital Invested in Manufacturing per capita, 1840       776        10.26          (18.70)       385         9.29        (36.38)       0.625
  Value of Agricultural Output per capita, 1840            774        45.95          (28.57)       384        44.18        (32.07)       0.361
  Value of Agricultural Crops per capita, 1840             774        41.82          (28.11)       384        40.56        (31.96)       0.511
  Post Offices per 1,000 Inhabitants, 1840                 846        0.665          (0.019)       448        0.636        (0.060)       0.644
  Newspapers per 1,000 inhabitants 1840                    252        0.175          (0.020)       138        0.125        (0.026)       0.130
  Water Connection Indicator, 1840                         782        0.515          (0.500)       386        0.469        (0.500)       0.136
Geographic Characteristics:
 Share of Counties in the Midwest and West                1,421        42%                        1,090         51%                                  0.000
 Share of Counties in the South                           1,375        44%                        1,009         41%                                  0.277

Notes : "Boom-Connection Counties" are counties that we observe as connected to the railway for the first time in either 1850, 1880 or 1900. "Lull-
Connection Counties" are counties that we observe as being connected for the first time in 1860, 1870 and 1890. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test of
equality of means with unequal variances, while column 8 reports the p -value for a Chi-square test of equality of proportions.




certain periods may have disproportionately benefited, and this may have had long-term effects

(Haines and Margo, 2008, Atack and Margo, 2010, Atack et al., 2010, Atack, Haines and Margo,

2011, Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016). As explained above, to address this, we construct a

control variable that accounts for these differential historical effects using the exact same logic

and procedure as we use for our immigration instrument. In the zero-stage equation, we control

for the interaction of the railway-connection indicator with a measure of aggregate industrial

development. We use the zero-stage estimates to construct a predicted measure and include this

as a control variable in our 2SLS equations.

    A comparison of Figure 1b and appendix Figure A13 provides some intuition for the variation

underlying our estimates. While aggregate industrial production is steadily increasing during

the period of interest, aggregate immigration increases, then decreases, then increases, and then

decreases. In part, it is these differences in aggregate trends that provide the identification for

our estimates.19
  19 The logged industrialization index closely approximates a linear time trend. Thus, the estimates are very similar if

one uses the interaction between a linear time trend and the railroad access indicator, rather than the industrialization
index and the railway access indicator.




                                                                               20
  Another concern is that aggregate immigrant inflows may have been influenced by the nature

of the railway network at the time. For example, the aggregate flow of immigrants may have

increased when the railway became connected to counties with greater future growth potential.

We address this concern by constructing a measure of aggregate immigrant flows that is solely

due to sending-country weather shocks. As we report in Section 6, this alternative procedure

generates estimates that are very similar to our baseline estimates.


5. Estimates

A. Zero-Stage Estimates: Construction of the Instrument

Estimates of the zero-stage equation (1) are reported in column 1 of Table 2. All standard errors

are adjusted for spatial autocorrelation and we report Conley standard errors using a five-degree

window. We see that the estimated coefficient for our interaction of interest – the railroad

access indicator multiplied by aggregate immigrant inflows into the United States (normalized

by total population) – is positive and statistically significant. In addition, the point estimate

on the coefficient of the uninteracted railway-connection indicator is very close to zero, which

indicates that connection to the railway is estimated to have no effect on immigrant settlement

when aggregate immigration flows are zero. This is reassuring since it provides evidence that the

estimates of the effect of railway access on immigrant settlement do not capture channels other

than the one that we have in mind.

  To illustrate the variation underlying the interaction term, we estimate a more flexible variant

of equation (1), where we interact the indicator for whether a county had access to the railway

network with decade fixed effects, rather than with the aggregate inflow of immigrants to the

United States. This allows the importance of being connected to the railway to vary flexibly over

time. We then examine the relationship between the coefficients of the interaction terms and the

aggregate inflow of immigrants during the previous decade. As shown in Figure 3, we observed

a strong positive relationship between the two variables (corr = 0.73). The decades in which

connection to the railway network had the largest effects on county-level immigrant settlement

are also the decades for which we observe the largest aggregate immigrant inflows.

  Our baseline sample includes all counties. We recognize that one could argue that the logic

of our identification strategy applies less well (or does not apply at all) to the Northeast of the



                                                21
                                                                             Table 2: Zero-stage OLS panel estimates.
                                                                                                      (1)                    (2)                   (3)              (4)
Dependent Variable                                                                                                 Migrant Share of Total County Population
                                                                                                  All                     Excluding          Excluding           Midwest
                                                                                                Counties                  Northeast            South             and West

Interaction of Interest:
  Lag Rail Access                                                                                0.149***                 0.153***            0.177***           0.197***
    x Lag Migrant Inflow/Total US Population                                                      [0.032]                  [0.034]             [0.055]            [0.061]
Other Variables:
  Lag Rail Access                                                                                 -0.006                    0.002             -0.025**             -0.009
                                                                                                 [0.008]                   [0.009]             [0.014]            [0.015]
  Lag Rail Access                                                                                 -0.003                  -0.006**              0.003              -0.003
    x Lag Log Industrialization Index                                                            [0.003]                   [0.003]             [0.006]            [0.006]
  Lag Migrant Share                                                                                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
  Lag Urban Indicator                                                                                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
    x Lag Migrant Inflow/Total US Population                                                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
  Lag Urban Indicator                                                                                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
  Log County Population Density                                                                        Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
  County Fixed Effects                                                                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
  Decade Fixed Effects                                                                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes             Yes
Observations                                                                                         16,729                15,706                 11,591          10,568
R-squared                                                                                             0.927                 0.927                  0.917           0.919
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                            0.087                 0.084                  0.115           0.113
Notes : OLS estimates are reported. An observation is a county in a time period (1860, 1870, 1880, 1890, 1900, 1910 or 1920). The
dependent variable "Migrant Share of Total County Population" is the proportion of a county's population that is foreign born in
period t . "Lag Rail Access" is an indicator variable that equals one if a county has a railway in period t-1 . Conley standard errors are
reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.
                                                             .01
                     Coefficients Lag Rail Access x Decade

                                                             .005




                                                                                                                                      1880

                                                                                                            1890
                                                                                                                                         1850
                                                                                                                                           1900
                                                             0
                                                             -.005




                                                                                                       1870
                                                                                               1860
                                                             -.01
                                                             -.015




                                                                                             1910
                                                             -.02




                                                                     .02           .04               .06            .08             .1        .12          .14
                                                                              Lag Total Migrant Share as a Percentage of US Population
                                                                     Correlation Coefficient: 0.73      P-value: 0.06



Figure 3: Estimated effect of a county’s connection to the railway on immigrant settlement in a
decade and total immigration (as a share of total population) in that same decade.



                                                                                                              22
United States, where there are many urban centers located on the coast, where travel distances are

relatively short, and where the railway network was already developed prior to the first period

in our analysis. Thus, as a robustness check, we re-estimate equation (1), but omit counties from

the Northeast from the sample.20 The estimates, which are reported in column 2 of Table 2, show

that omitting the counties in the Northeast results in estimates that are nearly identical to our

baseline full-sample estimates.21

   A related concern is the applicability of the model to the U.S. South, which featured compar-

atively little immigration from Europe. In column 3, we report estimates, after omitting counties

in the South. Again, we find that our estimates are similar. The point estimate increases slightly

in magnitude and remains statistically significant. Lastly, column 4 reports estimates when we

omit both the Northeast and South together; again the results remain robust.

   Lastly, the zero-stage estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of a lagged dependent

variable. We obtain very similar estimates if this is omitted from the specification.22


B. The Long-Term Economic Effects of Immigration

Using the zero-stage estimates of Table 2, we use the method described in Section 4 to construct

our predicted average migrant share. We then use this variable as an instrument for actual average

migrant share. Estimates examining measures of the economic health of a county today are

reported in Table 3. Panel A reports OLS estimates of second-stage equation (3), panel B reports

the 2SLS estimates of equation (3), and panel C reports the first-stage estimates – i.e. equation (2).

The reported standard errors are Conley standard errors adjusted for spatial correlation using a

window of five degrees.23

   As reported in panel C, our predicted-migrant-share instrument is strongly correlated with

actual migrant share, resulting in a strong first stage.                 The Kleibergen-Paap F -statistics are

approximately 10.4. According to the 2SLS estimates (panel B), counties with a greater share

of immigrants from 1860 to 1920 have significantly higher average per capita income in 2000
  20 We follow the regional definitions from the census. The Northeast includes Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,

New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont.
  21 These characteristics of the Northeast also provide an opportunity for a placebo test to check whether other omitted

factors are driving our estimates. In particular, looking at the Northeast only, we should not observe the same effects
as we do for the rest of the country. As we show in appendix Table A2, this is exactly what we find.
  22 These estimates are reported in appendix Table A3.
  23 The results are very similar when we use smaller or larger windows, e.g. one degree or ten degrees.




                                                           23
Table 3: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on the health of the
economy today.
                                                             (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
Dependent Variable                                   Log Average per      Prop of Population      Unemployment            Urbanization          Average Years
                                                      Capita Income,      Below Poverty Line,           Rate,                Share,              of Schooling,
                                                          2000                   2000                   2000                  2000                   2000
                                                                                                  A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    0.183**                 0.015               0.036***               0.930***                -0.210
1860-1920                                                 [0.080]                [0.016]               [0.013]                [0.081]                [0.206]

                                                                                                  B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    4.080***              -0.599**               -0.606**              6.234***              12.302***
1860-1920                                                  [1.463]               [0.288]                [0.239]               [2.222]               [4.345]

                                                                                           C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                            Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                             4.423***             4.423***             4.423***          4.423***                      4.423***
1860-1920                                                  [1.357]              [1.357]              [1.357]           [1.357]                       [1.357]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                10.43                10.43                10.43             10.43                         10.43

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share           Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Latitude                                                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Longitude                                                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                       Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                               2,935                  2,935                 2,935                  2,935                 2,935
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                      10.02                  0.136                 0.047                  0.401                 11.45
Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the
2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




(column 1). The magnitude of the coefficient suggests that moving a county’s average historical

migrant share from zero to the 50th percentile of the sample – a change of 0.049 or 4.9% – results

in an increase in average income of 4.08 × 0.049 = 0.20 or 20%.24 We view this as a sizeable, but

plausible, effect.

    The difference between the OLS and 2SLS estimates for per capita income (panels A and B) is

consistent with negative selection by immigrants. The OLS correlation between historical migrant

share and current per capita income is much smaller than the 2SLS estimate. An explanation

for this is that migrants tended to move to “worse” places that counterfactually would have had

lower long-run economic growth. This selection results in OLS estimates that are biased towards

zero and understate the positive effect of immigrants on long-term economic growth.25 This could

have been because better places were congested or because of discrimination against immigrants
   24 In reporting magnitudes, we focus on the median rather than the mean because the distribution of average migrant

share is noticeably right skewed, with a large number of counties with very low levels of average migrant share, and a
small number of counties with high levels (see appendix Figure A14). The mean of average migrant share is 0.098 and
the standard deviation is 0.111. The median is 0.049, the 25th percentile is 0.007, and the 75th percentile is 0.163.
   25 It is also the case that relative to the OLS estimates, the 2SLS local average treatment (LATE) estimates place more

weight on regions that experienced new railroad development during our period of analysis, such as the West and
Midwest. This is another potential explanation for the difference in magnitudes. To get some sense of the importance
of this, we re-estimate the regressions of Table 3 separately for the the Midwest and West, and for all other counties
(i.e., the Northeast and South). As appendix Tables A4 and A5 show, the OLS and IV estimates are very similar in the
two samples, as are their relative magnitudes.


                                                                               24
from natives.

   We next consider alternative measures of the strength of a county’s economy: the proportion

of the population living below the poverty line (column 2) and the unemployment rate (column

3). We estimate a negative effect of historical migrant share on both poverty and unemployment.

According to the estimates, moving a county with no historical immigration to the 50th percentile

of the distribution (0.049) is associated with a decrease in the proportion of people living under

the poverty line by 3 percentage points and a decrease in the unemployment rate by 3 percentage

points. These findings are consistent with the long-run increase in income found in column 1. In

addition, comparing the OLS to the 2SLS estimates again provides evidence that migrants may

have selected into locations with worse long-run growth potential.

   In columns 4 and 5, we consider two last measures of economic development: the urbanization

rate and average years of schooling. We estimate a large positive effect on both urbanization

and education. An increase in average migrant share from zero to the 50th percentile (0.049) is

associated with a 31 percentage-point increase in the urbanization rate and 0.6 additional years

of schooling.

   Overall, the estimates show that within the U.S. historical context, immigration had large

positive effects on long-run economic growth and prosperity.


C. The Long-Term Social Effects of Immigration

Having estimated the long-term economic benefits of immigration, we now turn to an exam-

ination of the potential long-run social effects of immigration.       It is possible that although

immigration had positive economic benefits, these coincide with long-run social costs, such as

an erosion of social cohesion, civic mindedness, or an increase in crime. Thus, we also estimate

the long-term effects of immigration on these social outcomes.

   The first factor that we consider is a composite index of social capital that is taken from Rupas-

ingha and Goetz (2008). The measure was created using principal component analysis applied

to a range of variables such as the total number of associations and not-for-profit organizations

per 10,000 people, as well as census mail response rates and voter turnout. The final variable

ranges from −3.9 to +17.5 in our sample. The 2SLS estimates are reported in column 1 of Table

4. We find a statistically insignificant effect of historical immigration on social capital today. The




                                                 25
       Table 4: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on social outcomes.
                                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
   Dependent Variable                                         Social              Voting           Total Crime       Crimes Against      Crimes Against
                                                             Capital,           Turnout,          Rate,                  Persons,           Property,
                                                              2000               2000             2000                    2000                2000
                                                                                    A. OLS Estimates
   Average Migrant Share,                                   -1.293***           -0.076***            0.006***            0.001***            0.003***
   1860-1920                                                 [0.344]             [0.026]              [0.001]            [0.0003]             [0.001]

                                                                                      B. 2SLS Estimates
   Average Migrant Share,                                      0.880               0.424               0.023               0.004               0.016
   1860-1920                                                  [4.716]             [0.395]             [0.018]             (0.004)             (0.012)

                                                                                C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                 Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
   Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                             4.423***         4.423***            4.423***       4.423***                    4.423***
   1860-1920                                                  [1.369]          [1.369]             [1.369]        [1.369]                     [1.369]
   Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                10.43            10.43               10.43          10.43                       10.43

   Controls (in all Panels):
       Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
       Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
       Latitude                                                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
       Longitude                                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
       State Fixed Effects                                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
   Observations                                               2,934               2,925               2,935               2,935               2,935
   Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                      -0.004              0.540               0.006               0.001               0.004

   Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates
   from the 2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the
   1, 5 and 10% levels.




estimated effect, in addition to being imprecise, is also small in magnitude.26

   We next turn to alternative measures of social cohesion: political participation and crime.

Column 2 of Table 4 reports 2SLS estimates of the long-term effects of immigration on political

participation, measured by voter turnout in the 2000 presidential election. We find a positive, but

small and insignificant, effect of historical immigration on voter turnout.27 Columns 3–5 report

estimates of the effects of immigration on crime, measured as the crime rate (crimes per year per

10,000 inhabitants) for any crime, crimes against persons, and property crimes.28 We estimate

positive, but small and statistically insignificant, effects of historical immigration on each type of

crime.29 Overall, we find no evidence of historical immigration having an effect on social capital,
  26  An increase in historical immigration from zero to the 50th percentile (0.049) is associated with an increase in the
social capital index of 0.04, a small effect given the range of the index.
   27 According to the estimated magnitude, an increase in historical immigration from zero to the 50th percentile

(0.049) is associated with an increase in voter turnout of 2 percentage points, which is small when compared to the
mean turnout rate of 54 percent.
   28 The measures are from 2000, and are taken from the County and City Data Book, which is produced by the U.S.

Census Bureau.
   29 According to the point estimate from column 3, an increase in historical immigration from zero to the 50th

percentile (0.049) is associated with an increase of 0.0011 crimes per year per 10,000 inhabitants, which is equal to
18% of the mean.



                                                                             26
political participation, or crime.


6. Robustness Checks

Having reported our baseline estimates of the effects of historical immigration on long-run

economic and social outcomes, we now examine the robustness of the estimates.


A. Endogeneity of Immigrant Supply

One concern with our estimates is that the timing of aggregate immigration booms could have

been endogenous to the connection of the railway to economically attractive counties. Once the

railway expanded to these counties, the flow of European immigrants might have increased in

response. To address this, we check the robustness of our results to the use of a measure of

aggregate immigrant flows to the United States that is driven only by origin-country weather

shocks. This strategy is motivated by the existing evidence of a strong link between climate and

agricultural output in Europe during the Age of Mass Migration (Solomou and Wu, 1999), as

well as the presence of a strong relationship between weather shocks and international migration

in the contemporary time period within developing countries (Feng, Krueger and Oppenheimer,

2010).

   To construct measures of origin-country weather shocks, we use historical temperature data

from Luterbacher, Dietrich, Xoplaki, Grosjean and Wanner (2004) and historical precipitation data

from Pauling, Luterbacher, Casty and Wanner (2006). Both sets of data are measured annually

(for each of the four seasons within a year) and at a 0.5-degree spatial resolution. Because the

emigration data are at the country-level, we create country-averages of our weather variables by

taking an average over all grid-cells in a country that were under cultivation at the time.30 Our

sample includes the sixteen European countries for which we have immigration, temperature,

and crop data.31 These sixteen countries account for 75% percent of European immigration into

the United States from 1860–1920 as captured in Willcox (1929-1931)
  30 The  information on land under cultivation historically is taken from estimates constructed by Ramankutty and
Foley (1999), who provide annual estimates at a 5 arc minute (approx. 10 kilometer) resolution.
   31 Our sample includes the following countries: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,

Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.




                                                       27
   We estimate outflows of emigrants for our period of interest using the following equation:


            ln Migrant Flowc,t+1 =          ∑ ∑                T emp,s,k
                                                       βc,s,k Ic,t       +   ∑ ∑                P recip,s,k
                                                                                        γc,s,k Ic,t         + εc,t ,   (4)
                                            s∈S k ∈K                         s∈S k ∈K

where ln Migrant Flowc,t+1 is the natural log of the flow of immigrants from country c in year
        T emp,s,k
t + 1. Ict        is an indicator variable that equals one if the average temperature in season

s ∈ {Spring, Summer, Winter, Autumn} falls within temperature range k, where k indexes a set

K of six temperature categories: 3 or more standard deviations below the mean, 2–3 standard

deviations below the mean, 1–2 standard deviations below the mean, 1–2 standard deviations

above the mean, 2–3 standard deviations above the mean, and 3+ standard deviations above the

mean. Thus, the omitted category is for temperatures that are within one standard deviation of

the mean (i.e., the absence of a shock). Since there are six temperature categories and four seasons

there are 6 × 4 = 24 temperature indicator variables in total. The precipitation indicator variables

are structured in exactly the same manner. Thus, there are 24 precipitation indicators as well.

   An important characteristic of equation (4) is that the coefficients for the shock variables

are allowed to differ for each country in the estimation. In practice, we estimate equation

(4) separately for each of the sixteen European countries in our sample. After estimating the

βc,s,k ’s and the γc,s,k ’s, we can calculate predicted log migrant flows for each country and year,
     \ Flow .
ln Migrant               We find the predicted migrant flows are strongly correlated with actual
           c,t

migrant flows.32 The relationship between the two measures for each of our 16 countries is

shown in appendix Figure A15. We then aggregate the predicted migrant flows across countries

to obtain an estimate of the total flow of emigrants from all 16 countries in a given decade:
     \ Flow = ∑c exp(ln Migrant
Agg Migrant               \ Flow ), where c indexes countries.
            t                   c,t

   The 2SLS estimates of the effects of immigrants on our economic outcomes of interest using

the weather shocks as predictors of immigrant inflows are reported in Table 5.33 The second stage

point estimates of interest are similar to the results that were obtained when using actual immi-
  32 The correlation coefficients between the actual and predicted flows measures range from 0.54 (for Switzerland) to

0.91 (for Hungary).
  33 The zero-stage estimates of equation (1) using predicted migrant flows rather than actual migrant flows are

reported in appendix Table A6. The estimates are very similar to the baseline estimates reported in Table 2. Note that
the reported standard errors are slightly biased upwards due to the fact that predicted migrant flows is an estimated
variable. However, due to the strong correlation between actual migrant flows and predicted migrant flows, we expect
this difference to be small. In addition, estimates using predicted migrant flows to instrument for actual migrant flows
yield unbiased standard errors that are very similar to those reported in appendix Table A6.




                                                           28
Table 5: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on the health of the
economy today, using immigrant inflows predicted by sending-country weather shocks rather
than actual flows.
                                                            (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)
Dependent Variable                                   Log Average per        Prop of Population        Unemployment            Urbanization         Average Years
                                                      Capita Income,        Below Poverty Line,           Rate,                  Share,             of Schooling,
                                                          2000                     2000                   2000                   2000                   2000
                                                                                                    A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    0.183**                   0.015                 0.036***              0.933***                -0.208
1860-1920                                                 [0.080]                  [0.016]                 [0.013]               [0.080]               [0.206]

                                                                                                   B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    5.424***                -0.986**               -0.804**               8.826***              16.361***
1860-1920                                                  [2.067]                 [0.429]                [0.326]                [3.308]               [6.131]

                                                                                             C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                              Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                             5.835***               5.835***               5.835***          5.835***                     5.835***
1860-1920                                                  [2.024]                [2.024]                [2.024]           [2.024]                      [2.024]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                 8.31                  8.31                    8.31              8.31                         8.31

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share            Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                   Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
  Latitude                                                   Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
  Longitude                                                  Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                        Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                                                2,935                   2,935                   2,935                 2,935                 2,935
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                       10.02                   0.136                   0.047                 0.401                 11.45
Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the 2SLS.
Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




Table 6: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on social outcomes, using
migrant flows predicted by sending-country weather shocks rather than actual flows.
                                                               (1)                  (2)                    (3)                   (4)                     (5)
Dependent Variable                                           Social                Voting              Total Crime          Crimes Against         Crimes Against
                                                             Capital,             Turnout,                Rate,                Persons,               Property,
                                                              2000                 2000                   2000                  2000                    2000
                                                                                                     A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                      -1.295***             -0.077***              0.006***               0.001***              0.003***
1860-1920                                                    [0.344]               [0.026]                [0.001]               [0.0003]               [0.001]

                                                                                                    B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                        -3.472                0.470                 0.036                   0.007                 0.023
1860-1920                                                    [5.475]               [0.445]               [0.022]                 [0.005]               [0.015]

                                                                                             C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                              Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                               5.835***             5.835***             5.835***         5.835***                       5.835***
1860-1920                                                    [2.024]              [2.024]              [2.024]          [2.024]                        [2.024]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                  8.306                8.306                8.306            8.306                          8.306

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share              Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Latitude                                                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Longitude                                                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                          Yes                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                                  2,934                 2,925                  2,935                  2,935                 2,935
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                        -0.004                 0.540                  0.006                  0.001                 0.004
Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the
2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




                                                                                 29
grant flows.34 Table 6 reports the estimated effects of immigration on the social outcomes. Again,

the estimates using predicted immigrant flows are very similar to the baseline estimates that use

actual immigrant flows. We continue to find no relationship between historical immigration and

any of the social outcomes of interest.


B. Reverse Causality

Another potential concern is the possibility that railroads tended to be built in locations and

during times when migration was already occurring (and was expected to continue). If this

was the case, then our use of the timing of the building of the railway relative to the timing of

immigration booms and lulls is potentially problematic.35 To directly test for this possibility, we

estimate a variant of equation (1), where the outcome variable is an indicator for the presence

of a railroad in a county in decade t, and the independent variable of interest is the share of

immigrants in the total population in the previous decade t − 1. The estimates, which are reported

in appendix Table A7, show that the coefficient on the lagged immigrant share is close to zero and

statistically insignificant. Thus, railroad placement does not appear to have been endogenous to

the presence of prior immigrant populations.


C. Potential Correlation of the Instrument with Length of Time Connected to the Railroad

In our baseline specification, we control for the length of time a county has been connected to

the railroad network (as of the year 2000) to account for any potential relationship between our

instrument and how late a county became connected to the railway network. Counties that were

connected late will tend to have low values of the instrument since their predicted migrant share

will be zero for many time periods.

     To be thorough, we check the robustness of our results to the use of an alternative strategy

that accounts for the relationship between the instrument and how early a county was con-
                                                                            \ Share =
nected to the railway network. Recall that our baseline instrument is: Avg Migrant i
1
T   ∑Tt=1 β
          b Migrant Flow × I RR Access . Periods without railway access, I RR Access = 0, mechanically
                        t−1 it−1                                          it−1

    34 Although the predicted migrant flow variable is a predicted regressor, because it enters our 2SLS equations as
part of a generated instrument, the 2SLS point estimates continue to be consistent and the test statistics remain
asymptotically valid (Pagan, 1984; Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 116–117).
  35 This is also one motivation for including a lagged dependent variable in our zero-stage equations. If the presence

of a pre-existing immigrant population had such effects, this should be captured by a measure of the pre-existing
immigrant population.



                                                          30
                          \ Share . Given this, we construct an alternative predicted migrant
reduces the value of Avg Migrant i

share instrument that is the mean of predicted migrant share, but only in the periods from 1860

to 1920 for which the county was connected to the railway network. Specifically, the alternative
                                               1                                  RR Access , where N RR is the
                 \ Share =
measure is: Avg Migrant i                     NiRR
                                                     ∑t∈TiRR β
                                                             b Migrant Flow
                                                                           t−1 × Iit−1               i

number of time periods for which IitRR
                                     −1
                                       Access = 1 in county i, and T RR is the set of census years
                                                                    i

for which IitRR
              −1
                Access = 1 for county i. Because periods without connection to the railway network


are not included in the average, not being connected to the railway, IitRR
                                                                         −1
                                                                           Access = 0, no longer

                          \ Share .
mechanically reduces Avg Migrant i

   Appendix Tables A8 and A9 report estimates using this alternative instrument.36 The estimated

effects of historical immigration on economic and social outcomes are qualitatively similar.37


D. Changing County Boundaries

One challenge when analyzing the historical effect of immigrants across counties is that for

a number of counties, current boundaries were established after 1860 (the first period of our

sample). Thus, our zero-stage panel is unbalanced, with counties entering over time as they

are established.38 Additionally, once counties are established, there can be changes to their

boundaries.      For our baseline analysis, we match counties across time using the nominally

integrated series available in the NHGIS datasets (Minnesota Population Center, 2011).39 We also

check that our results are robust to only using counties that existed in 1860, and effectively had

the same boundaries in 1860 as in 2000. This is the case for 1,596 counties or approximately 55%

of our sample. As shown in appendix Tables A10 and A11, the results using this more restrictive

sample are qualitatively similar to our baseline estimates. The magnitude of the estimates actually

increases, and the point estimates remain statistically significant.
  36 Since the predicted average immigrant share instrument for counties that are never connected to the railway

network is zero, the specifications include an indicator variable for whether the county was never connected to the
railway.
  37 Under this specification, the effect of historical migration on total crime and crimes against property (but not

crimes against persons) becomes marginally significant, although the point estimates remain very small in magnitude.
  38 In 1860, there are 1,600 counties in our sample, there are 1,974 counties in 1870; 2,216 in 1880; 2,468 in 1890; 2,728

in 1900; 2,797 in 1910; and 2,946 in 1920.
  39 For a detailed explanation of NHGIS’ matching strategy see https://nhgis.org/documentation/time-

series#geographic-integration.




                                                            31
7. Mechanisms

Up to this point, we have shown that counties with more immigrant settlement from 1860–1920

today are more prosperous economically and no different socially. We now attempt to gain a

better understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the long-run economic effects.


A. Evidence for the Reallocation of Economic Activity

We begin by testing whether the long-run benefits that we estimate are due to immigrants having

a positive effect on the creation of economic prosperity or whether immigrants resulted in the

movement of economic activity from other locations. To assess the extent to which our estimates

reflect such displacement effects, we test whether being close to a county with more historical

immigration resulted in less long-term economic development today. We would expect such a

relationship to be present if immigration caused economic activity to relocate to counties with

more immigrants at the expense of nearby counties.

   We do this by estimating the effect that immigration to neighboring counties had on a county.

We first construct a measure of average migrant shares of all neighboring counties, where we

weight each neighboring county in proportion to the length of the shared border. We denote this

as Nearby Migrant Sharei,s . We then estimate the following set of equations using 2SLS. The two

first stage equations are:

                                     \ Share + α2 Nearby
  Avg Migrant Shareis = αs + α1 Avg Migrant i,s
                                                       \ Mig Shareis + Xis Ω + εis , (5)

                                     \ Share + γ2 Nearby
   Nearby Mig Shareis = γs + γ1 Avg Migrant is
                                                       \ Mig Shareis + Xis Π + µis . (6)

And, the second stage equation is:

              Yis = αs + β1 Avg Migrant Shareis + β2 Nearby Mig Shareis + Xis Γ + νis ,          (7)

where i indexes counties and s states, and Avg Migrant Shareis is the average share of a county

population that were immigrants from 1860–1920. The new term, Nearby Migrant Shareis , is the

average share of population of nearby counties that were immigrants, 1860–1920.

   The estimates are reported in Table 7. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates for income and

education. Due to space constraints, the estimates for all outcomes are reported in appendix Table

A12. Panel A reports the OLS estimates of equation (7), panel B reports 2SLS estimates of equation

(7), and panel C reports estimates from the two first stage equations – i.e., equations (5) and (6).

                                                 32
Although the spillover coefficients are imprecisely estimated (and not statistically different from

zero), they provide no indication for the presence of negative spatial spillovers. Instead, the signs

of the coefficients suggest that the spillovers may even positive. That is, being close to a county

with more historical immigration may be economically beneficial. Most importantly, we also find

that the point estimates of the own-county effects remain robust. Although the precision of the

estimates decline slightly, the point estimates are very similar to the baseline estimates.

   A concern with these results is that adjacent counties may be too close to each other to

generate negative spillover effects, especially since contiguous counties today are often part of

the same city, commuting zone, or economic region. Motivated by this possibility, we examine

the effects of immigration to a county on all other counties in the same state. Thus, the measure

of Nearby Mig Shareis used in equations (5)–(7) is the average of historical immigrant share for

all other counties within the same state. We create two versions of the measure, one where we

exclude contiguous counties when constructing the state average and another where we include

them.

   The estimates for income and education are reported in columns 3–6 of Table 7, and the

estimates for all outcomes are reported in appendix Tables A13 and A14. We continue to find

no evidence for negative spillovers. As well, the estimated own-county effects remain robust

to allowing for the presence of within-state spillovers. Overall, the evidence suggests that it is

unlikely that the estimates we find are due to a reallocation of economic prosperity across space.

This said, an important caveat is that we have tested for this by necessarily making assumptions

about the particular form of the spillovers.


B. Are the Effects Working Through Current Immigration?

We next consider the possibility that the effects we estimate are due to an effect of historical

immigration on current immigration.       To test for this possibility, we examine the effects of

historical immigration on migration in each decade since 1920. The estimates, which are reported

in appendix Table A15, show that immediately following the Age of Mass Migration, historical

immigration from 1860 to 1920 is (mechanically) associated with a greater share of foreign-born

within the population. However, this relationship fades over time, and by 1950 it becomes

statistically insignificant and close to zero. This provides suggestive evidence that contemporary




                                                 33
Table 7: OLS and 2SLS estimates, accounting for spatial spillovers (for income and education only).
                                                          (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                                                                               Nearby County: All Non-
                                                          Nearby County: All               Nearby County: All other           Contiguous Counties in the
                                                         Contiguous Counties              Counties in the Same State                 Same State
                                                     Log Avg. per   Avg. years           Log Avg. per     Avg. years         Log Avg. per   Avg. years
Dependent Variable                                  Capita Income, of Schooling,        Capita Income, of Schooling,        Capita Income, of Schooling,
                                                        2000           2000                 2000             2000               2000           2000
                                                                                               A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920                         0.109            -0.120            0.140           -0.273               0.141            -0.270
                                                        [0.101]          [0.256]            [0.096]           [0.260]           [0.096]           [0.260]
Average Migrant Share in Nearby Counties,                0.137            -0.095             -3.448            -6.110            -3.404            -5.911
1860-1920                                               [0.137]          [0.327]            [2.644]           [7.782]           [2.640]           [7.731]

                                                                                              B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920                         4.425           13.363*           4.375***       12.954***             4.265***        12.634***
                                                        [3.229]          [7.660]            [1.549]           [4.622]           [1.508]           [4.507]
Average Migrant Share in Nearby Counties,                5.982           10.280              19.293           43.922             11.804           20.859
1860-1920                                               [3.872]          [9.616]            [22.543]         [65.399]           [21.575]         [63.110]

                                                                                           C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                             Dep. Var.: Avg Migrant Share in County, 1860-1920
Predicted Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920             3.879***          3.879***            2.759             2.759             3.433*            3.433*
                                                        [1.475]           [1.475]           [2.068]           [2.068]           [2.073]           [2.073]
Predicted Avg Migrant Share in Nearby Counties,          -0.313           -0.313            -95.214          -95.214            -56.938          -56.938
1860-1920                                               [2.997]          [2.997]            [106.9]          [106.9]           [110.586]        [110.586]
Angrist-Pischke F -statistic                              7.81             7.81               9.72             9.72              10.07            10.07

                                                                    Dep. Var.: Avgerage Migrant Share in Nearby Counties, 1860-1920
Predicted Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920               -1.114            -1.114           0.402**          0.402**           0.379***         0.379***
                                                        [1.193]           [1.193]           [0.160]          [0.160]            [0.161]          [0.161]
Predicted Avg Migrant Share in Nearby                  6.346***          6.346***          27.982***        27.982***          27.598***        27.598***
Counties, 1860-1920                                     [2.014]          [2.014]            [9.809]           [9.809]           [10.280]         [10.280]
Angrist-Pischke F -statistic                              9.89             9.89               7.53              7.53             10.07            10.07

Controls (in all Panels):
 Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share          Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Date of RR Connection (years as of 2000)                 Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Latitude                                                 Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Longitude                                                Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Nearby Counties: Avg. Date of RR Connection              Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Nearby Counties: Average Latitude                        Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 Nearby Counties: Average Longitude                       Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
 State Fixed Effects                                      Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes
Observations                                             2,931            2,931              2,934            2,934              2,934             2,934

Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                    10.02            11.44              10.02            11.44              10.02             11.44
Notes: An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panels C reports the first-stage estimates from
the 2SLS. Weighted Average Migrant Share in Contiguous Counties corresponds to the share of migrants in contiguous counties weighted by the length of
the shared border with the county. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance
at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




                                                                             34
immigration is unlikely to be an important channel for our findings.40


C. Evidence from Short-Run Estimates


Industrialization: Based on various accounts of the historical effects of immigration, a potential

explanation for the long-run economic benefits of immigration is that, during the early stages

of industrial development, immigration provided a large supply of labor that was necessary

for the take-off of industry and sustained modern economic growth (Goldin, 1994, Hatton and

Williamson, 1998, Hirschman and Mogford, 2009). Several historians have documented that immi-

grants were disproportionately represented in the industrial workforce (Engerman and Sokoloff,

2000, Alexander, 2007). For example, in 1880, despite only accounting for approximately 10% of

the total population, immigrants accounted for 57% of the manufacturing workforce (Hirschman

and Mogford, 2009).41

   Given this, we test whether the data are consistent with immigrants helping to spur early

industrialization by estimating the effects of immigration on manufacturing output during the

Age of Mass Migration and immediately afterwards. The estimates are reported in Table 8. In

column 1, we examine the natural log of real manufacturing output per capita, measured as an

average of census yeas from 1860–1920 and in 1930. We find that the presence of immigrants

caused a large and significant increase in manufacturing output both during the Age of Mass

Migration (1860–1920) and immediately afterwards (1930). According to the magnitude of the

estimated effects, moving a county with no historical immigration to the 50th percentile (an

increase of 0.049) led to a 50% increase in average manufacturing output per capita from 1860–

1920 and a 57% increase in 1930.
  40 As an informal check for whether part of our estimated effects of historical immigration is due to its relationship
with current immigration, we control for the share of the population that is foreign-born in 2000 when estimating
equation (3) with our measures of economic prosperity as the dependent variable. Keeping in mind the standard
concerns and necessary caution when interpreting estimates that control for an endogenous covariate, we report the
estimates in appendix Table A16. We find that the estimates of interest are nearly identical when we condition on
current immigration.
  41 A related argument is that immigrants were not only a supply of labor, but that they provided labor at lower costs

than native-born workers. Recent evidence in the literature appears to weigh against such a cheap-labor hypothesis.
Abramitzky et al. (2013) analyze panel data on immigrant assimilation during the Age of Mass Migration in the United
States and argue that the average immigrant did not face a substantial occupation-based earnings penalty upon first
arrival. They also find that immigrants experienced occupational advancement at the same rate as natives during this
period. However, their findings are consistent with immigration lowering wages in an industry and/or location for all
workers, both native- and foreign-born Goldin (1994).




                                                          35
Table 8: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on manufacturing output.
                                                            (1)           (2)                   (3)           (4)                  (5)          (6)
                                                            Log Manufacturing                   Log Manufacturing                     Log Number
Dependent Variable                                               Output per                         Output per                   of Establishments per
                                                                Capita                           Establishment                    10,000 Inhabitants
                                                        1860-1920      1930                 1860-1920       1930               1860-1920        1930
                                                                                                 A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    3.079***        3.524***           2.788***         2.704***           0.346**         0.730***
1860-1920                                                  [0.403]         [0.464]            [0.288]         [0.383]            [0.143]          [0.145]

                                                                                                B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    10.093*         11.597*              1.935          8.727*            10.580***          1.630
1860-1920                                                 [5.769]         [6.182]             [4.573]         [4.971]            [3.620]          [2.462]


                                                                                          C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                           Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                             4.528***        5.064***           4.528***         5.064***           4.528***        5.064***
1860-1920                                                  [1.354]         [1.530]            [1.354]          [1.530]            [1.354]         [1.530]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                11.19           10.95              11.19            10.95              11.19           10.95

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share           Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                  Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes
  Latitude                                                  Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes
  Longitude                                                 Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                       Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes
Observations                                               2,805            2,463              2,805           2,463              2,805           2,462
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                       6.56             7.21              12.58           14.03               3.35            2.49

Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the
2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




    In columns 3–6, we probe specific channels further by examining the effect of immigrants on

establishment size, measured using average output per establishment (columns 3 and 4), as well

as the effect of immigrants on the number of establishments per 10,000 inhabitants (columns 5 and

6).42 We find that during the Age of Mass Migration (1860–1920), the primary effect of immigrants

was to increase the number of manufacturing establishments and not their size. After the Age

of Mass Migration (1930), the primary effect of immigration is to increase the size of existing

establishments.

    Overall, the estimates show that immigrants had an immediate positive effect on industrializa-

tion. Our findings are consistent with historical accounts of immigrants bringing raw labor and

manufacturing know-how, both of which were crucial for the growth of manufacturing during

this time (Hirschman and Mogford, 2009).

Agriculture: We next turn to estimates of the short-run effect of immigrants on the agricultural
  42 We measure establishment size using output per establishment. We use output rather than value added because
value added data are only available for one year of our sample period, 1920. Using this alternative measure, we obtain
estimates that are very similar to the estimates of columns 3 and 4.




                                                                            36
           Table 9: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of historical immigration on farming.
                                                                  (1)                  (2)                        (3)                     (4)
Dependent Variable                                           Log Total Farm Value (per Farm)           Log Total Farm Value (per Acre)
                                                             1860-1920              1930               1860-1920                1930
                                                                                           A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                         1.168***           1.927***               2.127***             2.422***
1860-1920                                                       [0.207]            [0.197]                [0.223]              [0.271]

                                                                                                B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                           0.168               7.977**                    4.470                  11.758**
1860-1920                                                       [3.476]              [3.261]                    [3.297]                 [4.640]

                                                                                         C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                          Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                                  4.279***              4.279***                  4.279***                4.279***
1860-1920                                                       [1.350]               [1.350]                   [1.350]                 [1.350]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                     10.05                 10.05                     10.05                   10.05

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share                 Yes                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                        Yes                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes
  Latitude                                                        Yes                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes
  Longitude                                                       Yes                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                             Yes                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Observations                                                     2,804                2,800                     2,804                    2,800
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                            10.42                11.51                      5.91                     6.56
Notes : An observation is a county. Log Total Farm Value corresponds to the following decades: 1860 and 1900-1930. Panels A and B reports OLS
estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the 2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley
standard errors in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




sector. Our outcome of interest is total farm values, normalized using either the number of

farms or the total acres of farmland.43 Estimates are reported in Table 9, where columns 1 and

2 use farm value per farm (in 1860–1920 and 1930), while columns 3 and 4 use farm value per

acre (in 1860–1920 and 1930) as the dependent variable. For both sets of estimates, we see modest

positive effects of immigration on farm values in 1860–1920, with these effects becoming large and

statistically significant in 1930. According to the estimates, moving a county with no historical

immigration to the 50th percentile (0.049) is associated with a 39–58% increase in 1930 farm values

depending on the method of normalization. Thus, immigration appears to have had large positive

effects in the agricultural sector, but with the benefits primarily arising just after the end of the

Age of Mass Migration.

Human Capital: We next turn to the possibility that immigrants may have resulted in a greater

stock of technology and human capital. We examine this potential channel by first estimating the
  43 Alldata are from the Agricultural Census. Acres of land are only reported as being within the following categories:
less than 3 acres, 3–9 acres, . . . , 1000+ acres. We approximate total acreage by using the midpoint of each category,
and 1000 for the 1000-or-more-acre category.




                                                                          37
short-run effects of immigration on educational outcomes. Specifically, we consider the average

share of children enrolled in school in the decades from 1870–1920. Column 1 of Table 10 reports

these estimates. We find that counties with a higher share of immigrants actually had lower

enrollment rates. We obtain a similar finding if we instead look at the average share of the

total population that is illiterate from 1870–1920 (column 2). Thus, we find that immigration is

associated with lower rates of literacy.44

   Our finding that immigration resulted in less education in the short-run is consistent with

the fact that immigrants tended to be less educated than native-born populations, particularly

towards the end of the Age of Mass Migration. Examining the average rate of illiteracy of

native-born and foreign-born populations in the censuses, we find that in 1850, 9% of immigrants

were illiterate versus 4% of natives. In 1870, these figures are close to equal at 15% and 14%,

respectively. However, from this point forward, the rates begin to diverge noticeably. In 1900,

13% of immigrants were illiterate compared to 3% of natives; in 1910, these figures were 12% and

2%; and in 1920 they were 12% and 1%.45 The negative contemporaneous relationship between

immigration and educational attainment could also arise, in part, due to the positive economic

effects of immigration, which increased the opportunity cost of schooling.46

   Comparing the short-run effects of immigration on education in columns 1–2 of Table 10 to

the long-run education effects reported in column 5 of Table 3, it is clear that there has been a

reversal of the effects of immigration on education. In the short-run, immigrants reduced average

education, while in the long-run they increased it. There are several possible explanations for

this. First, it may be that the effects arise due to the long-run effect of immigrants on income, and

the fact that today higher incomes are associated with more education. A second explanation is

the mechanism found in the recent study by Foged and Peri (2015). The presence of immigrants

– and their supply of unskilled labor – in the long-run, could have led native workers to pursue

less manual-intensive occupations and to obtain more schooling. Third, they could also be due, in

part, to the mechanism present in the study by Bandiera et al. (2016), where it is shown that states

with more immigration from European countries that were less exposed to compulsory education
   44 These effects are particularly interesting given the existing evidence that the railroads increased educational

attainment (Atack, Margo and Perlman, 2012).
   45 The fact that immigrants had less education than native populations differs from other countries. Immigrants that

went to Brazil in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, on average, were more educated than the native populations.
In this setting, the evidence suggests that immigration resulted in higher levels of education, which had a persistent
effect, resulting in higher living standards today (Rocha et al., 2015).
   46 Such an effect has also been found in modern Mexico (Atkin, 2016).




                                                          38
Table 10: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of historical immigration on historical human
capital and innovation.
                                                            (1)                  (2)                            (3)                          (4)
                                                             Educational Attainment                                       Innovation
Dependent Variable                                    Share Enrolled               Share               Log Total Patents          Log European Patents
                                                         In School,              Illiterate,         per 10,000 Inhabitants       per 10,000 Inhabitants
                                                        1870-1920               1870-1920                  1860-1920                    1860-1920
                                                                                               A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                   -0.139***               0.139***                   1.069***                      2.731***
1860-1920                                                 [0.008]                 [0.021]                    [0.332]                      [0.225]

                                                                                               B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                   -0.568***               1.447***                   28.070***                      6.416**
1860-1920                                                 [0.191]                 [0.533]                    [9.694]                       [2.565]

                                                                                        C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                         Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                            4.423***                4.423***                    4.369***                     4.369***
1860-1920                                                 [1.369]                 [1.369]                    [1.367]                      [1.367]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                               10.43                   10.43                      10.18                        10.18

Controls (in all Panels):
 Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share            Yes                     Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                   Yes                     Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 Latitude                                                   Yes                     Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 Longitude                                                  Yes                     Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 State Fixed Effects                                        Yes                     Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Observations                                               2,935                   2,935                       2,929                        2,929
Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                      0.190                   0.104                       3.561                        0.312
Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the
2SLS. Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




were more likely to adopt compulsory education under the belief that exposure to American

public schools would instill the desired civic values that were missing among the immigrants.

A final potential explanation is that although immigrants were (on average) less skilled than the

native population, they may have had values and aspirational beliefs that facilitated the rapid

accumulation of education among their children and/or future generations of children in their

communities. This is consistent with the fact that although immigrants were less educated than

native populations, their children tended to be more educated.47

Innovative Activity: Another mechanism through which immigrants could have affected early

economic development is through innovative activities and knowledge creation (Fairlie and

Lofstrom, 2015). Although most immigrants were unskilled, an important subset of immigrants
  47 Forexample, the 1910 Report of the Immigration Commission studied 12,011 male iron and steel workers from the
Midwest. It found that although the proportion of foreign-born men that could read and write was lower than for
native-born men (81.6% versus 98.9%), native-born men with a foreign father had a higher literacy rate than native-born
men with a native (and white) father (99.8% versus 98.2%) (Dillingham, 1911, p. 27).




                                                                            39
were highly skilled and important innovators.48 There are many examples of immigrants, who

were involved in early industrialization in Europe, bringing over more advanced European

technologies to the United States (Rosenberg, 1972). It has also been argued that the increased

availability of unskilled labor due to immigration facilitated the introduction of technological and

managerial innovations, such as assembly lines and the rise of the managerial firm (Abramovitz

and David, 2000, Chandler, 1977, Denison, 1974, Hirschman and Mogford, 2009, Hounshell, 1984,

Wright, 1990). Others have argued that the increase in the labor force enabled economies of scale

in production, leading to increased profits that spurred innovation (Carter and Sutch, 1999).

   As a test for whether innovative activity was affected by European immigration in the short-

run, we examine patenting rates from 1860–1920, using utility patent data that were obtained

from the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Estimates are reported in column 3 of Table

10. We find a positive and significant effect of immigration on innovation during this time. An

increase in historical immigration from zero to the 50th percentile (0.049) results in a 0.7% increase

in the number of patents per capita.

   To assess the extent to which this increase in innovation is due to immigrants innovating

themselves or due to their facilitating innovation by native-born Americans, we attempt to identify

the country of birth of the innovators in the patent applications. The main challenge is that the

citizenship of patent applicants was not consistently reported prior to 1880. Consequently, we

are only able to identify the citizenship of the patent applicant in 50% of our sample of 1,297,086

applications. Moreover, per the Naturalization Act of 1798, immigrants could become United

States citizens after only fourteen years of residence in the country. Therefore, it is possible that

several patent applicants are registered as U.S. citizens, despite their being foreign-born. Another

concern is that there were significant challenges and costs associated with obtaining a patent,

which might have placed recently-landed foreigners with a limited understanding of English at a

disadvantage.49

   With these caveats in mind, we estimate the effect of immigration on the rate of patenting by
  48 Infact, recent evidence suggests that immigrants coming from Western European countries, were, if anything,
more skilled than the average of the home-country’s population (Wegge, 2002, Long and Ferrie, 2013, Abramitzky and
Boustan, 2015).
  49 While the Patent Act of 1793 might have benefited foreigners by removing the requirement of a thorough oral

examination as part of the process of granting patents, the cost of a patent was $35 in 1861, which corresponds to
about $891 in 2010 USD. Note, however, that the 1869 Report of the Commissioner of Patents compared the $35 fee
for a U.S. patent to the significantly higher charges in European countries such as Britain, France and Russia ($450);
Belgium ($420); and Austria ($350).




                                                         40
inventors that report themselves as being foreign-born. The estimates are reported in column 4 of

Table 10. We find a positive and statistically significant effect of immigration on foreign patents.

However, the magnitude is much smaller than for total patents. According to the estimates, an

increase in historical immigration from zero to the 50th percentile (0.049) results in an increase in

foreign patenting by 0.01%. This suggests that the direct effect of immigrants on foreign patents

was lower than the indirect effect of immigrants on innovation by native-born inventors. Such

an indirect effect of immigrants on native inventiveness is consistent with the findings of Moser,

Voena and Waldinger (2014). Although the authors examine a slightly later period than our

analysis (post-1920), they show that innovations by German-Jewish immigrants had a significant

effect on the rate of innovation of U.S.-born inventors.

   A closer analysis of the types of patents that tended to be registered by European-born

inventors suggests that while they were fewer in number, it is possible that many of these patents

represented contributions that were particularly important for industrialization. The importance

of their contribution can be inferred by relative citation rates. Of the patents in our sample, 16%

are cited by patents in the NBER Patent Citation Database, which contains patents from 1975–1999.

Among the cited patents, 12% are historical patents held by individuals that are European-born, a

figure that is significantly higher than the share of all patents that are registered by European-born

inventors (which is 3%). Thus, while European patents may have been small in number, they may

have been disproportionately influential.


D. Examining Effects Over Both the Short- and Long-Run

Our analysis to this point has provided estimates of the long-run economic effects of immigration,

as well as for the short-run effects of immigrants on industrialization, agricultural productivity,

and innovation. We now attempt to connect the short- and long-run effects by examining the

full range of effects from immediately after the Age of Mass Migration until today. To do this,

we examine urbanization, which has the benefit of being positively associated with income and

is available at regular time intervals during our time span of interest. We use our IV strategy

to estimate equation (3) with urbanization measured in each decade from 1920 to 2000 as the

outcome of interest.

   The estimates are reported in Table 11. We find that by 1920 one already observes a large

positive effect of immigration on urbanization. This effect remains stable until about 2000, when it


                                                 41
      Table 11: OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of historical immigration on urbanization.
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)

Dependent Variable                                                                               Urban Population Share in:
                                                           1920        1930         1940        1950       1960        1970          1980         1990        2000
                                                                                                      A. OLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    0.929***    0.940***    0.940***     0.890***   0.883***   0.887***       0.894***    0.941***    0.930***
1860-1920                                                 [0.085]      [0.085]     [0.083]     [0.086]      [0.088]     [0.091]     [0.088]      [0.084]     [0.081]

                                                                                                     B. 2SLS Estimates
Average Migrant Share,                                    5.173***    4.615***    5.050***     4.174**    4.995***   4.764**        5.088***    5.424***    6.234***
1860-1920                                                 [1.714]      [1.663]     [1.783]     [1.690]      [1.939]     [1.917]     [1.960]      [2.017]     [2.222]

                                                                                                 C. First Stage Estimates
                                                                                 Dependent Variable: Average Migrant Share, 1860-1920
Predicted Avg. Migrant Share,                             4.423***    4.423***    4.423***  4.423***      4.423***   4.461*** 4.423***          4.423***    4.423***
1860-1920                                                  [1.369]     [1.369]     [1.369]   [1.369]       [1.369]    [1.370]  [1.369]           [1.369]     [1.369]
Kleibergen Paap F -statistic                                10.43       10.43       10.43     10.43         10.43      10.60    10.43             10.43       10.43

Controls (in all Panels):
  Industrialization-Based Predicted Migrant Share           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Date of RR Connection (Years as of 2000)                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Latitude                                                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Longitude                                                 Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  State Fixed Effects                                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                                               2,935       2,935        2,935       2,935       2,935        2,933       2,935       2,935        2,935

Mean of Dep. Var. (2nd-Stage and OLS)                      0.195       0.219        0.236       0.286       0.324        0.345       0.362       0.365        0.401

Notes : An observation is a county. Panels A and B reports OLS estimates and 2SLS estimates, respectively. Panel C reports the first-stage estimates from the 2SLS.
Coefficient estimates are reported, with Conley standard errors reported in square brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




increases slightly.50 Thus, the estimates indicate that the economic benefits of immigrants were felt

early and persisted over time. This is consistent with immigration affecting early industrialization,

which due to increasing returns or lock-in effects, cause a persistent and long-run increase in

urbanization.

   Unfortunately, unlike urbanization, the other measures are not available during the full time

span. For education and per capita income, we can examine how the effects evolve over time, but

only in the post-WWII era. These estimates, which we report in appendix Tables A17 and A18,

show that we observe the same basic trend for education and income as we do for urbanization.

In the medium- and long-runs, we see that the effects of immigrants persist over time. For both

outcomes, we find that the benefits not only persist, but also grow overtime.

   Our findings of a persistent, and even growing, effect of historical immigration on economic

outcomes is consistent with the recent findings from Bleakley and Lin (2012), who find evidence

of lock-in effects in the context of historical U.S. portage sites. We find, as they do, that historical

factors affected the initial locations of economic activity, which generated persistent and even
  50 We also continue to find evidence that is consistent with the negative selection of immigrants. The 2SLS estimates
are consistently larger in magnitude than the OLS estimates.




                                                                                 42
diverging differences in incomes across locations.


8. Conclusions

The goal of this study was to make progress on understanding the long-run effects of large-scale

immigration. We examined the effects of the largest wave of immigration in U.S. history, the Age

of Mass Migration, which occurred from roughly 1860 to 1920. To help identify the causal effects

of immigrants on the locations in which they settled, we used an IV strategy that exploited the

significant decade-by-decade fluctuations in aggregate immigrant flows to the United States that

occurred during this era, the fact that immigrants typically used the railway to travel to their

eventual destination, and the gradual expansion of the railway network over time.

   We find that immigration resulted in large long-run economic benefits. Counties with more

immigrant settlement from 1860 to 1920, now have higher incomes, less unemployment, less

poverty, more education, and more urbanization. We also found that these economic benefits do

not come at the cost of social outcomes. Places with more historical immigrant settlement today

have similar levels of social capital, civic participation and rates of crime.

   Throughout the analysis, comparisons of the OLS and 2SLS estimates revealed evidence

consistent with negative selection by immigrants. The benefits inferred from the OLS correlations

were always much smaller than the benefits inferred from the 2SLS estimates. This is consistent

with migrants moving to “worse” places that counterfactually would have had lower long-run

economic growth, causing OLS estimates to understate the positive effect of immigrants on

long-term growth. The nature of selection is important since it may shed light into why casual

observation often associates immigration with poorer outcomes, even when the true causal effects

of immigrants may be positive.

   It is possible that the long-run benefits to locations that received more immigrants came at

the cost of other locations. The positive effect of immigrants could be due to a relocation of

economic activity rather than the creation of economic activity. We directly test for the presence

of such spatial spillovers. We estimated the effects that immigration to nearby counties had on a

county. We found no evidence of immigration reducing economic prosperity in nearby counties

(i.e., negative spillovers). Although we are unable to test for all possible forms of spillovers

(e.g., spillovers between distant locations), the evidence suggests that the long-run benefits of



                                                  43
immigrants are likely due to the creation of economic activity, rather than to the relocation of

economic activity.

   To better understand mechanisms, we turned to an examination of the short-run effects of

immigration. We found that immigrants resulted in an immediate increase in industrialization.

Immigrants first contributed to the establishment of more manufacturing facilities and then to the

development of larger facilities. We also found large positive effects of immigrants on agricultural

productivity and innovation as measured by patenting rates.

   Having examined the short-run effects of immigration, we then turned to an examination of the

dynamic effects of immigrants over the short-, medium- and long-runs. Examining urbanization

rates from 1920 to 2000, we found that large effects on urbanization were felt immediately and

persisted over time. We also examined income and education, but for the more limited time

period for which data are available (post WWII). We found a similar pattern for these outcomes

as well.

   Taken as a whole, our estimates provide evidence consistent with an historical narrative that

is commonly told of how immigration facilitated economic growth. The less skilled immigrants

provided the labor force necessary for industrial development. A smaller number of immigrants

brought with them knowledge, skills, and know-how that were beneficial for industry and

increased productivity in agriculture. Thus, by providing a sizeable workforce and a (smaller)

number of skilled workers, immigration led to early industrial development and long-run pros-

perity, which continues to persist until today.

   Despite the unique conditions under which the largest episode of immigration in U.S. history

took place, our estimates of the long-run effects of immigration may still be relevant for assessing

the long-run effects of immigrants today. According to our estimates, the long-run benefits of

immigration can be large, and need not come at high social cost. In addition, the economic

benefits can be realized quickly and can be highly persistent. This suggests the importance of

taking a long-run view when considering the current immigration debate. Thus, as Abramitzky

and Boustan (2015) have argued, we believe that looking backwards and learning from our past

experience with immigration is important when moving forward and thinking about immigration

policy today.




                                                  44
References

Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan, “Immigration in American History,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Literature, 2015, p. forthcoming.
  ,   , and Katherin Eriksson, “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and
  Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5),
  1832–1856.
  , , and , “Have the Poor Always Been Less Likely to Migrate? Evidence from Inheritance
  Practices during the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 102 (1),
  2–14.
  , , and , “A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of
  Mass Migration,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (3), 467–717.
Abramovitz, Moses and Paul A. David, “American Macroeconomic Growth in the Era of
 Knowledge-Based Progress: The Long Run Perspective,” in Stanley E. Engerman and Robert E.
 Gallman, eds., Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Vol. 3, Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press, 2000, pp. 1–92.
Ager, Philipp and Markus Bruckner, “Cultural Diversity and Economic Growth: Evidence from
 the US during the Age of Mass Migration,” European Economic Review, 2013, 64, 76–97.
  , Francesco Cinnirella, and Peter Sandholt Jensen, “The Kindergarten Movement and the U.S.
  Demographic Transition,” 2016. Mimeo, University of Southern Denmark.
Alexander, June Granatir, Daily Life in Immigrant America, 1870–1920, Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2007.
Atack, Jeremy and Robert A. Margo, “The Impact of Access to Rail Transportation on Agricul-
  tural Improvement: The American Midwest as a Test Case, 1850–1860,” 2010. Mimeo, Boston
  University.
  , Fred Bateman, Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo, “Did Railroads Induce or Follow
  Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the American Midwest, 1850–
  1860,” Social Science History, 2010, 34, 171–197.
  , Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo, “Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: Evidence for
  the United States, 1850–1870,” in Paul W. Rhode, Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and David F. Weidman,
  eds., Economic Evolution and Revolutions in Historical Time, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press,
  2011, pp. 162–179.
  , Robert A. Margo, and Elisabeth Perlman, “The Impact of Railroads on School Enrollment in
  Nineteenth Century America,” 2012. Mimeo, Boston University.
Atkin, David, “Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico,” 2016. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bandiera, Oriana, Myra Mohnen, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo, “Nation-Building
  Through Compulsory Schooling During the Age of Mass Migration,” 2016. Working paper,
  LSE.
Bergquist, James M., Daily Life in Immigrant America, 1820–1870, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
  2007.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin, “Portage and Path Dependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2012, 127 (2), 587–644.
Borjas, George, “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1994, 32, 1667–


                                                45
  1717.
  , “The Economic Benefit of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1995, 9 (1), 3–22.
  , Heaven’s Doors, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Burchardi, Konrad B. and Thomas Chaney Tarek A. Hassan, “Migrants, Ancestors, and Invest-
  ments,” 2015. Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Cance, Alexander E., “Immigrants and American Agriculture,” Journal of Farm Economics, 1925, 7
  (1), 102–114.
Card, David, “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review, 1990, 43, 245–257.
  , “Immigration and Inequality,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2009, 99 (2), 211–
  215.
  , “The Elusive Search for Negative Wage Impacts of Immigration,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 2012, 10 (1), 1–21.
Carter, Susan and Richard Sutch, “Historical Background to Current Immigration Issues,” in
  James P. Smith and Barry Edmonston, eds., The Immigration Debate: Studies on the Economic,
  Demographic and Fiscal Effects of Immigrants, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999,
  pp. 289–366.
Chandler, Alfred, The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Cambridge,
 M.A.: Harvard University Press, 1977.
Daniels, Roger, Coming to America: A History of Immigration and Ethnicity in American Life, New
 York: Harper Perennial, 2002.
Davis, Joseph, “An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790–1915,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1177–1215 2004, 119 (4), 642–658.
Denison, Edward F., Accounting for United States Economic Growth, 1929–1969, Washington, D.C.:
 Brookings Institution, 1974.
Dillingham, William P., “Immigrants in Industries. Part 2: Iron and Steel Manufacturing,” in
  The Immigration Commission, ed., Reports of the Immigration Commission, Washington, D.C.:
  Government Printing Office, 1911.
Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck, “Railroads and American Economic Growth: A “Mar-
 ket Access” Approach,” 2016. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Droller, Federico, “Economic Development: Evidence from Settlements in the Pampas,” 2013.
 Mimeo, University of Santiago de Chile.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth Sokoloff, “Technology and Industrialization, 1790–1914,”
  in Stanley E. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, eds., Cambridge Economic History of the United
  States, Vol. 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 367–401.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Magnus Lofstrom, “Immigration and Entrepreneurship,” 2015. Mimeo,
  University of California, Santa Cruz.
Faulkner, Harold Underwood, American Economic History, New York: Harper and Row Publish-
  ers, 1960.
Faust, Albert Bernhardt, The Germans in the United States, New York: German University League,
  1916.


                                                46
Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer, “Linkages among Climate
  Change, Crop Yields and Mexico-US Cross-Border Migration,” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 2010, 107 (32), 14257–14262.
Fischer, David Hackett, Albion’s Seed: A Cultural History, New York: Oxford University Press,
  1989.
Foerster, Robert, The Italian Emigration of our Times, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
  1924.
  , The American Immigration Collection, New York: Arno Press Inc., 1969.
Foged, Mette and Giovanni Peri, “Immigrants’ Effect on Native Workers: New Analysis on
  Longitudinal Data,” 2015. Working paper.
Fulford, Scott L., Ivan Petkov, and Fabio Schiantarelli, “Does It Matter Where You Came From?
  Ancestry Composition and Economic Performance of US Counties, 1850–2010,” 2015. Mimeo,
  Boston College.
Goldin, Claudia, “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States, 1890
 to 1921,” in Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap, eds., The Regulated Economy: A Historical
 Approach to Political Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 223–257.
Gripshover, Margaret M. and Thomas L. Bell, “Patently Good Ideas: Innovations and Inventions
 in U.S. Onion Farming, 1883–1939,” Material Culture, 2012, 44 (1), 1–30.
Grosjean, Pauline, “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US South,”
 Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, p. forthcoming.
Haines, Michael and Robert A. Margo, “Railroads and Local Development: The United States in
 hte 1850s,” in Joshua L. Rosenbloom, ed., Quantitative Economic History: The Good of Counting,
 London: Routledge, 2008, pp. 78–99.
Haines, Michael R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, “His-
 torical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002,” 2010.
 ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
 [distributor], 2010-05-21. http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02896.v3.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson, The Age of Mass Migration, New York: Oxford
 University Press, 1998.
   and   , Global Migration and the World Economy: Two Centuries of Policy and Performance,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Hedges, James B., “The Colonization Work of the Northern Pacific Railroad,” Mississippi Valley
 Historical Review, 1926, 13 (3), 311–342.
Hirschman, Charles and Elizabeth Mogford, “Immigration and the American Industrial Revo-
  lution from 1880 to 1920,” Social Science Research, 2009, 38, 897–920.
Hornung, Erik, “Immigration and the Diffusion of Technology: The Huguenot Diaspora in
 Prussia,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (1), 84–122.
Hounshell, David A., From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of
 Manufacturing Technology in the United States, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.
Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innova-
 tion?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2, 31–56.
Jordan, Terry G., German Seed in Texas Soil: Immigrant Farmers in Nineteenth-Century Texas, Austin:


                                                47
  Yale University Press, 1966.
Kennedy, John F., A Nation of Immigrants, New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1964.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala and William R. Kerr, “Immigrant Entrepreneurship,” 2016. NBER Working
 Paper No. w22385.
Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti, “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
  and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2014, 129, 275–331.
Kollmorgen, Walter M., The Pennsylvania German Farmer, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
 Press, 1942.
Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie, “British, American, and British-American Social Mobility: In-
  tergenerational Occupational Change among Migrants and Non-Migrants in the Late 19th
  Century,” 2013. Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Luebke, Frederick C., “Ethnic Group Settlement on the Great Plains,” Western Historical Quarterly,
  1977, 8 (4), 405–430.
Luterbacher, Jurg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner, “Euro-
  pean Seasonal and Annual Temperature Variability, Trends, and Extremes Since 1500,” Science,
  2004, 303 (5663), 1499–1503.
Malone, Dumas, “The Intellectual Melting-Pot,” The American Scholar, 1935, 4 (4), 444–459.
Migration Policy Institute, “Data Hub: Tabulations of U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
 Office of Immigration Statistics, Yearbook of Immigration Statistics (various years),” 2016.
 http://migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub. Accessed July 2016.
Minnesota Population Center, “National Historical Geographic Information System: Version
 2.0,” 2011. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. http://www.nhgis.org.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, “German Jewish Emigres and US
 Invention,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3222–3255.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri, “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity:
  Evidence from U.S. Cities,” Journal of Economic Geography, 2006, 6 (1), 9–44.
Pagan, Adrian Rodney, “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated
  Regressors,” International Economic Review, 1984, 25, 221–247.
Pauling, Andreas, Jurg Luterbacher, Carlo Casty, and Heinz Wanner, “Five Hundred Years of
  Gridded High-Resolution Precipitation Reconstructions over Europe and the Connection to
  Large-Scale Circulation,” Climate Dynamics, 2006, 26, 387–405.
Paz, Francisco Haimovich, “The Long-Term Return to Early childhood Education: Evidence from
  the First U.S. Kindergartens,” 2015. Mimeo, University of California Los Angeles.
Peri, Giovanni, “The Effects of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from US States,” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 348–358.
  and Chad Sparber, “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (3), 135–169.
Ramankutty, Navin and Jonathan A. Foley, “Estimating Historical Changes in Global Land
  Cover: Croplands from 1700 to 1992,” Global Biogeochemical Cycles, December 1999, 13 (4),
  997–1027.



                                               48
Rocha, Rudi, Claudio Ferraz, and Rodrigo R. Soares, “Human Capital Peristence and Develop-
 ment,” 2015. Mimeo, PUC-Rio.
Rodriguez-Pose, Andres and Viola von Berlepsch, “When Migrants Rule: The Legacy of Mass
 Migration on Economic Development in the United States,” Annals of the Association of American
 Geographers, 2014, 104 (3), 628–651.
Rosenberg, Nathan, Technology and American Economic Growth, White Plains, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe,
 1972.
Rupasingha, Anil and Stephan J. Goetz, “U.S. County-Level Social Capital Data, 1990–2005,”
 2008. The Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development, Penn State University, University
 Park, PA.
Saloutos, Theodore, “The Immigrant Contribution to American Agriculture,” Agricultural His-
  tory, 1976, 50 (1), 45–67.
Solomou, Solomos and Weike Wu, “Weather Effects on European Agricultural Output, 1850–
  1913,” European Review of Economic History, 1999, 3, 351–373.
Spitzer, Yannay and Ariell Zimran, “Self-Selection of Immigrants on the Basis of Living Stan-
  dards: Evidence from the Stature of Italian Immigrants at Ellis Island, 1907–1925,” 2013.
  Working Paper.
Wegge, Simone A., “Occupational Self-Selection of European Emigrants: Evidence from
 Nineteenth-Century Hesse-Cassel,” European Review of Economic History, 2002, 6 (3), 365–394.
Willcox, Walter, International Migrations, Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,
 1929-1931.
Wittke, Carl, We Who Built America, Ann Arbor: The Press of Western Reserve University, 1939.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, MA: MIT
 Press, 2002.
Wright, Gavin, “The Origins of American Industrial Success: 1879–1940,” American Economic
 Review, 1990, 80, 651–678.




                                              49
