                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE CROSS SECTION OF BANK VALUE

                                          Mark Egan
                                        Stefan Lewellen
                                         Adi Sunderam

                                      Working Paper 23291
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23291


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




We thank Anil Kashyap, Henri Servaes, Vania Stavrakeva, Jeremy Stein, Chad Syverson, Vikrant
Vig, and participants at Boston College, Brown, Carnegie Mellon, London Business School, and
UT Austin for helpful comments. Lewellen thanks the Research and Materials Development Fund
at London Business School for financial support. Sunderam gratefully acknowledges funding
from the Harvard Business School Division of Research. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mark Egan, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Cross Section of Bank Value
Mark Egan, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 23291
March 2017
JEL No. G2,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the determinants of value creation within U.S. commercial banks. We focus on three
theoretically-motivated drivers of bank value: screening and monitoring, "safe" deposit
production, and synergies between deposit-taking and lending. To assess the relative
contributions of each, we develop novel measures of banks' deposit productivity and asset
productivity and use these measures to evaluate the cross-section of bank value. We find that
variation in deposit productivity explains the majority of variation in bank value, consistent with
theories emphasizing safe-asset production. We also find evidence of meaningful value creation
from synergies between deposit-taking and lending. Overall, our findings suggest that banks are
primarily "special" due to their unique liability structure rather than their ability to screen and
monitor borrowers.

Mark Egan                                        Adi Sunderam
Department of Finance                            Harvard Business School
3-117 Carlson School of Management               Baker Library 359
321 19th Avenue South                            Soldiers Field
Minneapolis, MN 55455                            Boston, MA 02163
eganx076@umn.edu                                 and NBER
                                                 asunderam@hbs.edu
Stefan Lewellen
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
slewellen@london.edu
1    Introduction
What is the fundamental purpose of a bank? In a frictionless world, the Modigliani-Miller

theorems hold, and banks are simply pass-through entities, no dierent than other nan-

cial intermediaries. In contrast, forty years of theoretical work has identied reasons that

banks are special in the presence of frictions. This work can be grouped into three broad

categories. One class of theories argues that banks exist to produce safe, liquid, adverse-

selection free liabilities, such as bank deposits (e.g., Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990). A second

class of theories argues that banks produce valuable information about borrowers through

the screening and monitoring of loans (e.g., Diamond, 1984). Finally, a third class of theories

highlights synergies between deposit-taking and lending that allow banks to make certain

types of loans more easily than other intermediaries (e.g., Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein, 2002).

Collectively, these theories capture the primary economic dierences between banks and

other types of rms.

    However, little is known about the relative importance of these explanations for the

existence of banks. Banks clearly issue deposits and make loans, but is deposit-gathering

or borrower screening more important in explaining bank specialness? The answer to this

question is important for a number of reasons, including understanding the impact of new

regulations on banks. To judge the relative contributions of dierent broad classes of theories,

we need a measure that makes the contribution of each explanation comparable.

    Bank value is the natural choice.    In a Modigliani-Miller world, banks do not create

economic value. However, each broad theory of banking involves frictions that violate the

Modigliani-Miller theorems and hence has implications for bank value creation. For example,

if information produced through the screening and monitoring process allows a bank to

source positive-NPV projects, this should be reected in the bank's value.       Similarly, the

production of safe debt can also create value for banks. As such, the cross-section of bank

value is informative about which of these broad classes of theories best describes banks'

business models and thus their fundamental purpose.        However, little is currently known

about the underlying factors that drive the cross-section of bank value.

    In this paper, we systematically examine the cross-section of bank value to understand

the quantitative contributions of dierent theories of banking. We begin by using tools from

industrial organization to construct novel estimates of a bank's prociency at producing

deposits and risk-adjusted loan income.     Our structural framework allows us to estimate

primitive measures of deposit productivity and asset productivity. Intuitively, a bank with

high deposit productivity is able to collect more deposits than a less productive bank, holding

xed inputs like its deposit rate and number of branches. Similarly, a bank with higher asset




                                               1
productivity is able to generate more risk-adjusted revenue with the same asset base.

   Uncovering these primitives is important because the observable characteristics of a bank

are endogenous functions of its productivity: all else equal, a more productive bank will grow

at a faster rate than a less productive bank. Thus, in the presence of diminishing returns,

variation in observable characteristics is likely to understate the amount of true variation

in primitives across banks. Similarly, estimating simple cross-sectional regressions relating

bank value to factors such as interest income or interest expense would be like relating the

value of an industrial rm to the prices of its output goods.     Such regressions would not

have a natural economic interpretation in the context of the three broad classes of theories

of banking. Overall, our ability to estimate primitive productivity dierences across banks

represents an important step forward in our ability to identify dierences in banks' business

models, both in the cross-section and over time.

   We combine our productivity estimates with banks' market-to-book ratios (M/B) from

1994 to 2015 to identify the primary determinants of cross-sectional variation in bank value.

Our main nding is that the liability side of the balance sheet drives the majority of cross-

sectional variation in bank value.    Consistent with theories of safe-asset production, we

nd that a one-standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is associated with an

increase in M/B of 0.2 to 0.5 points.     In contrast, a one-standard deviation increase in

asset productivity is only associated with an increase in M/B of 0.1 to 0.2 points. Hence,

variation in deposit productivity accounts for about twice as much variation in bank value

as variation in asset productivity. This nding suggests that liability-driven theories of bank

value creation explain more variation in the cross section of banks than asset-driven theories.

   To better understand the economics behind this result, we further decompose asset and

deposit productivity into their sub-components. On the deposit side, we separately measure

a bank's ability to collect savings, transaction, and small/large time deposits. Our results

suggest that variation in a bank's ability to collect savings and transaction deposits is the

main driver of value creation. Savings deposit productivity explains over three times as much

variation in market-to-book ratios as transaction deposit productivity, and ve times as much

variation as any other subcomponent of productivity. We nd that the demand for savings

and transaction deposits is highly inelastic; that is, these deposits tend to be stickier.

Evidence from an analysis of bank balance sheet composition rearms these results: we nd

that high deposit productivity is associated with having more deposits in general and, in

particular, higher levels of savings deposits. In addition, we nd that the impact of deposit

productivity on overall bank leverage is relatively small in the cross section. Thus, banks

that are particularly good at raising deposits are not signicantly more levered than those

that are not. Instead, they substitute non-deposit debt for deposits.



                                              2
   On the asset side, we nd that variation in a bank's loan portfolios, rather than securities

portfolios, is the main driver of bank productivity. Consistent with information production

theories of banking, we also nd that banks with high asset productivity tilt their balance

sheet towards holding more illiquid assets.        In particular, we nd that asset-productive

banks hold more loans and fewer securities, particularly real estate and commercial and

industrial (C&I) loans, which are likely to be more information-intensive than other types

of loans. Hence, our results are consistent with the idea that the screening and monitoring

of information-intensive loans is an important source of bank value, though it accounts for

far less variation in bank value than deposit productivity.

   Finally, we utilize our productivity measures to assess the degree of synergies between

banks' deposit-taking and lending activities. Intuitively, a bank that is good at producing

deposits may be able to oer more loans or dierent types of loans than a bank that is less

productive at raising deposits. By assessing the relationships between our two productivity

measures, and by examining the relationship between each productivity measure and banks'

balance sheet composition, we are able to uncover the full extent of balance sheet synergies

in a manner distinct from the existing literature.

   We nd that asset productivity is strongly correlated with deposit productivity    −   about

25% of the cross-sectional variation in asset productivity can be explained by deposit pro-

ductivity, consistent with the theoretical literature on synergies. All types of deposit pro-

ductivity except for transactions deposits are positively correlated with asset productivity.

This nding suggests that the ability to raise sticky short-term funding is a key source

of bank synergies.    In addition, we nd that deposit-productive banks tend to oer more

loan commitments and lines of credit, consistent with Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) and

Gatev and Strahan (2006). In addition, we nd that banks with high deposit productivity

tend to make more illiquid C&I loans, consistent with Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny

(2016).

   We also explore the relationships between banks' geographical footprints and our pro-

ductivity measures.    Intuitively, loan markets are likely to be regional or even national in

scope, while deposit markets are likely to be more local in scope. Consistent with this intu-

ition, we nd that the demographic characteristics of where banks operate explain twice as

much variation in deposit productivity as asset productivity. However, even after controlling

for banks' geographic footprints, we still nd that both of our productivity measures are

strongly related to bank value, with deposit productivity again explaining signicantly more

variation than asset productivity in the cross-section of banks.

   In summary, this paper represents the rst attempt to empirically identify and quantify

the primary determinants of cross-sectional variation in bank value.       We focus on three



                                               3
theoretically motivated drivers of bank value:             safety and liquidity services produced by

deposits, screening and monitoring technologies for lending, and synergies between deposit-

taking and lending. While we nd that all three drivers play an important role, our results

suggest that cross-sectional variation in deposit productivity accounts for the majority of

cross-sectional variation in bank value.         Consistent with the idea that bank liabilities are

special, we nd that a bank's deposit productivity plays a central role in determining its

funding structure, size, and ultimate value. The existing literature has largely focused on

the potential social value associated with banks' safe-asset production activities. Here, we

show that these activities have signicant private value as well.

    To estimate a bank's deposit productivity, we construct a consumer demand system for

bank deposits that builds upon existing work by Dick (2008) and Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos

(2016). In our framework, banks compete for deposits by setting interest rates in a standard

Bertrand-Nash dierentiated products setting, which we estimate using a common model

of demand from the industrial organization literature (Berry, 1994; Berry, Levinsohn, and

Pakes, 1995). To address the endogeneity of deposit rates in our demand specications, we

use two sets of instrumental variables. One set of instruments is based on the bank specic

pass-through of 3-month LIBOR into deposit rates (Villas-Boas (2007), Egan, Hortaçsu, and
                   1
Matvos (2016)).        Our second set of instruments is based on standard Berry, Levinsohn, and

Pakes (1995) instruments where we instrument for deposit rates using the lagged average
                                                                                   2
product characteristics of a bank's competitors in a given market.                     We then use these

demand estimates to quantify deposit productivity at the bank-year level.

    To estimate asset productivity, we exibly estimate a bank's ability to produce interest

and fee income as a function of its loan and securities portfolios. We address the potential

endogeneity of the primary production input (asset size) by instrumenting for size using

the weighted average deposit productivity of the bank's competitors. The idea behind the

instrument is that it is a cost shifter: all else equal, a bank that competes against more

deposit-productive banks will be smaller.            As in the literature on estimating total factor

productivity (see Syverson, 2011), we use the residuals and bank xed eects from the

estimated production function as our measure of asset productivity for individual banks.

Thus, our estimation procedure allows us to construct two complementary measures of bank

productivity: a bank's skill at producing deposits, and the same bank's skill at using these

   1 In particular, we instrument for bank deposit rates using the tted value of a bank-specic regression of
deposit rates on the 3-month LIBOR rate. The idea behind this instrument is that a bank's average degree
of pass-through in the time series is likely to be orthogonal to the deposit demand it faces at any one point
in time.
   2 The idea behind this instrument is that there is unlikely to be a link between lagged competitors' product
characteristics and the bank's own current-period deposit demand shock.




                                                      4
funds to generate revenue.

    Our paper is related to several strands of the literature on banking. First, a large theo-

retical and empirical literature has argued that banks create value by producing safe, liquid
                                                                 3
liabilities that are useful for transaction purposes.                Our paper adds to this literature by

quantifying the eects of safe-liability creation on bank value. We nd strong evidence that

bank value is linked to a bank's ability to produce safe, liquid deposits.                  However, while

a bank's transaction deposit productivity is linked to its value, our strongest results are

for savings deposits, which, while safe, are not completely liquid. In addition, we nd no

evidence that non-deposit debt creates value for banks. Second, our paper is related to a

long literature on bank information production dating back to Leland and Pyle (1977) and
                    4
Diamond (1984).             This literature has argued that part of a bank's purpose is to perform del-

egated information production and portfolio management (e.g. screening and monitoring) on

behalf of its investors. Consistent with the broad themes of this literature, we nd evidence

that a bank's asset productivity is strongly linked to its value. However, we also nd that

dierences in asset productivity across banks appear to be signicantly less important in the

cross-section relative to dierences in banks' abilities to produce deposits. A third literature

has argued that banks exist in part because of synergies between their deposit-taking and
                        5
lending activities.          Consistent with this literature, we nd that deposit-productive banks

   3 For the theoretical literature, see, e.g., Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990; Pennacchi, 2012; Stein, 2012;
Gennaoili, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2013; DeAngelo and Stulz, 2015; Dang, Gorton, and Holmström, 2015;
Dang, Gorton, Holmström, and Ordoñez, 2016; Moreira and Savov, 2016. The empirical literature in this
area, e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick, 2012; Greenwood,
Hanson, and Stein, 2015; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2015; Sunderam, 2015; and Nagel, 2016,
has largely focused on understanding whether bank liabilities are special by examining the behavior of
equilibrium prices and quantities.
   4 Other asset-driven theories of bank value creation include Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984), Boyd
and Prescott (1986), Allen (1990), Diamond (1991), Rajan (1992), Winton (1995), and Allen, Carletti, and
Marquez (2011). Empirical literature includes Petersen and Rajan (1994), Berger and Udell (1995), Demsetz
and Strahan (1997), Shockley and Thakor (1997), Acharya, Hassan, and Saunders (2006), and Su (2007).
A separate literature studies the charter value that accrues to banks due to entry restrictions that allowed
incumbents to extract monopoly rents. See Keeley (1990) for a discussion of the decline in charter values
and Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) for more information on the removal of branching restrictions.         There
is also a literature on estimating bank production functions, primarily for the purpose of understanding
whether there are economies of scale in banking (e.g., Berger and Mester, 1997; Hughes and Mester, 1998;
Stiroh, 2000; Berger and Mester, 2003; Rime and Stiroh, 2003; Wang, 2003). We extend this literature by
estimating a bank's     liability   productivity in addition to introducing a new methodology to estimate bank
asset productivity and studying the value implications of both measures.
   5 See, e.g., Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Berlin and Mester (1999), Diamond
and Rajan (2000, 2001), Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002), Gatev and Strahan (2006), and Hanson, Shleifer,
Stein, and Vishny (2016). Mehran and Thakor (2011) argue that there are synergies between equity capital
and lending and provide evidence from the cross section of bank valuations. Berger and Bouwman (2009)
construct a measure of bank liquidity creation and show that their measure is positively correlated with banks'
market-to-book ratios. Bai, Krishnamurthy, and Weymuller (2016) also link bank liquidity mismatch, the
dierence in liquidity between the asset and liability sides of a bank's balance sheet, to bank stock returns.




                                                          5
also tend to be asset-productive. Finally, our paper is also related to the growing literature
                                                                     6
at the intersection of industrial organization and nance.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple framework

that highlights the economic linkages between deposit productivity, asset productivity, and

bank value. Section 3 describes our estimation procedure and provides more details on our

measures of bank productivity. Our main results are discussed in Section 4, which relates

our productivity measures to bank characteristics and measures of bank value.                      Section 5

presents robustness exercises, and Section 6 concludes.




2      Economic Framework
In this section, we present a simple economic framework that allows us to link deposit

productivity and asset productivity with bank value.               Our framework contains two types

of agents: consumers and banks.            We begin by describing consumer preferences for bank

deposits.    We then turn to the problem of banks seeking to generate revenue from their

assets.



2.1       Consumers

There is a continuum of consumers, each of whom chooses to deposit their funds at one

bank or purchase an outside option.           Consumer demand for deposit services is a function

of the deposit rate and quality of services provided by each bank     j = 1, ..., J. A consumer
                                                                                 7
depositing funds at bank j earns the deposit rate ij , which yields utility αij . The parameter

α > 0 measures the consumer's sensitivity to deposit rates. Depositors also derive utility
from banking services, given by βXj + δj + εij . This service utility depends on observable

bank characteristics Xj , such as the number of bank branches. In addition, it depends on

a bank-specic xed eect, δj , which reects bank quality dierences: all else equal, some

banks oer better services than others. Finally, the term εij is a consumer-bank specic

utility shock. This utility shock captures preference heterogeneity across consumers. Some

However, neither of these papers perform a comprehensive analysis of the determinants of bank value. To
our knowledge, our paper is the rst in the literature to do so.
    6 Our deposit demand estimates relate most closely to Dick (2008) and Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos
(2016). Similar tools have been used to estimate demand by Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) for index mutual
funds, Koijen and Yogo (2015) for investment assets, Koijen and Yogo (2016) for life insurance, and Hast-
ings, Hortaçsu and Syverson (2016) for privatized social security. Our estimation of bank asset production
functions uses techniques similar to those used by Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) and Schoar (2002) to
study nonnancial rms.     An advantage in our setting is that we correct for the potential endogeneity of
production inputs using cost shifters from the liability side of the bank as instruments.
    7 While our empirical analysis uses panel data, we suppress time subscripts here for simplicity.




                                                      6
consumers may inherently prefer Bank of America to Citibank (or vice versa). Thus, the

total indirect utility derived by a depositor                   i    from bank   j   is given by:



                                                 uij = αij + βXj + δj + εij .                                           (1)



The bank specic xed eects,                   δj ,   denote a bank's deposit productivity. Conditional on the

oered deposit rate            (ij )   and other bank characteristics            (Xj ),   banks with a higher deposit

productivity      δj   are able to attract more deposits.

         Consumers select the bank that maximizes their utility. We follow the standard assump-

tion in the industrial organization literature (Berry, 1994; Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes,

1995) and assume that the utility shock                        εij      is independently and identically distributed

across banks and consumers and follows a Type 1 Extreme Value distribution. Given this

distributional assumption, the probability that a consumer selects bank                               j   follows the multi-

nomial logit distribution. We also assume that consumers have access to an outside good,

which represents placing funds outside of the traditional depository banking sector. Without

loss of generality, we normalize the utility of the outside good to zero                            (u0 = 0).   The market

share for bank         j,   denoted     sj ,   is then


                                                              exp(αij + βXj + δj )
                                   sj (ij , i−j ) = PJ                                  .                               (2)
                                                           k=1 exp(αik + βXk + δk ) + 1


The total market size for deposits is denoted                       M. Hence,    the total deposits collected by bank

j   is   sj M.
         Our utility formulation closely follows that of Egan, Hortaçsu and Matvos (2016), with

one notable exception.                 Previous research such as Rose (2015) and Egan, Hortaçsu and

Matvos (2016) nds that depositors (particularly uninsured depositors) may be sensitive to

the nancial stability of a bank. In this paper, rather than explicitly modeling consumers'

perceptions about bank solvency as a separate feature of their utility function, we account

for banks' risk-taking and overall nancial stability through our empirical implementation.



2.2         Banks

We next turn to the problem of banks. Banks collect deposits and other capital and invest

them in a bank-specic technology.                        Banks have total assets equal to to the sum of the

deposit it collects,         M sj ,    and its other capital,           Kj :

                                                         Aj = Mt s j + K j .



                                                                    7
The bank's per-period prot function is given by



                                         πj = φj Aθj − ij Mt sj − rj Kj .                                             (3)



The term     φj Aθj   reects the investment income the bank generates from assets                       Aj .    In other

words,    φj Aθj is   the bank's asset production function.                  The parameter      θ   reects returns to

scale in production, and          φj   reects bank        j 's   asset productivity.        Specically,   φj    reects

excess risk-adjusted revenue the bank can earn on its loans and securities. These revenues

may arise because the bank has a particularly good technology for screening and monitoring

borrowers, or because it is particularly good at nding and holding mispriced securities.

The remaining terms in the prot function,                  ij M s j   and   rj Kj ,   reect the bank specic costs

of raising deposits      M sj   and capital    Kj .   For ease of exposition, we assume that the income

generated from the the bank's investment is deterministic. This allows us to abstract away

from bank risk-taking, which we address in our empirical analysis.

    Banks compete for deposits by playing a dierentiated product Bertrand-Nash interest

rate setting game. The bank sets the deposit rate to maximize



                                         max φj Aθj − ij M sj − rj Kj .
                                           i

                                                                              8
 The corresponding bank rst order condition is given by


                                                                       1
                                         φj θAθ−1
                                              j   = ij +                      .                                       (4)
                                                                   α(1 − sj )
The left-hand side term,         φj θAθ−1
                                      j   ,    reects the marginal return of an additional dollar of
                                                  1
assets.   The right-hand side term,
                                               α(1−sj )
                                                          + ij ,   reects the marginal cost of collecting an

additional dollar of deposits.          All else equal, banks with better investment opportunities

(higher marginal returns) will nd it optimal to oer higher deposit rates.



2.3       Bank Value and Productivity

The primary objects of interest in our simple framework are deposit and asset productivity.

We examine how these dierent measures of productivity create value for the bank.                                    On

the liability side, the parameter         δj   can be interpreted as a bank's total factor productivity

for collecting deposits, or simply bank           j 0s    deposit productivity. Holding the oered deposit

   8 For simplicity, we assume a bank's only choice variable is the deposit rate. However, the model can be
easily generalized to include additional choice variables, such as capital and risk. Provided that the additional
bank choice variables and deposit rates are determined simultaneously, the bank's rst order condition for
deposit rates will remain the same because of the envelope theorem.




                                                             8
rate (ij ) and other bank characteristics                   (Xj ) xed, banks with a higher δj      are able to attract

more depositors. In other words, banks with higher deposit productivity can attract deposits

more cheaply. To illustrate, suppose that bank                    j wishes to collect D deposits. It then needs
to oer a deposit rate         i0   such that         D = M sj (i0 , i−j ). Bank j 0 s interest expenditure is then
given by
                                                        exp(αi0 + βXj + δj0 )
                                                                                          !
                               Di0 = M              PJ                               i0 ,
                                                     k=1 exp(αi k + βX k + δ k ) + 1
where    δj0    reects bank   j 0s   initial deposit productivity. Now, suppose that bank             j 's deposit
productivity increases from            δj0   to   δj1 .   Because of the increase in productivity, bank j can now
                                          δj1 −δj0                                                      9
oer a lower rate equal to            i1 = i0 −
                                              α
                                                   and still raise the the same amount of deposits, D.
                                                                                 1 0
                                                                                 δj −δj
Bank     j 0s   total interest expense of collecting D deposits falls by D
                                                                                    α
                                                                                        . All else equal,

an increase in a bank's deposit productivity leads to an increase in the bank's net income

and bank value.

     On the asset side, the parameter                      φj   reects a bank's asset total factor productivity or

simply a bank's asset productivity. Conditional on the bank's level of assets, a bank with

higher asset productivity generates more revenue from its set of assets                             Aj .   To illustrate,

suppose a bank's asset productivity increases from                         φ0j   toφ1j . All else equal, the increase   in
                                                                                         1      0  θ
asset productivity results in an increase in net income                           of (φ − φ )Aj . Both increases        in

deposit productivity and asset productivity translate directly into higher net income and

value.




3       Data and Estimation
3.1          Data

Our primary data source is the Federal Reserve FR Y-9C reports, which provide detailed

quarterly balance sheet and income statement data for all U.S. bank holding companies. We

supplement the Y-9C data with stock market data from CRSP and weekly branch-level data

on advertised deposit rates from RateWatch. We also obtain branch-level deposit quantities

from the annual FDIC Summary of Deposits les. Finally, we obtain county- and MSA-level

demographic characteristics from the U.S. Census Bureau.

     Our sample is the universe of public bank holding companies.                              Our primary data set

consists of an unbalanced panel of 847 bank holding companies over the period 1994 through
        10
2015.        Observations are at the bank holding company by quarter level. Table 1 provides

    9 Note that as illustrated by Eq. (4), a bank would nd it optimal to increase the amount of deposits it
collects in equilibrium after an increase in productivity.
    10 On average, we observe 327 banks in a given time period (quarter) and 52 observations (quarterly) for



                                                                    9
summary statistics for the data set. On average, bank deposit interest expenditure is 2.19%

and is 1.74% when measured net of fees.           As discussed below, we measure the quality of

services oered by a bank using the bank's non-interest expenditures, number of employees,

and number of branches. Our two primary measures of bank risk taking are its equity beta

and its standard deviation of return on assets.          Following Baker and Wurgler (2015), we

calculate the equity beta for each bank in our sample using monthly returns over the past

twenty-four months. Similarly, we measure the standard deviation of return on assets using

quarterly returns over the past two years. We provide further details and the source of each

variable in the data appendix.



3.2    Bank Liabilities: Deposit Demand Estimation

We estimate the demand system described in Section 2.1 using our bank data set over the

period 1994 through 2015. We can write the logit demand system in Eq. (2) as the following

regression specication:



                              ln Mt sjt − ln(Mt s0t ) = αijt + βXjt + δjt .                        (5)


Because we do not observe the characteristics of the outside good,            s0 ,   we include a time

xed eect. This also allows us to estimate the key demand parameters without actually

specifying the outside good. Thus, we estimate the following specication:



                               ln Mt sjt = αijt + βXjt + µj + µt + ξjt .                           (6)



We estimate demand in two separate ways.             First, in our baseline demand specications,

we dene the market for deposits and compute the associated bank market shares at the

aggregate US by quarter level. We also estimate a second demand system where we dene
                                                          11
the market for deposits at the county by year level.

   A standard issue in demand estimation is the endogeneity of prices, or in this case, deposit

rates. The term    ξjt   in Eq. (6) represents an unobserved bank-time specic demand shock.

If banks observe   ξjt   prior to setting deposit rates, the oered deposit rate will be correlated

with the unobservable term    ξjt . For example, suppose bank j experiences a demand shock
such that ξjt is positive. Bank j will then nd it optimal to oer a lower deposit rate (e.g.,

Eq. 4). This will cause our estimate of α to be biased downwards.

   We use two sets of instruments to account for the endogeneity of deposit rates. First, fol-

each bank.
  11 Deposit market share data at the branch level is only available at an annual frequency through the
FDIC's Summary of Deposits. Hence, we estimate demand at the county level using annual data.




                                                   10
lowing Villas-Boas (2007) and Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos (2016), we construct instruments

from the bank specic pass-through of 3-month LIBOR into deposit rates. As documented

by Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992), Driscoll and Judson (2013), and

Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2016), deposit rates at dierent banks respond dierently

to changes in short term interest rates. Investment opportunities are a key reason for this

variation. Banks with good investment opportunities will not wish to lose deposit funding

to competitors and thus will raise their deposit rates more when short rates rise.                         Hence,

variation in investment opportunities will induce variation in deposit rates that is unrelated

to the deposit demand conditions that banks face.                    Thus, we can instrument for           ijt ,   the

deposit rate oered by bank          j   at time    t,   with the tted value of a bank-specic regression

of   ijt   on 3-month LIBOR. The exclusion restriction here is that bank                  j 's   average degree of

pass-through in the time series is orthogonal to the deposit demand it faces at time                       t.
      Our second set of instruments are traditional Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)-type

instruments. We instrument for deposit rates using the average product characteristics of a

bank's competitors. We use lagged competitor product characteristics and only use charac-

teristics that are slower moving. Specically, we use the number of bank branches, number

of employees, non-interest expenditures, and banking fees of a bank's competitors, but we do

not use the deposit rates they oer. We calculate the average product characteristic oered

by each bank's competitor at the county by quarter level. We then form our instrument by

taking the weighted average of a bank's competitors' product characteristics across all coun-

ties the bank operates in. The idea is that, all else equal, a bank must oer higher deposit

rates if its competitors oer better products. The exclusion restriction in this setting is that

the lagged average competitor product characteristics are orthogonal bank-quarter specic

demand shocks.

      Table 2 displays the corresponding demand estimates using aggregate bank-quarter data

from the Y-9C reports. We measure deposit rates                    ijt   as interest expense on deposits, net

of fees on deposit accounts, divided by total deposits.                     Column (1) of Table 2 displays

the simple OLS estimates corresponding to Eq.                    (6).     Column (2) uses the pass-through

instruments.       Column (3) uses competitors' deposit rates as instruments, and column (4)

uses both sets of instruments. The instruments yield rst stage F-statistics in excess of 25

for each specication. We estimate a positive and signicant relationship between demand

for deposits and the oered deposit rate. Moreover, as we would expect, the IV estimates

tend to be higher than the OLS estimates. The coecient                     20.8   in column (4) implies that a

one percentage point increase in the oered deposit rate is associated with a 1.8 percentage
                                         12
point increase in market share.               These point estimates are in line with the literature (Dick,

     12 Calculated assuming an initial market share of 10%.



                                                           11
2008; Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos, 2016). In Section 5.2.3 below, we show that our main

ndings are robust to a variety of alternative specications of the demand system.

   We use the estimated demand system to calculate each bank's deposit productivity.

Specically, we measure bank          j 's   deposit productivity at time       t, δjt ,   as



                                     δ̂jt = ln Mt sjt − α̂ijt − β̂Xjt − µ̂t .                                   (7)



Our estimates of deposit productivity have a structural interpretation and are micro-founded

in the consumer demand model described in Section 2.1. However, the estimates also have

a reduced-form interpretation as well. In Eq. (6), we are regressing log deposits collected

on inputs (number of branches, deposit rate, etc.) and then using the residuals to calculate

deposit productivity. Hence, a reduced-form interpretation is that more productive banks

can raise more deposits with the same inputs than less productive banks. Not surprisingly,

bank deposit productivity is highly persistent in the data, with a quarterly auto-correlation

of 0.99.



3.3         Bank Assets: Bank Production

We next estimate the bank asset production function to recover each bank's asset produc-

tivity in each quarter. We can write the bank's log production function as



                                              ln Yjt = θ ln Ajt + φjt .                                         (8)



We parameterize and estimate the production function as



                                 ln Yjt = θ ln Ajt + ΓXjt + φj + φt + jt .                                     (9)



The dependent variable         Yjt   measures the interest and fee income generated by bank                 j   at

time   t.   We measure a bank's assets lagged by one year to capture the potential lag between

the time an investment decision is made and returns are realized.                          We include additional

control variables    Xjt ,   including the bank's equity beta and standard deviation of its return

on assets, to capture the riskiness of bank assets. In addition, we include time xed eects

to absorb common variation in bank asset productivity over time. Thus, our coecients are

identied from variation across banks in a given quarter. Although the functional form in

Eq. (9) is motivated by the specic production function we wrote down in Section 2.2, it is

a rst-order approximation to any arbitrary production function (see, e.g., Syverson, 2011).

   A well known challenge in estimating Eq. (9) is the potential endogeneity of bank size




                                                         12
(ln Ajt ). If a bank observes its productivity                            φjt    prior to determining its investments, then

the variable           ln Ajt      is endogenous in Eq.             (9).         This is a well-known problem dating back

to Marschak and Andrews (1944), and much of the industrial organization literature on
                                                                                          13
production has been devoted to addressing this issue.

    Conceptually, we need an instrument that is correlated with size but is otherwise uncor-

related with the bank's asset productivity. We construct a set of cost-shifter instruments in

the style of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). Specically, we instrument for                                                ln Ajt   using
                                                                                                                     14
the weighted average of the deposit productivity of bank                                       j 's   competitors.        The idea is that

if a bank faces competitors that are better at raising deposits, it will naturally be smaller,

so that competitor deposit productivity induces variation in bank size that is orthogonal to

the bank's own asset productivity.

    Table 3 displays the corresponding estimates. In columns (1) and (2), we report the OLS

estimates, and in columns (3) and (4), we report the IV estimates.                                             The instruments are

empirically relevant and yield rst stage F-statistics in excess of 20 for each specication.

In each specication, we estimate a coecient on                                      ln Ajt (θ)        that is less than one.          This
                                                                                      15
implies that banks face decreasing returns to scale.                                       In columns (2) and (4), we measure

risk using equity beta and the standard deviation of returns.                                            We include both backward

looking measures over the previous two years, as well as forward-looking measures of risk
                                                                                16
calculated from time                t   to time   t   plus two years.                The estimates in our IV specications in

columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 are quite similar to the OLS estimates. This suggests that

within a quarter, banks either do not observe                              jt   prior to determining their asset size or that

banks are unable to adjust their asset size within a quarter.

  13 For example Olley and Pakes (1996), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), in addition to many others. For an
overview of the literature see Griliches and Mairesse (1998), Ackerberg et al. (2007), and Van Biesebroeck
(2008).
  14 Specically, we construct instruments based on the quality of services oered by a bank's competitors
where we dene a bank's competitors based at the county by year level. We denote the set of counties bank                                   j
operates in       K,   and the set of banks in each county           k    is denoted       Lk .   Our instrument    δ−j   is then constructed
as follows (note time subscripts            t   are omitted for ease of notation):

                                                                   X Mk X
                                                        δ−j =             δ̂l .
                                                                     M
                                                                   k∈K           l∈L−jk


The term    δ̂l   corresponds to Eq.(7). The estimates of                δ̂j   are from the demand estimates reported in Appendix
Table A7 using the expanded data set.                   In our IV specications, we winsorize                 δ−j   at the 1% we use the
                               2
variables   δ−j    and   δ−j       to instrument for    ln Akt .
  15 We obtain coecients around one if we exclude bank xed eects. This suggests that within a bank
there are decreasing returns to scale. In addition, it suggests that the endogeneity of bank size is mostly
a concern across banks rather than within bank over time. In the cross section, more protable banks are
larger. However, as a bank grows, our data suggests that its protability declines.
  16 We obtain similar results if we only use the backward-looking measures.




                                                                         13
    We use the estimated production function system to calculate each bank's assets produc-

tivity. Specically, we compute bank   j 's   asset productivity at time   t, φjt ,   as



                                φ̂jt = ln Yjt − θ̂ ln Ajt − Γ̂Xjt .

In our main results, we calculate bank asset productivity using this equation based on the

estimates in column (6) of Table 3. Our estimates of asset productivity have a structural

interpretation as described by the model of bank prot maximization in Section 2.2. However,

as with deposit productivity, a reduced-form interpretation of our results is simply that more

asset-productive banks generate more income with the same inputs than less productive

banks. Not surprisingly, bank deposit productivity is highly persistent in the data, with a

quarterly auto-correlation of 0.95.




4     Results
4.1    Bank Productivity and Value

We begin by showing that our productivity measures are value relevant to validate them.

We rst show that our productivity measures are related to interest income and interest

expense. Fig. 1 displays the estimated relationship between interest expense (normalized

by assets) and bank deposit productivity. We estimate a negative, signicant, and roughly

linear relationship between the two variables. Throughout our analysis, we standardize our

productivity measures so that the units show the eect of a one-standard deviation change

in productivity. A one standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is correlated with

a 24 basis point (bp) decrease in interest expense (t-statistic of 14 clustering by bank). This

is economically signicant compared to the cross-sectional standard deviation of interest

expense of 58 bps.

    Fig. 2 shows that there is a positive, signicant, and roughly linear relationship between

interest income (normalized by assets) and bank asset productivity. A one standard deviation

increase in asset productivity is correlated with a 43 basis point (bp) increase in interest

income (t-statistic of 15 clustering by bank). This is economically signicant compared to the

cross-sectional standard deviation of interest income of 45 bps. Furthermore, in untabulated

results, we nd that both deposit productivity and asset productivity are strongly positively

correlated with bank size (as measured by total assets).         This is to be expected: all else

equal, more productive banks should grow at a faster rate than less productive banks, and

should hence be larger.

    We next examine how our productivity measures relate to stock-market based measures


                                                 14
of bank value. We regress a bank's market-to-book on our estimates of deposit and asset

productivity as well as time xed eects and additional bank-level controls:


                               M
                                  
                                            = γ0 + γ1 δ̂jt + γ2 φ̂jt + ΓXjt + µt + εjt .               (10)
                               B       jt

                                                                       17
Table 4 displays the corresponding estimation results.                      Column (1) shows the univariate

relationship between deposit productivity and market-to-book. In column (2), we add con-

trols   Xjt :   lagged (log) assets, as well leverage, the bank's estimated equity beta, and the

standard deviation of its ROA to account for risk. We control for size as a proxy for the

growth expectations of the bank. Larger banks will tend to grow more slowly and thus have

lower market-to-book ratios.                The remaining controls are meant to account for any corre-

lation between our productivity measures and bank risk taking, which will tend to reduce

market-to-book.

    The results show that a one-standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is asso-

ciated with an increase in market-to-book of 0.2 to 0.5 points, an economically signicant
                                                                                                         18
eect.     The cross-sectional standard deviation of market-to-book is 0.69 in our sample.

Columns (3) and (4) show the relationship between asset productivity and market-to-book.

The results show that a one-standard deviation increase in asset productivity is associated

with an increase in market-to-book of 0.14 to 0.22 points, an eect that is also economically

signicant.

    Overall, these results show that our productivity measures are strongly value relevant.



4.2        Deposit-driven Value versus Asset-driven Value

We next compare the relative importance of deposit and asset productivity in determining

bank value. We use two distinct approaches to examine the relative importance of the liability

and asset side of a bank. First, we examine how market-to-book loads on deposit and asset

productivity. Second, we use our framework from Section 2 to calculate the model-implied

relative contribution of asset and deposit productivity to bank value.

    We start by re-estimating our market to book regressions (Eq. 10), simultaneously in-

cluding both deposit and asset productivity.                  Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4 display the

corresponding estimates. Bank value loads positively on both asset and deposit productivity

in both specications. However, we nd that an increase in deposit productivity has a much

  17 We winsorize M/B at the 1% level, after which the distribution of this variable looks approximately
Normal. All of our main results are robust to using ln(M/B); if anything, most results are stronger.
  18 This number is within-time and therefore lower than the overall standard deviation of M/B reported in
Table 1.




                                                            15
larger impact on a bank's market-to-book than asset productivity. The results in column

(5) indicate that a one standard deviation increase deposit productivity is associated with

a 0.21 increase in market-to-book, whereas a one standard deviation increase in asset pro-
                                                                                             19
ductivity is associated with only a 0.09 increase in market-to-book.                              The impact of deposit

productivity is about twice as large in column (5), where we only include time xed eects,

and nearly ve times as large in column (6), where we include the full suite of controls.

This suggests that liability-driven theories of bank value creation, which focus on the special

services provided by bank deposits, explain more variation in the cross section of banks than

asset-driven theories. One important caveat is that the regression results reported in Table

4 focus on the explaining cross-sectional dispersion in bank value rather than the level of

bank value or social value created by banks.

   The results suggest that deposit productivity plays a larger role in explaining the dis-

persion in bank value than asset productivity. What explains this dierence? Variation in

multiples must be explained by variation in cash ows, growth rates, or returns. We nd

little evidence that our productivity measures have dierent associations with future growth

rates or equity returns. The remaining possibility is that deposit productivity explains more

variation in bank cash ows than asset productivity.

   We use our economic framework from Section 2 to examine this possibility. As discussed

in Section 2.3, our two productivity measures directly aect bank cash ows. For example,

if a bank's deposit productivity increases from               δ0   to   δ1,   the bank can oer a lower deposit

rate and still collect the same amount of deposits. The cost savings of increasing deposit

productivity are given by


                                                                               ∆δ
                                       Cost Savings = Deposits ×                  .
                                                                               α

Similarly, if a bank's asset productivity increases from                 φ0    to   φ1 ,   its returns increase by

                                             h                      i
                                   ∆Y = exp(φ1 ) − exp(φ0 ) exp(ΓXj )Aθj .

Fig. 3 uses these equations to decompose the dispersion in net income across banks. The

red shaded histogram shows how much the average bank's net income changes as we vary

bank deposit productivity           (δjt )   across its observed distribution in the data. Similarly, the

blue histogram shows how much the average bank's net income changes as we vary asset
                                                              20
productivity across its distribution in the data.                  Consistent with the evidence presented in

  19 In terms of partial   R2 ,   deposit productivity explains 7% of the residual variation in market-to-book
whereas asset productivty explains 1% of the residual variation in market-to-book (Table 4 column 5).
  20 In Fig. 3, we normalize the distributions based on the risk-free return and benchmark bank borrowing




                                                         16
our market-to-book regressions (Table 4, columns 5 and 6), Fig. 3 suggests that heterogeneity

in deposit productivity explains about twice as much of variation in bank net income as

heterogeneity in asset productivity.

    Fig. 4 presents a similar plot that discards the structure of Fig. 3 and simply plots the

variation in interest income and interest expense, normalized by assets. In this accounting-

based decomposition of bank value, the contributions of the asset-side (interest income) and

liability-side (interest expense) measures look comparable.             The stark dierences between

Fig.    3 and Fig.   4 therefore highlight the value of a more rigorous economic analysis.               In

particular, by ignoring     how   banks (1) obtain funding and (2) convert that funding into

income, the accounting-based decomposition obscures the primitives that enter the bank's

optimization problem and are responsible for determining a bank's value.

    We can also use the joint distribution of deposit and asset productivity to determine the

share of net income coming from deposits for each bank.               Fig.   5 shows the results.      The

gure suggests that deposit productivity on average accounts for about twice as much of

bank value relative to asset productivity. The mean and median deposit value share is 63%

and 70%, respectively.      However, the gure also shows that there is signicant variation,

indicating that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in bank business models.

    Overall, a variety of dierent approaches suggest that variation in deposit productivity

accounts for a larger share of the dispersion in bank value than variation in asset productivity.

This suggests that liability-driven theories of bank value creation explain more variation in

the cross section of banks than asset-driven theories.



4.3      Decomposing Bank Productivity

Why does deposit productivity explain more variation in bank cash ows than asset pro-

ductivity? One potential explanation is that product dierentiation and competition allow

banks to extract more value from their deposit activities relative to their lending activities.

For example, if lending products are more homogeneous and competitive than deposit mar-

kets, then deposit productivity may have a larger impact on bank value. In this section, we

examine this possibility.

rates. Specically, we normalize the level of asset productivity relative to 3-month LIBOR such that the
small set of banks earning returns below 3-month LIBOR have negative asset productivity. Similarly, we
also normalize the deposit total factor productivity distribution relative to 3-month LIBOR. We use deposit
productivity to predict the bank's oered deposit rate. Specically, we regress a bank's deposit rate (net
of fees) on our measure of deposit productivity and time xed eects. The results imply that the bottom
13% of banks in terms of deposit productivity oer deposit rates (net of fees) that are greater than 3-month
LIBOR. We normalize the deposit productivity distribution under the assumption that the bottom 13% of
banks in terms of deposit productivity in each quarter do not generate any value on the deposit side of the
bank.




                                                    17
    We start by decomposing our productivity measures to ask which types of assets and

deposits most aect these overall measures in Table 5. Specically, we compute more rened

measures of deposit and asset productivity for various types of deposits and assets using
                                                         21
the emprical framework described in Section 3.                We then assess the correlations between

these more specialized productivity measures and our broader deposit and asset productivity

measures, as well as market-to-book ratios.

    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 examine the relationship between overall deposit pro-

ductivity and our deposit subcategory measures: savings deposit productivity, small time

deposit productivity, large time deposit productivity, and transaction deposit productivity.

All of the subcategory measures are positively correlated with our overall deposit productiv-

ity measure. As before, all variables are standardized such that the coecients correspond

to a one-standard deviation increase in our productivity measures.

    The overall deposit productivity measure is most strongly correlated with savings deposit

productivity and transactions deposit productivity. This is not simply driven by the compo-

sition of bank deposits. A one standard deviation increase in savings deposit productivity

is associated with a 0.74 standard deviation increase in total deposit productivity, though

savings deposits make up only 41% of a bank's total deposits on average. Similarly, we nd

that a one standard deviation increase in transaction deposit productivity is associated with

a 0.41 standard deviation increase in total deposit productivity, despite transaction deposits

making up only 19% of total deposits on average.

    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 display the relationship between asset productivity and
                                                                                        22
our subcategory measures: lending productivity and securities productivity.                  The estimates

indicate that our asset productivity measure is signicantly more correlated with banks' loan

productivity than their securities productivity. This accords with intuition: as noted above,

there is more scope for banks to use their screening and monitoring technologies to generate

excess returns in the context of loans than securities. If securities are relatively standardized

and homogeneous relative to bank loans, it is natural that variation in bank productivity

would be driven by a bank's lending portfolio rather than its securities portfolio.

    Finally, columns (5) and (6) assess the correlations between our detailed productivity

measures and banks' market-to-book ratios. These columns show that bank value is more

sensitive to loan productivity than securities productivity, but that neither asset-side pro-
                                                                                                           23
ductivity measure is particularly important relative to our deposit productivity measures.

  21 The corresponding estimates are reported in Table A1.
  22 This is the most granular decomposition we can do on the asset side because of data availability.
  23 The negative coecient on small time deposits is a product of running a multiple regression.        The
univariate correlation between market-to-book and small time deposit productivity is positive.           How-
ever,   this result is consistent with the claim that banks report losing money on smaller accounts




                                                    18
Hence, consistent with the results in Table 4, Table 5 shows that bank value is more sensitive

to deposit productivity than to asset productivity.

    The results in Table 5 also suggest that not all deposits are created equal. Columns (5)

and (6) suggest that the main drivers of value on the liability side are savings deposits with

transaction deposits a distant second. In column (6), savings deposit productivity explains

over three times as much variation in market-to-book as transaction deposit productivity,

and ve times as much variation as any other subcategory productivity measure.

    Why are saving deposits so strongly correlated with value?                A key part of the answer

is that depositors behave as though they are highly dierentiated products.                   They act as

though savings deposits at one bank are not a good substitute for savings deposits at another

bank. In other words, savings deposits are very sticky. Thus, demand is almost completely

inelastic to the rate a bank oers, so a bank that is good at gather savings deposits can gather
                           24
them at very low rates.         In contrast, if demand for deposits were completely elastic, deposit

productivity would create no value for the bank; a less productive bank could always oer

a deposit rate      higher than the most productive bank and collect all deposits. Consistent

with this intuition, demand for transaction deposits is also quite inelastic, while demand for

time deposits is quite elastic. The more elastic the demand for a particular type of deposit,

the less it contributes to bank value.

    These value decompositions have interesting implications for mapping our results back

to theories of bank value creation. Our results in Section 4.2 suggest that liabilities are an

important source of bank value. However, the liabilities that are most strongly associated

with deposit productivity are not transaction deposits, which provide the most liquidity

services. Instead, the source of most liability-side bank value comes from savings deposits,

liabilities that provide some limited liquidity services but are primarily safe stores of value.



4.4     Bank Productivity and Balance Sheet Composition

Another way to understand what drives our productivity measures is to look at how they

correlate with balance sheet composition. This is particularly useful on the asset side of the

balance sheet, where data limitations prevented us from doing ne-grain decompositions in

the previous section. Here, we instead use a revealed preference argument. If banks with

high productivity tilt their balance sheets towards certain assets and liabilities, this suggests

that those assets and liabilities create substantial value.

[http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/03/10/do-the-big-banks-not-want-small-customers.aspx,         ac-
cessed 2/24/2017]
  24 We show this formally in Appendix Table A1a, which re-estimates our basic deposit demand system
from Eq.(6) for each type of deposit. That is, in Table A1a, we treat each deposit type as a separate product
and estimate a demand system for each product.



                                                     19
    In Table 6a, we examine the correlations between our deposit productivity measure and

the composition of the liability side of banks' balance sheets. Column (1) shows that our

deposit productivity measures are not strongly correlated with bank leverage (dened as
                           25
liabilities over assets).       Interestingly, banks that are particularly good at raising deposits

do not appear to lever up much more than other banks. Columns (2)-(7) show that banks

with higher deposit productivity tend to have signicantly higher quantities of deposits

as a fraction of their total liabilities, as expected.            Given that leverage does not change

with deposit productivity, this implies that non-deposit debt falls with deposit productivity.

Instead, they substitute non-deposit debt for deposits. Thus, it appears that non-deposit

debt is not an important source of value for banks, suggesting that this debt does not provide

safety or liquidity services that are valuable to investors.

    Table 6b displays correlations betwen our asset productivity measure and banks' asset

composition. Columns (1)-(3) show that more productive banks tend to hold more real es-

tate loans, more C&I loans, and more loan commitments (credit lines) than less productive

banks. This is consistent with the idea that more productive banks have better screening

and monitoring technologies that allow them to make loans with high risk-adjusted returns.

Columns (4)-(6) show that productive banks also tend to have lower quantities of securities

and liquid assets than less productive banks. This also makes sense  there is presumably

more scope for banks to use their screening and monitoring technologies to generate excess

returns in the context of loans, where there can be substantial asymmetric information, than

securities, which are more standardized. Thus, it is not surprising that variations in produc-

tivity are correlated with variations in relative loan quantities across banks. Collectively, our

ndings indicate that high-productivity banks tend to have a higher fraction of their balance

sheet made up of loans and a lower fraction of their balance sheet made up of securities and

liquid assets.



4.5     Synergies

In previous sections, we have examined a bank's deposit productivity and its asset produc-

tivity separately. However, because of potential synergies between collecting deposits and

lending, a bank's asset productivity may be intimately linked to it's deposit productivity.

Here, we examine the synergies between the two dimensions of a bank.

    Table 7a presents regressions relating our asset productivity measures to our deposit

  25 Note that our standard suite of controls includes lagged leverage.       If we omit this control from the
regression, we still obtain a small and statistically insignicant correlation.




                                                       20
productivity measures. Specically we run regressions of of the form



                                φ̂jt = γ0 + γ1 δ̂jt + ΓXjt + µt + εjt .                        (11)



The table shows that the two measures are strongly correlated. Column (1) shows that a

one-standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is associated with a 0.33 standard

deviation increase in asset productivity.         This is economically signicant: the within time
                                           2
(i.e., excluding time xed eects)     R       of the regression is 25%, indicating that 25% of the

variation in our measure of asset productivity can be explained by variation in deposit pro-

ductivity. Once we include controls in column (2), the association between asset productivity

and deposit productivity strengthens somewhat. Columns (3)-(6) break asset productivity

into its constituent pieces: loan productivity and securities productivity. Both are correlated

with deposit productivity, though the eect for securities productivity becomes insignicant

once we add controls. Overall, Table 7a suggests that there are important synergies between

deposit productivity and asset productivity, and that those synergies are more related to

loans than securities.

   To better understand the fundamentals driving the observed synergies between asset

and deposit productivity, we examine the correlations between our subcategory measures

of productivity in Table 7b .     We separately examine the relationship between overall as-

set (columns 1-2), loan (columns 3-4), and securities (columns 5-6) productivity and the

subcategory deposit productivity measures. In general, we nd a positive relationship be-

tween savings and time deposit productivity and our various measures of asset productivity.

However, we do not nd a relationship between transaction deposits productivity and our

dierent measures of asset productivity. The results suggest that the nature of synergies may

have to do with the term structure of deposits. Banks that are more productive in collecting

long-term deposits appear to have more productive lending and securities portfolios.

   In Table 8, we use variation in bank balance sheet composition to explore the sources

of these synergies in more detail. Table 8a relates bank asset composition to deposit pro-

ductivity. Column (1) shows that there is no correlation between deposit productivity and

real estate lending.     In contrast, column (2) shows there is a strong correlation between

deposit productivity and C&I lending. Since C&I loans are more illiquid than mortgages,

this suggests that the ability to raise deposits in a cost-eective manner is important for

banks that wish to make protable, illiquid loans. This is consistent with Hanson, Shleifer,

Stein, and Vishny (2016), who argue that the fact that deposits are stickier than other types

of short-term debt is a key source of value for banks because it allows them to hold more

illiquid assets than they otherwise could. Column (3) shows that banks with higher deposit




                                                    21
productivity also tend to write more loan commitments. This is consistent with Kashyap,

Rajan, and Stein (2002) and Gatev and Strahan (2006), who argue that there are synergies

between taking deposits and writing loan commitments because in bad times deposits tend

to ow into banks while loan commitments are simultaneously drawn down.           Our results

suggest that this eect is particularly strong for banks that are good at gathering deposits.

    In Table 8b, we examine the relationship between bank liability composition and asset

productivity. The strongest correlation that arises here is in column (4), which shows that

banks with productive assets tend to gather more large time deposits. This suggests that

banks with strong asset productivity may be viewed more favorably by depositors, allowing

them to raise more funding at better rates. The results also suggest that the term structure

of deposits may also play an important factor.      We nd a positive relationship between

asset productivity and term deposits. Conversely, we nd a negative relationship between

transaction deposits and asset productivity.




5     Robustness
We nd that banks that are more productive in raising deposits and generating asset income

are more valuable.   Although deposit and asset productivity are closely related, we nd

that variation in deposit productivity accounts for more than twice the variation in bank

value relative to asset productivity.   In this section, we provide a variety of robustness

tests examining the importance of the geographical distribution of bank operations, using

alternative measures of productivity, accounting for potential measurement error, and using

dierent subsets of the banks in our data set. Overall, we nd that our main results discussed

in Section 4 are robust to these alternative specications.



5.1    Geography

Beyond the theory-based explanations we examined in the previous sections, variation in

bank value and bank productivity may also be driven by dierences in the areas where

banks operate.   To examine this question, we begin by analyzing the geographic and de-

mographic correlates of our productivity measures in Table A2a. We combine county-level

Census data with the FDIC's summary of deposits to generate average characteristics of

the counties where each bank operates, weighted by the fraction of the bank's deposits in

each county.   Column (1) shows the correlation between asset productivity and these de-

mographic characteristics. There is a concave relationship between asset productivity and

both population and average local wages.       Banks in low-population, low-wage areas have




                                               22
low asset productivity, but the relationship fades as population and wages increase. Banks

in high house price areas have higher asset productivity.     We do not nd any evidence of

nonlinearity in the relationship and therefore only report the linear relation. Similarly, banks

with high asset productivity tend to operate in less competitive areas, as measured by the

Herndahl-Hirschman index (HHI) of mortgage originations from Home Mortgage Disclo-

sure Act (HMDA) data. In column (2), we replace specic demographic characteristics with

xed eects. Specically, we regress bank asset productivity on 387 dummy variables, each

of which indicates whether the bank operates in a particular MSA. The within time         R2   of

the regression is 35%, suggesting that the areas where banks operate explains a signicant

fraction of their asset productivity. Columns (3) and (4) repeat these exercises for deposit

productivity with similar results.   We nd that geographic variation explains 70% of the

variation in deposit productivity.

   Table A2b shows that our main results hold even controlling for MSA xed eects. De-

spite the fact that geography explains much of the variation in our productivity measures,

these measures are still strongly related to market-to-book ratios after controlling for ge-

ographic variation, and deposit productivity continues to have a much larger impact than

asset productivity. In addition, asset productivity remains strongly correlated with deposit

productivity, even after controlling for MSA xed eects.

   Overall, while the geographic and demographic characteristics of where banks operate

explain a substantial part of the variation in asset and deposit productivity, geographic and

demographic characteristics cannot explain our main results.



5.2     Alternative Production Function and Demand Estimates

In our baseline analysis, we estimate the deposit demand system and asset side produc-

tion function using standard methods from the industrial organization literature. Here, we

run several robustness checks, where we allow for a more exible asset income production

function, use additional measures of risk, and use alternative demand estimates.



5.2.1   Alternative Production Function Estimates - Spline Estimation

We estimate the bank's asset side production function using a rst order Taylor series ap-

proximation to any arbitrary production function.      One potential concern with our asset

production function estimates is that our empirical specication may not be exible enough

to capture a bank's true production function. In our baseline estimates, we nd that there

are decreasing returns to scale in production. Here, we re-estimate the bank's production

function, where we allow for a more exible model in terms of the economies of scale. Specif-




                                              23
ically, we estimate the production function where we use a spline with                 K=5      and   K = 10
knot points


                                    K−1
                                    X
              ln Yjt = θ ln Ajt +         (θk max(ln Ajt − qk , 0)) + ΓXjt + φj + φt + jt .              (12)
                                    k=1


The term   qk   represents the   k th quantile of the distribution of bank asset holdings in the data.
We report the alternative production function estimates in the Internet Appendix (Column

1 of Table A8). In general, the results suggest that our baseline specication captures the
                                                               26
curvature of a bank's production function quite well.

   We next replicate our main ndings using the new production function estimates. These

ndings are reported in Table A3a. We construct an alternative asset productivity measure

using our spline production function estimates with ve knot points. Columns (1) and (2)

display the relationship between a banks' market-to-book ratio and our alternative measure

of asset productivity. Our baseline results remain the same. Both asset and deposit produc-

tivity are both positively correlated with a bank's market-to-book ratio; however, deposit

productivity has a larger impact on market-to-book relative to asset productivity. Similarly,

columns (3) and (4) indicate that there are strong synergies between deposit productivity

and our alternative measure of asset productivity.



5.2.2     Alternative Production Function Estimates - Additional Risk Controls

We control for risk in our baseline specication using a bank's equity beta, leverage, and

standard deviation of returns.         As discussed in Section 4.1, we nd substantial evidence

that banks with higher asset productivity create more value. These results suggests that our

measures of asset productivity are not simply picking up dierences in a bank's risk exposure.

As a robustness check, we re-estimate our bank asset income production function where we

control for the Fama and French (1992, 1993) factors as well as a bank's asset composition.

We report the alternative production function estimates in the Internet Appendix (Column

2 of Table A8). The production function estimates are comparable to our baseline estimates.

   Using our alternative asset productivity estimates, we next replicate our main results.

The results of this exercise are documented in Table A3b. The alternative set of results are

both qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those in our baseline analysis. Columns (1)

and (2) show that our alternative measure of asset productivity is positively associated with

a bank's market-to-book, but market-to-book loads more on deposit productivity relative to

asset productivity. We also nd evidence of strong synergies between deposit productivity

  26 We do nd evidence that the dis-economies of scale are slightly greater for banks in the top decile of the
sample.



                                                     24
and our alternative measure of asset productivity as reported in Columns (3) and (4).



5.2.3    Alternative Demand Estimates

In this section, we examine the robustness of our main ndings to the alternative demand

specications. We begin by re-estimating our demand system using more granular county-

by-year data from RateWatch, which reports deposit rates directly, in Table A4a.                                       The
                                      27
data runs from 2002 to 2012.               We now include county            ×   time xed eects in estimating

the county-year analog of Eq. (6). The estimates are very similar to those we nd at the

aggregate level in Table 2.
                                                                                                               28
    We then recompute our measure of deposit productivity using these estimates.                                    Demand

for bank deposits and bank competition may occur at a much more localized level, which is

consistent with these county level demand estimates.

    Table A4b displays our baseline set of tests, where we use this alternative measure of

deposit productivity.          The results are comparable to our baseline results.                          We nd that

a bank's market-to-book is positively correlated with our alternative measures of deposit

productivity. The results displayed in columns (1) and (2) of Table A4b again suggest that

deposit productivity has a greater impact on market-to-book relative to asset productivity.

Columns (3) and (4) of Tables A4b indicate that there are strong synergies between asset

and deposit productivity.



5.3     Measurement Error

We measure deposit and asset productivity using estimates from our demand and production

function regressions. Because productivity is estimated, our deposit and asset productivity

measures may inherently contain measurement error. We employ two well-known methods

to address measurement error. First, we instrument for our deposit and asset productivity

measures using alternative measures of productivity. Second, we construct empirical Bayes

estimates of productivity.          Our main ndings are robust to these alternative estimation

strategies.

  27 Our RateWatch data includes 447 of the 847 banks in our main sample.
  28 We construct county by rm by year measures of deposit productivity using our county level demand
estimates. Let   δljt   denote the deposit productivity of rm     j   in county   l   at time    t.   Following our demand
specication, we calculate the rm's aggregate deposit productivity at time              t   as

                                                                          !
                                                       X
                                           δjt = ln         Mk exp(δkjt )
                                                      k∈K

where we denote the set of counties bank     j   operates in as   K.



                                                         25
5.3.1       Instrumental Variables

We instrument for our measures of deposit and asset productivity using our subcategory

measures of productivity. Specically, we instrument for total deposit productivity using our

productivity estimates for savings deposits, small time deposits and other types of deposits.

Similarly, we instrument for total asset productivity using our separate estimates of loan and

asset productivity. As discussed in Section 4.3, our instruments are clearly relevant (Table 5

columns 1-4). Provided that the measurement error in our productivity estimates (assets and

deposits) is orthogonal to the subcategory productivity measures, our instrumental variable

strategy is valid and will correct for any bias caused by measurement error.

    Table A5 displays the corresponding instrumental variables estimates corresponding to

our baseline set of results. Consistent with our previous results, we nd a positive relationship

between deposit productivity and a bank's market-to-book and asset productivity and a

bank's market-to-book (columns 1 and 2).                 However, the estimated relationship between

asset productivity and a bank's market-to-book is no longer statistically signicant.                                    The

IV estimates rearm our earlier nding that market-to-book loads more heavily on deposit

productivity relative to asset productivity. The IV estimates reported in columns (3) and (4)

of Table A5 again indicate there are strong synergies between asset and deposit productivity.



5.3.2       Empirical Bayes Estimation

We construct empirical Bayes estimates of deposit and asset productivity as an additional

robustness check. Much of our analysis is focused on the distributions of deposit and asset

productivity in the population of banks. If our estimates of productivity suer from classical

measurement error, then the estimated distributions productivity will overstate the true
                                 29
variance of productivity.             As is common in the education and labor literature (e.g., Jacob

and Lefgren, 2008; Kane and Staiger, 2008; and Chettty, Friedman, and Rockho, 2014),

we shrink the estimated distributions of asset and deposit productivity to match the true

distribution of asset and deposit productivity.

    Here, we examine a bank's average deposit and asset productivity in our sample using the

estimated bank specic xed eect in Eqs. (6) and (9). We shrink the estimated distribution

of xed eects by the factor            α,   which is estimated from the data.               Under the assumption

  29 For example, suppose our estimates of deposit productivity are unbiased estimates of true deposit pro-
ductivity   δ̂j = δj + j   and assume that the measurement error is uncorrelated with deposit productivity.
The variance of the estimated distribution of total factor productivity is then equal to the true variance
of deposit total factor productivity plus the variance of the measurement error,             σδ̂2 = σδ2 + σ2 .   We address
                                                                                                                       σδ2
this concern by shrinking the estimated distribution of total factor productivity by the factor                            to
                                                                                                                    σδ2 +σ2
account for measurement error. Conceptually, the greater     σ2   is relative to   σδ2 ,   the more we want to shrink
the estimated distribution of productivity.



                                                        26
that the variance of the estimation error is homoskedastic, the appropriate scaling factor is
            2
     F −1− k−1
α=       F
               , where F is the F -test statistic corresponding to the a joint test of the statistical
signicance of the xed eects and      k   is the number of xed eects (Cassella, 1992). The

estimated shrinkage factors are close to one for both deposit and asset productivity (0.998

and 0.971), which suggests that most of the variation in our productivity estimates is driven

by true variation in productivity rather than measurement error.

   We replicate Fig. 3 using our empirical Bayes estimates of deposit and asset productivity

and display the corresponding results in Fig. A1. Fig. A1 allows us to determine how much

of the dispersion in net income across banks can be explained by heterogeneity in terms of

deposit and asset productivity. The estimated dispersion in net income created by deposit

productivity (red shaded area) is nearly identical in Figs. 3 and A1. Similarly, the estimated

dispersion in net income created by asset productivity (blue shared area) is nearly identical

in Figs. 3 and A1. However, the dispersion asset productivity is slightly lower in Fig. A1

relative to Fig.   3.   Consistent with the evidence presented above, Fig.        A1 suggests that

about twice as much of the variation in bank net income can be explained by productivity

heterogeneity on the deposit side relative to productivity heterogeneity on the asset side.



5.4     Sub-sample Analysis

We run several robustness checks regarding the set of banks in our sample. First, we replicate

our ndings where we exclude the largest banks. Second, we replicate our main ndings where

we exclude observations from the nancial crisis.



5.4.1   Excluding Large Banks

We replicate our main ndings where we exclude the the largest 5% of banks. Specically,

we drop all observations of those banks that appear among the top 5% of the sample in

terms of assets at any point in time.       In total, we drop 41 of the largest banks from the

sample. We then replicate our baseline tests using the alternative set of banks. Table A6a

reports the corresponding estimates. The alternative set of results are both qualitatively and

quantitatively similar to those in our baseline analysis. Columns (1) and (2) show that our

alternative measure of asset productivity is positively associated with a bank's market-to-

book, but market-to-book loads more on deposit productivity relative to asset productivity.

The results in column (4) suggest that the synergies between asset and deposit productivity

may actually be larger for the smaller banks in our sample.             The results in column (4)

indicate that a one standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is associated with a

0.98 standard deviation increase in asset productivity. In untabulated results, we also drop




                                                 27
all observations for the acquiring bank in the year following bank mergers and acquisitions

and verify that our ndings are not driven by sharp productivity gains or losses stemming

from mergers and acquisitions.



5.4.2    Excluding the Financial Crisis

We show that our ndings are not driven by the recent nancial crisis. Although we include

time xed eects in all of our analysis, one may still be concerned that abnormal variation in

bank productivity and valuations during the nancial crisis could be driving our main results.

We replicate our baseline tests where we exclude the period surrounding the nancial crisis

(2008 and 2009).    Table A6b displays the corresponding estimates.       Again, we nd that

both asset and deposit total factor productivity are both positively correlated with a bank's

market-to-book and that deposit total factor productivity has a relatively larger impact on

a bank's market-to-book. We also nd comparable evidence suggesting that there are strong

synergies between asset and deposit productivity.




6       Conclusion
What are the key cross-sectional determinants of bank value? In this paper, we draw upon

the literature in industrial organization to develop a simple empirical framework.       In our

framework, banks can create value through three primary mechanisms: though excelling at

the gathering of deposits, through excelling at the production of loans and other assets, and

through synergies between loan and deposit production. These mechanisms correspond with

the three most widely-cited theoretical channels of bank value creation.

    We nd evidence that all three channels aect bank value. Of the three channels, however,

we nd that a bank's ability to produce deposits is by far the most important in explaining

cross-sectional variation in bank value.    In particular, we nd that variation in deposit

productivity accounts for about twice as much variation in bank value as variation in asset

productivity. A one-standard deviation increase in deposit productivity is associated with an

increase in market-to-book ratios of 0.2 to 0.5 points, while a one-standard deviation increase

in asset productivity is associated with an increase in market-to-book of 0.1 to 0.2 points.

We also nd evidence of signicant synergies between banks' lending and deposit-taking

activities, with high-deposit productivity banks holding a signicantly greater fraction of

illiquid assets than low-deposit productivity banks. Collectively, these results shed signicant

light on the determinants of bank value.

    We also explore the drivers of variation in our measures of bank productivity.       While

bank leverage is not strongly linked to deposit productivity, we nd that high deposit pro-


                                              28
ductivity is associated with higher fractions of savings deposits and large time deposits as a

function of total liabilities. Thus, while our estimates suggest that liabilities are an impor-

tant source of bank value, the liabilities that are most strongly associated with productivity

are not those that provide the most transaction and liquidity services.               We also nd that

high asset productivity is associated with a tilt towards illiquid assets.            Thus, our results

are consistent with the idea that screening and monitoring of information-intensive loans is

an important source of bank value, though it accounts for less variation in bank value than

deposit productivity.

    All together, our paper represents the rst attempt to provide evidence on all three

sources of potential bank value creation within a unied framework, and to assess which

theoretical levers are most important in explaining the cross-section of value. Our results also

have important implications for nancial regulation. Without quantitatively understanding

the main drivers of bank value creation, its dicult to determine the costs and benets of

nancial regulations. Hence, we believe our ndings have implications across a wide range

of specic bank regulatory topics. For example, so-called narrow banking proposals might

need to be re-evaluated in light of our nding that deposit productivity and asset productivity
                   30
are synergistic.        Among other avenues for future research, it is also an open question how

monetary policy aects banks' deposit and asset productivity. For now, however, our cross-

sectional ndings give credence to the argument that banks are special entities that generate

value by providing unique services through their liabilities.

  30 There has a been a resurgence of narrow banking proposals among academics and policy makers (Kay
2009; Gorton and Metrick 2010, Chamley, Kotliko, and Polemarchakis 2012; Bulow and Klemperer 2013;
and Cochrane 2014). The implications of narrow banking dier drastically depending on how banks create
value.   We nd strong fundamental linkages between the asset and liability sides of bank balance sheets,
suggesting that narrow banking proposals could be quite costly. In a similar vein, the costs and benets of
other bank regulations, such as increased captial requirements, hinge on how banks create value.




                                                    29
References

   Acharya, Viral V., Iftekhar Hasan and Anthony Saunders. 2006. Should Banks
      Be Diversied? Evidence from Individual Bank Loan Portfolios.        Journal of
      Business 79(3): 1355-1412.
   Ackerberg, Daniel, C. Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes.           2007.
      Econometric Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes. In       Handbook of Econo-
      metrics, Volume 6A, ed. James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, 4171276.
      Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier, North-Holland.

   Allen, Franklin. 1990. The Market for information and the Origin of Financial
      Intermediation.    Journal of Financial Intermediation 1(1): 3-30.
   Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, and Robert Marquez.        2011.   Credit Market
      Competition and Capital Regulation.        Review of Financial Studies     24(4):
      983-1018.

   Bai, Jennie, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Charles-Henri Weymuller. 2016. Mea-
      suring Liquidity Mismatch in the Banking Sector. Stanford Working Paper.

   Baker, Malcolm and Jerey Wurgler.         2015.   Do strict capital requirements
      raise the cost of capital? Bank regulation, capital structure, and the low-risk
      anomaly.     American Economic Review 105(5): 315-320.
   Berger, Allen N. and Christa H. S. Bouwman. 2009. Bank Liquidity Creation.
      Review of Financial Studies 22(9): 3779-3837.
   Berger, Allen N. and Loretta J. Mester.       1997.   Inside the black box:   What
      explains dierences in the eciencies of nancial institutions?      Journal of
      Banking and Finance 21: 895-947.
   Berger, Allen N. and Loretta J. Mester. 2003. Explaining the dramatic changes
      in performance of US banks: technological change, deregulation, and dynamic
      changes in competition.    Journal of Financial Intermediation 12: 57-95.
   Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell. 1995. Relationship Lending and Lines
      of Credit in Small Firm Finance.    Journal of Business 68(3): 351-381.
   Berlin, Mitchell and Loretta J. Mester. 1999. Deposits and Relationship Lend-
      ing.    Review of Financial Studies 12(3): 579-607.
   Berry, Steven. 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product dierentia-
      tion.   RAND Journal of Economics 25(2): 242-262.
   Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel. Pakes. 1995. Automobile prices in
      market equilibrium.    Econometrica 63(4): 841-890.
   Bulow, Jeremy, and Paul Klemperer. 2013. "Market-based bank capital regula-
      tion." Working Paper.

   Boyd, John H. and Edward Prescott. 1986. Financial intermediary-coalitions.
      Journal of Economic Theory 38(2): 211-232.
                                            30
Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn. 1991. The Role of Demandable
   Debt in Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements.            American Economic
   Review 81(3): 497-513.
Casella, George. 1992. Illustrating empirical Bayes methods.         Chemometrics
   and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 16(2): 107-125.
Chamley, Christophe, Laurence J. Kotliko, and Herakles Polemarchakis. 2012.
   "Limited-purpose bankingmoving from trust me to show me banking."
   The American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 102(3): 113-119.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and John Rockho. 2014. Measuring the Impacts
   of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates.       American
   Economic Review      104(9): 2593-2632

Cochrane, John H. 2014. "Toward a run-free nancial system." Working Paper.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2015. Ignorance, Debt, and
   Financial Crises. MIT Working Paper.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström, and Guillermo Ordoñez. 2016.
   Banks as Secret Keepers. NBER Working Paper 20255.

DeAngelo, Harry and Rene M. Stulz. 2015. Liquid-claim production, risk man-
   agement, and bank capital structure: Why high leverage is optimal for banks.
   Journal of Financial Economics 116(2): 219-236.
Demsetz, Rebecca S. and Philip E. Strahan.       1997.    Diversication, Size, and
   Risk at Bank Holding Companies.         Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
   29(3): 300-313.

Diamond, Douglas W. 1984. Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitor-
   ing.   Review of Economic Studies 51(3): 393-414.
Diamond, Douglas W. 1991. Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice between
   Bank Loans and Directly Placed Debt.       Journal of Political Economy 99(4):
   689-721.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig. 1983. Bank Runs Deposit Insurance,
   and Liquidity.   Journal of Political Economy 91(3): 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan.               2000.   A Theory of Bank
   Capital.    Journal of Finance 55(6): 2431-2465.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2001. Liquidity Risk, Liquidity
   Creation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking.       Journal of Political
   Economy 109(2): 287-327.
Dick, Astrid. 2008. Demand estimation and consumer welfare in the banking
   industry.   Journal of Banking and Finance 32: 1661-1676.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2016. The Deposits Chan-
   nel of Monetary Policy. NYU Stern Working Paper.

Driscoll, John C. and Ruth Judson. 2013. Sticky Deposit Rates. FRB FEDS
   Working Paper 2013-80.


                                        31
Egan, Mark, Ali Hortaçsu and Gregor Matvos.          2016.    Deposit Competition
   and Financial Fragility: Evidence form the US Banking Sector.          American
   Economic Review, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1992. The cross-section of expected
   stock returns.   Journal of Finance 47(2): 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1993. "Common risk factors in the
   returns on stocks and bonds."    Journal of Financial Economics 33(1): 3-56.
Gatev, Evan and Philip E. Strahan. 2006. Banks' Advantage in Hedging Liquid-
   ity Risk: Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market.          Journal
   of Finance 61(2): 867-892
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny.         2013.   A Model of
   Shadow Banking.      Journal of Finance 68 (4): 1331-1363.
Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick.           2012.   The Safe-Asset
   Share.    American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings           102(3): 101-
   106.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick.         2010.   Regulating the Shadow Banking
   System.   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2010 (2), 261-297.
Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi. 1990. Financial Intermediaries and Liq-
   uidity Creation.    Journal of Finance 45(1): 49-71.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G Hanson, and Jeremy C Stein. 2015. A Comparative-
   Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity. Journal of Finance 70
   (4): 1683-1722.

Griliches, Zvi, and Jacques Mairesse. 1998. Production Functions: The Search
                        Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twenti-
   for Identication. In
   eth Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, ed. Steinar Strøm,
   169203. Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: ambridge University Press.

Hastings, Justine, Ali Hortaçsu and Chad Syverson. 2016. Sales Force and Com-
   petition in Financial Product Markets: The Case of Mexico's Social Security
   Privatization.   Econometrica, Forthcoming.
Hannan, Timothy H. and Allen N. Berger. 1991. The Rigidity of Prices: Evi-
   dence from the Banking Industry.      American Economic Review        81(4), 938-
   945.

Hanson, Samuel, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Robert Vishny. 2016. Banks
   as Patient Fixed-Income Investors.   Journal of Financial Economics 117: 449-
   469.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson. 2004. Product Dierentiation, Search Costs,
   and Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500
   Index Funds,     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 403-456.
Hughes, Joseph P. and Loretta J. Mester. 1998. Bank Capitalization and Cost:
   Evidence of Scale Economies in Risk Management and Signaling.          Review of
   Economics and Statistics 80(2): 314-325.
                                         32
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren. 2008. Principals as Agents: Subjective Perfor-
   mance Assessment in Education.    Journal of Labor Economics 26(1): 101-136
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan.        1996.    The Finance-Growth Nexus:
   Evidence from Bank Branch Deregulation.           Quarterly Journal of Economic
   111(3): 639-670.

Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. Estimating teacher impacts on
   student achievement: An experimental evaluation.          NBER Working Paper
   14607.

Kay, John. 2009. Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation. Work-
   ing Paper.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, and Motohiro Yogo. 2015. An Equilibrium Model of Institu-
   tional Demand and Asset Prices. NBER Working Paper w21749.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, and Motohiro Yogo. 2016. "Shadow insurance."        Econometrica,
   84(3) : 1265-1287.

Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein.             2002.   Banks as
   Liquidity Providers:   An Explanation for the Coexistence of Lending and
   Deposit-taking.   Journal of Finance 57(1): 33-73.
Keeley, Michael C. 1990. Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Bank-
   ing.   American Economic Review    80(5), 1183-1200.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. The Aggregate
   Demand for Treasury Debt.     Journal of Political Economy 120(2), 233-267.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2015. The Impact of
   Treasury Supply on Financial Sector Lending and Stability.        Journal of Fi-
   nancial Economics, forthcoming.
Leland, Hayne E. and David H. Pyle.      1977.    Informational Asymmetries, Fi-
   nancial Structure, and Financial Intermediation.       Journal of Finance 32(2):
   371-387.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin. 2003. Estimating Production Functions Us-
   ing Inputs to Control for Unobservables.    Review of Economic Studies 70(2):
   31741.

Marschak, Jacob and William Andrews. 1944. Random simultaneous equations
   and the theory of production.   Econometrica 12, 143205.
Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon Phillips.        2001.    The market for corporate
   assets: Who engages in mergers and asset sales and are there eciency gains?
   Journal of Finance 56(6): 2019-2065.
Mehran, Hamid and Anjan Thakor. 2011. Bank Capital and Value in the Cross-
   Section.   Review of Financial Studies 24(4): 1019-1067.
Moreira, Alan and Alexi Savov. 2016. The Macroeconomics of Shadow Bank-
   ing.   Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

                                       33
Nagel, Stefan, 2016. Liquidity Premia of Near-Money Assets.     Quarterly Jour-
   nal of Economics, forthcoming.
Neumark, David and Steven A. Sharpe. 1992. Market Structure and the Na-
   ture of Price Rigidity: Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2): 657-680.
Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the
   Telecommunications Equipment Industry.      Econometrica 64(6): 126397.
Pennacchi, George. 2012. Narrow Banking.      Annual Review of Financial Eco-
   nomics 4: 141-159.
Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan.        1994.   The Benets of Lend-
   ing Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data.      Journal of Finance
   49(1): 3-37.

Rajan, Raghuram. 1992. Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed
   and Arm's-Length Debt.     Journal of Finance 47(4): 1367-1400.
Ramakrishnan, Ram T. S. and Anjan V. Thakor. 1984. Information Reliabil-
   ity and a Theory of Financial Intermediation.    Review of Economic Studies
   51(3): 415-432.

Rime, Bertrand and Kevin J. Stiroh. 2003. The performance of universal banks:
   Evidence from Switzerland.   Journal of Banking and Finance 27: 2121-2150.
Rose, Jonathan D. (2015).      Old-Fashioned Deposit Runs, Finance and Eco-
   nomics Discussion Series 2015-111. Washington: Board of Governors of the
   Federal Reserve System, http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.111.

Schoar, Antoinette. 2002. Eects of corporate diversication on productivity.
   Journal of Finance 57(6): 2379-2403.
Shockley, Richard L. and Anjan V. Thakor.        1997.   Bank Loan Commitment
   Contracts: Data, Theory, and Tests.     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
   29(4): 517-534.

Stein, Jeremy C. 2012.    Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1): 57-95.
Stiroh, Kevin J. 2000. How did bank holding companies prosper in the 1990s?.
   Journal of Banking and Finance 24: 1703-1745.
Su, Amir. 2007. Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evi-
   dence from Syndicated Loans.    Journal of Finance 62(2): 629-668.
Sunderam, Adi.    2015.   Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System.
   Review of Financial Studies, 28 (4): 939-977.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. What Determines Productivity?        Journal of Economic
   Literature 49(2): 326-65.
van Biesebroeck, Johannes. 2008. Aggregating and Decomposing Productivity.
   Review of Business and Economics 53(2): 122-146.

                                       34
Villas-Boas, S.B. 2007.   Vertical relationships between manufacturers and re-
   tailers:   Inference with limited data.   Review of Economic Studies   74(2):
   625-652.

Wang, J. Christina. 2003. Productivity and Economies of Scale in the Produc-
   tion of Bank Service Value Added. FRB of Boston Working Paper 03-7.

Winton, Andrew. 1995. Delegated Monitoring and Bank Structure in a Finite
   Economy.     Journal of Financial Intermediation 4(2): 158-187.




                                        35
Figures

                       Figure 1: Deposit Productivity vs. Interest Expense




Note: Fig. 1 displays a binscatter plot of a bank's interest expense (normalized by assets) versus a
bank's deposit productivity. Deposit productivity is standardized and is constructed from the de-
posit demand estimates reported in column (4) of Table 2. Interest expense is annualized (quarterly
interest expense multiplied by 4). Observations are at the bank by quarter level over the period
1994-2015.   In the gure, both interest expense and deposit productivity are measured within a
given year and quarter (i.e., the binscatter plot includes year by quarter xed eects).




                                                 36
                            Figure 2: Asset Income vs. Interest Income




Note: Fig. 2 displays a binscatter plot of a bank's interest income (normalized by assets) versus
a bank's asset productivity. Asset productivity is standardized and is constructed from the asset
income production function estimates reported in column (4) of Table 3. Interest income is annual-
ized (quarterly interest income multiplied by 4) Observations are at the bank by quarter level over
the period 1994-2015. In the gure, both interest income and deposit productivity are measured
within a given year and quarter (i.e., the binscatter plot includes year by quarter xed eects).




                                                 37
               Figure 3: Value Creation: Asset Productivity vs. Deposit Productivity




Note:   Fig.   3 displays the estimated distributions of asset and deposit productivity.   The red
                                                                                     Deposits 1
shaded histogram plots the distribution of bank deposit productivity weighted by
                                                                                      Assets α . The
                                                                             θ
                                                                      Assets
blue histogram displays the scaled distribution of asset productivity
                                                                      Assets
                                                                               exp(φjt + ΓXjt ). We
normalize the level of asset productivity relative to 3-month LIBOR such that the small set of
banks earning returns below 3-month LIBOR have negative asset productivity. Similarly, we also
normalize the deposit productivity distribution relative to 3-month LIBOR. We nd that 16% of
banks oer deposit rates (net of fees) that are greater than 3-month LIBOR. We normalize the
deposit productivity distribution under the assumption that the bottom 16% of banks in terms of
deposit productivity in each quarter do not generate any value on the deposit side of the bank. The
deposit productivity estimates correspond to the specication reported in column (4) of Table 2.
The asset productivity estimates correspond to specication reported in column (4) of Table 3.




                                                38
                          Figure 4: Interest Expense vs Interest Income




Note: Fig. 4 displays the distributions of deposit interest expense and interest income. The red
shaded histogram plots the distribution of deposit interest expense divided by assets. The blue
shaded histogram plots the distribution of interest income divided by assets. Both deposit interest
expense and interest income are annualized (multiplied by 4).




                                                39
                               Figure 5: Deposit Productivity Share




Note: Fig. 5 displays the distribution of the deposit value share of each bank. The deposit value
share reects the percentage of bank value that is generated by deposit productivity relative to asset
productivity. We censor those observations with negative deposit value shares at zero and those
observations with deposit value shares greater than 1 at 1. The deposit and asset productivity
estimates correspond the specications reported in columns (4) of Table 2 and Table 3.




                                                 40
Tables
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics


                  Variable                   Obs       Mean      Std. Dev.      Min        Max
  Deposit Int. Expense                      26,742      2.18%        1.34%     0.11%        6.53%
  Deposit Int. Expense (Net of Fees)        26,742      1.73%        1.36%     -0.46%       6.16%
  Non Int. Expense (Millions)               26,742     142.44        517.53      1.27     3,662.00
  No. Branches                              26,742     119.50        307.73      1.00     2,024.00
  No Employees                              26,742    3,456.47    10,511.54     54.00    68,396.00
  Assets (Billions)                         26,742       26.50       161.00      0.10     2,580.00
  Interest Income (Millions)                26,742     281.85      1,524.57      1.50    33,000.00
  Deposits (Billions)                       26,742       14.20        78.90      0.01     1,370.00
  Leverage                                  26,742        0.91         0.04      0.19         1.02
  Beta                                      26,742        0.63         0.58      -0.66        2.46
  Std. Dev. ROA                             26,742      0.14%        0.18%     0.01%        0.91%
  Market-to-Book                            26,742        1.71         0.85      0.18         5.30
  Liabilities (Relative to Total Liabilities)
     Deposits                               26,742        0.83         0.13      0.00         1.00
     Small Time Deposits                    26,736        0.20         0.11      0.00         0.68
     Large Time Deposits                    26,736        0.13         0.08      0.00         0.89
     Savings Deposits                       24,633        0.34         0.15      0.00         0.89
     Transaction Deposits                   24,627        0.15         0.10      -0.30        0.81
     FF+Repo                                18,051        0.04         0.06      0.00         0.69
  Assets (Relative to Total Assets)
     Loans                                  26,742        0.65         0.13      0.00         0.96
     RE Loans                               24,633        0.46         0.16      0.00         0.91
     C&I Loan                               23,685        0.11         0.07      0.00         0.58
     Loan Commitments                       26,742        0.14         0.17      0.00        21.10
     Securities                             26,713        0.22         0.12      0.00         0.94
     Cash                                   26,732        0.02         0.04      0.00         0.41
     FF+Repo                                18,047        0.01         0.03      0.00         0.45


Note: Table 1 reports the summary statistics for our sample. Observations are at the bank by
quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Deposit interest expense and deposit interest expense net
of fees are both annualized (multiplied by 4). The following variables are winsorized at the 1% level:
Deposit Int. Expense, Deposit Int. Expense (Net of Fees), Non Int. Expense, No. Branches, No
Employees, Assets, Interest Income Deposits, Leverage, Beta, Std. Dev. ROA.




                                                 41
                                    Table 2: Deposit Demand


                                                        (1)           (2)
                      Deposit Rate                   12.61***     20.88***
                                                      (1.848)      (4.620)
                      No. Branches (hundreds)        0.0405***    0.0441***
                                                     (0.0093)      (0.0096)
                      No. Empl (thousands)           0.0271***    0.0278***
                                                     (0.0082)      (0.0084)
                      Non-Int. Exp. (billions)        -0.0886       -0.120
                                                      (0.101)      (0.104)
                      Time Fixed Eects                  X            X
                      Bank Fixed Eects                  X            X
                      IV-1                                            X
                      IV-2                                            X
                      Observations                    26,742        26,742
                      R-squared                        0.981        0.981


Note: We report our demand estimates (Eq. 6). In Table 2, we dene the market for deposits at
the aggregate US by quarter level. The unit of observation is at the bank by quarter level over the
period 1994 through 2015. The key independent variable of interest is the deposit rate oered for
each bank. We measure the deposit rate as the bank's quarterly deposit interest expense net of fees
(scaled by 4) divided by the bank's level of deposits. Because of the potential endogeneity of the
deposit rate, we instrument for the deposit rate using two sets of instruments. We construct our
rst instrument (IV-1) as the estimated deposit rate from a bank specic pass-through regression of
deposit rates on 3-month LIBOR. We construct our second instrument (IV-2) as the average of the
product characteristics oered by a bank's competitors in the previous quarter (branches, employees,
non-interest expense, and fees). Specically, we calculate the average product characteristics of a
bank's competitors in each county the bank operates in in a given year, and we then calculate the
average across all counties the bank operates in. We winsorize all independent variables at the 1%
to help control for outliers in the sample. Standard errors are clustered by bank and are reported
in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                42
                          Table 3: Bank Production Function (Asset Income)


                                          (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)
             ln Akt (θ)               0.848***       0.847***    0.894***      0.888***
                                       (0.0132)      (0.0143)     (0.0361)     (0.0379)
             Beta                                     -0.0081                   -0.0094
                                                     (0.0059)                  (0.0061)
             Beta (fwd 2 yr)                        0.0164***                 0.0150***
                                                     (0.0050)                  (0.0051)
             SD ROA                                 -0.0258***                -0.0266***
                                                     (0.0034)                  (0.0034)
             SD ROA (fwd 2 yr)                          0.0021                  0.0008
                                                     (0.0030)                  (0.0032)
             Bank F.E.                    X               X          X             X
             Time F.E.                    X               X          X             X
             IV                                                      X             X
             Observations               26,742          21,289     26,742       21,289
             R-squared                  0.992           0.992      0.992         0.992


Note: We report our asset income production function estimates (Eq.          9) in Table 3.   The unit
of observation is at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994 through 2015. The dependent
variable is the logged value of interest income earned by the bank. The key independent variable of
interest is the log value of a bank's assets lagged by one year. Because of the potential endogeneity of
assets, we instrument for assets in columns (3) and (4). Specically, we instrument for assets using
the weighted average of the deposit product characteristics of a bank 's competitors as described
in Section 3.3. We also control for the bank's equity beta, standard deviation of return on assets
(standardized), and leverage.    We measure equity beta on a rolling basis using monthly equity
returns over the previous 24 months using data from CRSP and Kenneth French. We measure the
standard deviation of return on assets on a rolling basis using quarterly income statement/balance
sheet data over the previous eight quarters.      Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and
are reported in parentheses.    *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                   43
                         Table 4: Market to Book vs. Bank Productivity


                               (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
  Deposit Productivity      0.236***    0.496***                               0.207***   0.452***
                            (0.0235)    (0.0792)                               (0.0287)   (0.0810)
  Asset Productivity                                     0.225***   0.144***   0.0878*    0.100***
                                                         (0.0523)   (0.0373)   (0.0529)   (0.0377)
  Time F.E.                     X            X              X          X          X          X
  Other Controls                             X                         X                     X
  Observations               26,742      26,742           26,742     26,742     26,742     26,742
  R-squared                   0.420         0.453         0.378      0.436      0.424      0.458


Note: Table 4 displays the estimation results corresponding to a linear regression model (Eq.10).
The dependent variable is the bank's market-to-book ratio. The key independent variables of
interest are deposit and asset productivity. Both deposit and asset productivity are standardized.
The deposit productivity estimates correspond to specication reported in column (4) of Table 2.
The asset productivity estimates correspond to specication reported in column (4) of Table 3. The
unit of observation is at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994 through 2015. Other controls
include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), three-month returns (lagged
by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on assets. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                    44
                       Table 5: Deposit and Asset Productivity Subcategories


       Dep. Var          Deposit Productivity Asset Productivity          Market to Book
                            (1)          (2)           (3)     (4)         (5)         (6)
       Deposit Prod.:
          Savings        0.734***     0.628***                          0.252***    0.368***
                         (0.0279)      (0.0422)                         (0.0360)    (0.0535)
          Small Time     0.125***     0.0945***                         -0.228*** -0.180***
                         (0.0286)      (0.0264)                         (0.0279)    (0.0314)
          Large Time     0.179***     0.156***                           0.0379    0.0724***
                         (0.0196)      (0.0151)                         (0.0331)    (0.0272)
          Transaction 0.414***        0.371***                           0.0594*    0.104***
                         (0.0219)      (0.0323)                         (0.0326)    (0.0331)
       Asset Prod.:
          Loans                                   0.166**    0.161**    0.0675**    0.0749**
                                                  (0.0674)   (0.0788)   (0.0325)    (0.0334)
          Securities                               0.0154     0.0159     0.0294    0.0697***
                                                  (0.0147)   (0.0235)   (0.0244)    (0.0244)


       Time F.E.             X            X            X        X           X           X
       Other Controls                     X                     X                       X
       Observations       22,345        22,345     18,323     18,323     16,724      16,724
       R-squared           0.979        0.981      0.668      0.681       0.460       0.492


Note: Table 5 displays the relationship between our more rened measures of productivity, overall
productivity, and market-to-book. Overall deposit productivity is the dependent variable columns
(1) and (2).   We measure overall deposit productivity using the demand estimates reported in
column (4) of Table 2. Overall asset productivity is the dependent variable columns (3) and (4).
We measure overall asset productivity using the production function estimates reported in column
(4) of Table 3. Market-to-book is the dependent variable in columns (5) and (6). We measure deposit
productivity for savings deposits, small time deposits, large deposits, and transaction deposits using
the corresponding demand estimates reported in Table A1a. We measure asset productivity for
loans and savings deposits using the corresponding production function estimates reported in Table
A1b. Observations are at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Other controls
include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), 3-month returns (lagged
by one quarter), equity beta, and sd of roa. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and
are reported in parentheses.     *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                  45
                  Table 6: Productivity vs. Composition of Assets and Liabilities

                             (a) Composition of Liabilities and Deposit Productivity

                                 Deposits      Small Time Large Time              Savings      Trans.    FF+Repo
 Dep. Var          Leverage
                                Liabilities     Liabilities Liabilities          Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities
                      (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)                  (5)         (6)         (7)
 Deposit Prod.     0.0225*       1.773***       -0.347***          0.137         1.354***        0.432***     -0.320
                   (0.0127)       (0.134)        (0.126)          (0.0834)         (0.160)       (0.106)      (0.239)


 Time F.E.             X            X              X                 X               X              X           X
 Other Controls        X            X              X                 X               X              X           X
 Observations       26,742        26,742         26,736           26,736           24,633         24,627      18,051
 R-squared           0.969         0.558          0.376            0.160           0.383          0.232       0.142


                            (b) Composition of Assets and Asset Productivity

                      RE Loans C&I Loan Loan Commit. Securities                        Cash        FF+Repo
    Dep. Var
                       Assets   Assets     Assets     Assets                           Assets        Assets
                        (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)                             (5)           (6)
    Asset Prod.       0.348***       0.157***        0.0938***           -0.462*** -0.338*** -0.295***
                       (0.0479)      (0.0454)          (0.0234)          (0.0483)     (0.118)       (0.113)


    Time F.E.               X              X                X                X             X            X
    Other Controls          X              X                X                X             X            X
    Observations       24,633         23,685            26,742            26,713       26,732        18,047
    R-squared           0.353           0.057             0.134            0.147         0.235       0.116


Note: Table 6 panels (a) and (b) display the relationship between productivity and a bank's liability
and asset structure. In Table 6a, we regress bank leverage and the composition of its deposits
on deposit productivity. We measure deposit productivity using the demand estimates reported
in column (4) of Table 2.       In Table 6b, we regress the composition of a bank's assets on asset
productivity. We measure asset productivity using the estimates reported in column (4) of Table
3. Observations in both Tables 6a and 6b are at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994-
2015. Other controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), three-
month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on assets.
Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses.                    *,**, and ***
indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                       46
                                 Table 7: Deposit and Asset Synergies

                                     (a) Deposit vs. Asset Productivity

  Dep. Var                   Asset Productivity               Loan Productivity            Sec. Productivity
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
  Deposit Productivity       0.328***        0.441***         0.504***      0.340***      0.692***       0.0985
                             (0.0304)        (0.0937)         (0.0543)       (0.110)       (0.0242)     (0.0966)


  Time F.E.                        X               X                X             X             X             X
  Other Controls                                   X                              X                           X
  Observations                26,742          26,742           18,360        18,360        19,467        19,467
  R-squared                    0.630           0.644           0.409          0.420         0.612         0.647



                       (b) Deposit vs. Asset Productivity - Subcategory Measures

     Dep. Var             Asset Productivity             Loan Productivity              Sec. Productivity
                             (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
     Deposit Prod.:
         Savings         0.136***         0.275***       0.215***         0.215***      0.448***      0.0667
                          (0.0362)        (0.0429)       (0.0355)         (0.0676)      (0.0515)      (0.0506)
         Small Time      0.164***         0.194***       0.292***         0.296***      0.122**       0.00589
                          (0.0304)        (0.0270)       (0.0543)         (0.0645)      (0.0482)      (0.0255)
         Large Time      0.121***         0.124***       0.100***         0.109***      0.0890**      0.0193
                          (0.0403)        (0.0268)       (0.0373)         (0.0339)      (0.0347)      (0.0226)
         Transaction      -0.0188          0.0414        -0.0164          -0.0172        0.0798       -0.0510
                          (0.0390)        (0.0406)       (0.0454)         (0.0408)      (0.0614)      (0.0381)
     Time F.E.               X               X                X              X             X             X
     Other Controls                          X                               X                           X
     Observations          22,345          22,345         16,753           16,753        17,269       17,269
     R-squared             0.646            0.666         0.602            0.607         0.607         0.650



Note: Tables 7a and 7b display the relationship between deposit productivity and asset produc-
tivity (eq. 11). Each column corresponds to a separate linear regression. The dependent variable
in columns (1)-(2) is overall productivity as measured using the production function estimates re-
ported in column (4) of Table 3. The dependent variable in columns (3)-(4) is loan productivity
as measured using the production function estimates reported in column (1) of Table A1b.                            The
dependent variable in columns (5)-(6) is securities productivity as measured using the production
function estimates reported in column (2) of Table A1b. The key independent variable of interest
is deposit productivity. We measure overall deposit productivity using the demand estimates re-
ported in column (4) of Table 2 and deposit productivity for each type of deposit using the demand
estimates reported in Table A1a.         Observations are at the bank by quarter level over the period
1994-2015.   Other controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter),
three-month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on
assets. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and
*** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         47
                 Table 8: Productivity vs. Composition of Assets and Liabilities

                           (a) Composition of Assets and Deposit Productivity

                       RE Loans C&I Loan Loan Commit. Securities Cash FF+Repo
     Dep. Var
                        Assets   Assets     Assets     Assets    Assets Assets
                         (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)    (6)
     Deposit Prod.         0.165      0.705***           0.255***            -0.0280    -0.131      -0.665*
                        (0.129)          (0.117)         (0.0769)            (0.192)    (0.127)     (0.348)


     Time F.E.               X              X                X                 X           X          X
     Other Controls          X              X                X                 X           X          X
     Observations          24,633        23,685            26,742            26,713     26,732      18,047
     R-squared             0.314         0.090              0.136            0.068       0.193       0.123



                             (b) Composition of Liabilities and Asset Productivity

                                 Deposits       Small Time Large Time               Savings      Trans.    FF+Repo
 Dep. Var          Leverage
                                 Liabilities     Liabilities Liabilities           Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities
                      (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)                   (5)         (6)         (7)
 Asset Prod.        0.00278      0.162***        0.100***        0.284***            0.0409      -0.202**     -0.115**
                   (0.00484)     (0.0571)        (0.0358)           (0.0390)       (0.0597)       (0.0837)    (0.0521)


 Time F.E.             X             X               X                 X               X             X           X
 Other Controls        X             X               X                 X               X             X           X
 Observations       26,742         26,742          26,736           26,736           24,633       24,627      18,051
 R-squared           0.969          0.328          0.370             0.189            0.233        0.231       0.138



Note: Table 8 (a) and (b) display the relationship between productivity and a bank's liability and
asset structure. In Table 8a, we regress the composition of a bank's assets on deposit productivity.
We measure deposit productivity using the demand estimates reported in column (4) of Table 2. In
Table 8a, we regress bank leverage and the composition of its deposits on asset productivity. We
measure asset productivity using the estimates reported in column (4) of Table 3. Observations in
both Tables 8a and 8b are at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Other controls
include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), three-month returns (lagged
by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on assets. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                      48
Appendix Figures and Tables

               Figure A1: Value Creation: Asset Productivity vs. Deposit Productivity




Note: Fig. A1 displays the distributions of our empirical Bayes estimates of asset and deposit
productivity as discussed in Section 5.3.2. Specically, we "shrink" the estimated distribution of
asset and deposit productivity to account for measurement error. The red shaded histogram plots
                                                                                             Deposits 1
the distribution of our empirical Bayes estimates of bank deposit productivity weighted by
                                                                                              Assets α .
The blue histogram displays the distribution of our empirical Bayes estimates of asset productivity
     θ
Assets
Assets
         exp(φjt +ΓXjt ).   We normalize the level of asset productivity relative to 3-month LIBOR such
that the small set of banks earning returns below 3-month LIBOR have negative asset productivity.
Similarly, we also normalize the deposit total factor productivity distribution relative to 3-month
LIBOR. We nd that 16% of banks oer net deposit rates (net of fees) that are greater than 3-month
LIBOR. We normalize the deposit productivity distribution under the assumption that bottom 16%
of banks in terms of deposit productivity in each quarter do not generate any value on the deposit
side of the bank. The deposit productivity estimates correspond to specication reported in column
(4) of Table 2. The asset productivity estimates correspond to specication reported in column (4)
of Table 3.




                                                    49
                   Table A1: Rened Demand and Production Function Estimates

                               (a) Demand for Deposits by Type of Deposit

                                                                 Deposit Type
                                           Savings      Small Time Large Time Transaction
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
              Deposit Rate                  -9.594       63.17***       75.39***     -1.188
                                            (12.73)       (23.21)       (18.25)      (12.51)
              No. Branches (hundreds) 0.0825***          0.113***        0.0265      0.0142
                                           (0.0211)       (0.0412)      (0.0263)    (0.0143)
              No. Empl (thousands)         0.00932         0.0241      0.0479***   0.0377***
                                           (0.0102)       (0.0185)      (0.0135)    (0.0104)
              Non-Int. Exp. (billions)      -0.192       -0.920***     -0.656***     0.0724
                                            (0.154)       (0.347)       (0.247)     (0.0881)
              Time Fixed Eects                X             X               X          X
              Bank Fixed Eects                X             X               X          X
              IV                               X             X               X          X
              Observations                  24,609         24,500        24,556      22,345
              R-squared                      0.970         0.868         0.809        0.941


                               (b) Bank Production Function by Asset Type

                                                             Asset Type
                                                          Loans      Securities
                                                           (1)          (2)
                              ln(Loanskt ) (θL )        0.853***
                                                         (0.0193)
                              ln(Securitieskt ) (θS )                 0.754***
                                                                      (0.0214)
                              Beta                       -0.0101      -0.00335
                                                        (0.00618)     (0.0104)
                              SD ROA                    -0.0303*** -0.0226***
                                                        (0.00375)    (0.00703)
                              Bank F.E.                     X            X
                              Time F.E.                     X            X
                              Observations               18,360        19,467
                              R-squared                   0.989        0.978


Note: Table A1a reports our baseline demand estimates for each type of deposit. The key independent
variable of interest is the deposit rate oered for each bank. Because of the potential endogeneity of the
deposit rate, we instrument for the deposit rate using two sets of instruments. We construct our rst
instrument (IV-1) as the estimated deposit rate from a bank specic pass-through regression of deposit rates
on 3-month LIBOR. We construct our second instrument (IV-2) as the average of the product characteristics
oered by a bank's competitors in the previous quarter (branches, employees, non-int expense, and fees).
Specically, we calculate the average product characteristics of a bank's competitors in each county the bank
operates in in a given year ,and then we calculate the average across all counties the bank operates in. We
winsorize all independent variables at the 1% to help control for outliers in the sample. Standard errors are
clustered by bank and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.
Table A1b reports our asset production function estimates for loans and securities. The unit of observation
is at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994 through 2015. The dependent variable in column (1)
(column 2) is the logged value of loan (securities) interest income earned by the bank. The key independent
variable of interest in column (1) (column 2) is the log value of the bank loans (securities) lagged by one
year.   We also control for the bank's equity beta, standard deviation of return on assets (standardized),
and leverage. We measure equity beta on a rolling basis using monthly equity returns over the previous 24
months using data provided by CRSP and Kenneth 50  French. We measure the standard deviation of return
on assets on a rolling basis using quarterly income statement/balance sheet data over the previous eight
quarters. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and ***
indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                  Table A2: Geographic Characteristics

                               (a) Productivity and Geographic Characteristics

                Dep. Var.                Asset Productivity          Deposit Productivity
                                             (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
                ln(Population)            0.235***                   0.611***
                                          (0.0342)                    (0.0571)
                              2
                ln(Population)          -0.0467***                   -0.126***
                                          (0.0159)                    (0.0252)
                ln(Wage)                 -0.203***                   -0.179**
                                          (0.0494)                    (0.0790)
                           2
                ln(Wage)                 -0.0452**                    0.0257
                                          (0.0216)                    (0.0250)
                ln(Branch Age)            -0.00839                   0.413***
                                          (0.0267)                    (0.0403)
                ln(House Prices)          0.119***                    0.107*
                                          (0.0432)                    (0.0644)
                HMDA HHI                  0.103***
                                          (0.0289)
                Deposit HHI                                          0.189***
                                                                      (0.0352)
                Time F.E.                    X              X            X           X
                MSA F.E.                                    X                        X


                Observations               26,742      26,742         26,742       26,742
                R-squared                   0.557          0.695       0.331       0.716


                                (b) Robustness to Controlling for Geography

              Dep. Var.                       Market-to-Book            Asset Productivity
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)      (4)
              Deposit Productivity          0.317***       0.424***     0.337***   0.714***
                                            (0.0323)       (0.0695)     (0.0507)    (0.177)
              Asset Productivity            0.152***       0.158***
                                            (0.0417)       (0.0298)
              Time F.E.                          X              X             X          X
              MSA F.E.                           X              X             X          X
              Other Controls                                    X                        X
              Observations                   26,742         26,742       26,742     26,742
              R-squared                       0.581         0.602         0.727      0.742

Note: In Table A2a we show how deposit and asset productivity correlate with the geographic
characteristics of areas where banks operate. In Table and A2b, we replicate our baseline set of
results controlling for xed eects for each MSA a bank operates in. We measure deposit and asset
productivity using the estimates reported in columns (4) of Table 2 and 3.               Observations are at
the bank by quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Other controls include assets (lagged by one
year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), three-month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta,
and the standard deviation of return on assets. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and
are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                                      51
                    Table A3: Alternative Asset Production Fuction Estimates

                        (a) Alternative Production Function Estimates - Spline

               Dep. Var.                  Market-to-Book          Asset Productivity
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
               Deposit Productivity     0.242***       0.343***   0.553***       0.451***
                                        (0.0363)       (0.105)    (0.0369)       (0.131)
               Asset Productivity        0.0281        0.118**
                                        (0.0516)       (0.0459)


               Time F.E.                    X             X          X              X
               Other Controls                             X                         X
               Observations              21,362         21,362     21,362         21,362
               R-squared                  0.413         0.454      0.655          0.705


                  (b) Alternative Production Function Estimates - Asset Composition

               Dep. Var.                  Market-to-Book          Asset Productivity
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
               Deposit Productivity     0.222***       0.500***   0.374***       0.351***
                                        (0.0373)       (0.0955)   (0.0336)       (0.0846)
               Asset Productivity        0.0939        0.107**
                                        (0.0627)       (0.0440)


               Time F.E.                    X             X          X              X
               Other Controls                             X                         X
               Observations              18,564         18,564     18,564         18,564
               R-squared                  0.429         0.463      0.654          0.666

Note: In Tables A3a and A3b, we replicate our baseline set of results using our alternative measures
of asset productivity. To construct the measure of asset productivity reported In Table A3a, we
estimate the bank's asset income production function using a spline with ve knot points as discussed
in Section 5.2.1. To construct the measure of asset productivity reported In Table A3b, we estimate
the bank's asset income production function where we control for the Fama French risk factors
and the proportion of a bank's assets held in both loans and securities (both lagged by one year).
We measure deposit productivity using the demand estimates reported in column (4) of Table
2.   Observations in both Tables A3a and A3b are at the bank by quarter level over the period
1994-2015.   Other controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter),
three-month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on
assets. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and
*** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  52
                             Table A4: Alternative Demand Estimates

                                 (a) County Level Demand Estimates

                                                                 (1)             (2)
                    Deposit Rate                               20.33          18.19**
                                                               (13.59)         (8.213)
                    No. of Branches (County Level)                            0.184***
                                                                           (0.00398)
                    County×Year Fixed Eects                      X               X
                    Bank Fixed Eects                             X               X
                    IV                                            X               X
                    Observations                              260,881         260,881
                    R-squared                                  0.659           0.779


                      (b) Alternative Demand Estimates - County Level Demand

              Dep. Var.                   Market-to-Book               Asset Productivity
                                           (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
              Deposit Productivity      0.112***       0.162**        0.317***         0.471***
                                         (0.0345)      (0.0812)        (0.0241)        (0.101)
              Asset Productivity         0.108**       0.106**
                                         (0.0502)      (0.0501)


              Time F.E.                     X             X               X               X
              Other Controls                              X                               X
              Observations                3,050         3,050           3,050           3,050
              R-squared                   0.431         0.482           0.511           0.525




Note: We report our demand estimates (Eq. 6). In Table A4a we dene the market for deposits at
the county by year level. The unit of observation is at the bank by county by year level over the
period 2002 through 2012. We instrument for the deposit rate using the estimated deposit rate from
a bank by county specic pass-through regression of deposit rates on 3-month LIBOR. We winsorize
all independent variables at the 1% to help control for outliers in the sample. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. In Table A4b, we replicate our baseline
set of results using our alternative measure of deposit productivity. We measure deposit productivity
using the demand estimates reported in column (2) of Table A4a. The asset productivity estimates
correspond to specication reported in column (4) of Table 3.           Observations are at the bank by
year level over the period 1994-2015. Other controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage
(lagged by one quarter), three-month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard
deviation of return on assets. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in
parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  53
                      Table A5: Measurement Error - Instrumental Variables


              Dep. Var.                   Market-to-Book          Asset Productivity
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)
              Deposit Productivity      0.205***       0.513***   0.353***   0.567***
                                        (0.0301)       (0.106)    (0.0270)   (0.108)
              Asset Productivity         0.0128         0.0596
                                        (0.0427)       (0.0435)


              Time F.E.                     X             X          X          X
              Other Controls                              X                     X
              IV                            X             X          X          X
              Observations               16,724         16,724     22,345     22,345
              R-squared                   0.428         0.469      0.624      0.640


Note: In Table A5, we replicate our baseline set of results using instrumental variables to address
potential measurement error issues. Specically, we instrument for deposit productivity using the
subcategory deposit productivity measures that we construct from the estimates reported in Table
A1a. Similarly, we instrument for asset productivity using the subcategory asset productivity that
we construct from the estimates reported in Table A1b. We measure deposit and asset productivity
using the estimates reported in columns (4) of Table 2 and 3.      Observations are at the bank by
quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Other controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage
(lagged by one quarter), three-month returns (lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard
deviation of return on assets. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level and are reported in
parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  54
                                   Table A6: Subsample Analysis

                        (a) Subsample Analysis - Excluding the Largest Banks

              Dep. Var.                    Market-to-Book          Asset Productivity
                                            (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
              Deposit Productivity       0.224***       0.465***   0.341***    0.983***
                                         (0.0299)       (0.124)    (0.0210)       (0.113)
              Asset Productivity          0.0957        0.104***
                                         (0.0641)       (0.0360)


              Time F.E.                      X             X          X              X
              Other Controls                               X                         X
              IV                             X             X          X              X
              Observations                24,881         24,881     24,881        24,881
              R-squared                    0.426         0.459      0.650          0.686


                        (b) Subsample Analysis - Excluding the Financial Crisis

              Dep. Var.                    Market-to-Book          Asset Productivity
                                            (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
              Deposit Productivity       0.213***       0.464***   0.329***    0.453***
                                         (0.0287)       (0.0795)   (0.0302)       (0.0991)
              Asset Productivity         0.107**        0.113***
                                         (0.0517)       (0.0385)


              Time F.E.                      X             X          X              X
              Other Controls                               X                         X
              Observations                24,211         24,211     24,211        24,211
              R-squared                    0.402         0.432      0.642          0.654

Note: In Tables A6a and A6b, we replicate our baseline set of results using dierent subsets of the
data. In Table A6a, we replicate our baseline set of results where we exclude the largest banks from
our sample. Specically, we drop all observations of those banks that appear among the top 5% of
the sample in terms of assets at any point in time. In Table A6a, we replicate our baseline set of
results where we exclude all observations from the years surrounding the nancial crisis (years 2008
and 2009). We measure deposit and asset productivity using the estimates reported in columns (4)
of Table 2 and 3. Observations are at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994-2015. Other
controls include assets (lagged by one year), leverage (lagged by one quarter), three-month returns
(lagged by one quarter), equity beta, and the standard deviation of return on assets. Standard errors
are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                   55
               Table A7: Alternative Deposit Demand Estimates - Extended Data Set


                                               (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)
                Deposit Rate                13.66***       8.943**    48.25***   19.67***
                                             (1.721)       (4.363)    (9.091)     (4.664)
                No. Branches (hundreds) 0.0330*** 0.0328*** 0.0338*** 0.0320***
                                            (0.00955)     (0.00949)   (0.0100)   (0.00925)
                No. Empl (thousands)       0.0366*** 0.0345*** 0.0527*** 0.0403***
                                            (0.0109)      (0.0111)    (0.0117)   (0.0106)
                Non-Int. Exp. (billions)     -0.163        -0.148     -0.254**    -0.165
                                             (0.117)       (0.117)    (0.127)     (0.115)


                Time Fixed Eects               X            X           X          X
                Bank Fixed Eects               X            X           X          X
                IV-1                                         X                      X
                IV-2                                                     X          X
                Observations                 33,145        33,145      32,083     32,083
                R-squared                     0.976         0.976      0.971      0.977


Note: We report our demand estimates (Eq. 6) in Table A7. Here we re-estimate demand using our
extended data set of over 32,000 bank by quarter observations. In our baseline demand estimates
(Table   ??), we restrict our data set to the 26,742 bank/quarter observations for which data is avail-
able to estimate both deposit demand and the asset production function. The unit of observation
is then at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994 through 2015. We dene the market for
deposits at the aggreate US by quarter level. The key independent variable of interest is the deposit
rate oered for each bank. We measure the deposit rate as the bank's quarterly deposit interest
expense net of fees (scaled by 4) divided by the bank's level of deposits. Because of the potential
endogeneity of the deposit rate, we instrument for the deposit rate using two sets of instruments.
We construct our rst instrument (IV-1) as the estimated deposit rate from a bank specic pass-
through regression of deposit rates on 3-month LIBOR. We construct our second instrument (IV-2)
as the average of the product characteristics oered by a bank's competitors in the previous quarter
(branches, employees, non-int expense, and fees).         Specically, we calculate the average product
characteristics of a bank's competitors in each county the bank operates in in a given year, and we
then calculate the average across all counties the bank operates in. We winsorize all independent
variables at the 1% to help control for outliers in the sample. Standard errors are clustered by bank
and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                     56
                      Table A8: Alternative Production Function Estimates


                                                       (1)          (2)
                         ln Akt (θ)                0.879***      0.891***
                                                   (0.0369)      (0.0547)
                         θ1                        -0.00276
                                                   (0.0447)
                         θ2                        -0.00527
                                                   (0.0326)
                         θ3                           0.0190
                                                   (0.0282)
                         θ4                        -0.108***
                                                   (0.0297)
                         Beta                      -0.00656
                                                   (0.00500)
                         Beta (fwd 2 yr)                         0.0128**
                                                                (0.00499)
                         SD ROA                   -0.0290***
                                                   (0.00299)
                         SD ROA (fwd 2 yr)                       0.00132
                                                                (0.00339)
                         SMB (fwd 2 yr)                          0.00407
                                                                (0.00269)
                         HML (fwd 2 yr)                         -0.000365
                                                                (0.00259)
                         Bank F.E.                      X           X
                         Time F.E.                      X           X
                         IV                                         X
                         Observations                 26,742      18,564
                         R-squared                    0.992       0.993


Note: Table A8 displays our alternative production function estimates. The unit of observation
is at the bank by quarter level over the period 1994 through 2015. The dependent variable is the
logged value of interest income earned by the bank. The key independent variable of interest is the
log value of a bank's assets lagged by one year. In column (1) we estimate a bank's asset production
function using a spline with ve knot points (eq. 12) as described in Section 5.2.1. In column (2) we
estimate a bank's asset production function using our basline log-linear specication and instrument
for assets using the weighted average of the deposit product characteristics of a bank 's competitors
as described in Section 3.3. In both specications, we control for the bank's equity beta, standard
deviation of return on assets (standardized), and leverage. In column (2), we also control for the
other Fama French Factors, HML and SMB. We measure equity beta, HML, and SMB on a rolling
basis using monthly equity returns over the previous 24 months using data provided by CRSP and
Kenneth French. We measure the standard deviation of return on assets on a rolling basis using
quarterly income statement/balance sheet data over the previous eight quarters. Standard errors
are clustered at the bank level and are reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate signicance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 57
