                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM EURO-DOLLAR TWEETS?

                                       Vahid Gholampour
                                       Eric van Wincoop

                                       Working Paper 23293
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23293


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2017




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Bankard Fund for Political Economy. We
like to thank seminar participants at the University of Virginia, Bucknell University, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and the NBER Fall 2016 IFM
Meeting for useful comments. We particularly thank Laura Veldkamp for very helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Vahid Gholampour and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What can we Learn from Euro-Dollar Tweets?
Vahid Gholampour and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 23293
March 2017
JEL No. F31,F41,G12,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

We use 633 days of tweets about the Euro/dollar exchange rate to determine their information
content and the profitability of trading based on Twitter Sentiment. We develop a detailed lexicon
used by FX traders to translate verbal tweets into positive, negative and neutral opinions. The
methodologically novel aspect of our approach is the use of a model with heterogeneous private
information to interpret the data from FX tweets. After estimating model parameters, we compute
the Sharpe ratio from a trading strategy based on Twitter Sentiment. The Sharpe ratio
outperforms that based on the well-known carry trade and is precisely estimated.


Vahid Gholampour
Bucknell University
Department of Economics
1 Dent Drive
Lewisburg, PA 17837
vahid.gholampour@bucknell.edu

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu
1         Introduction
Asset pricing models with asymmetric information commonly assume that information is widely
dispersed among traders.1 Traders have different information about future events or may interpret
the same information differently. All this information affects asset prices, which therefore in turn
provide a (noisy) looking glass into the dispersed private information in the market. With the
advent of the internet and social media, large numbers of people now go online to directly express
their opinions about the direction of asset prices.2 This leads to questions about the information
content of these online opinions and the profitability of trading based on this information.3 In this
paper we investigate what can be learned from Twitter by considering two and a half years of tweets
that express opinions about the Euro/dollar exchange rate. This is a natural choice as Twitter has
become a widely used platform to express opinions and the importance of private information for
the determination of exchange rates is well established through the FX microstructure literature.4
        The paper makes several contributions. First, we develop a “dictionary” based on financial
lexicon used by traders in the Euro/dollar market to automate the interpretation of verbal tweets
as positive, negative or neutral.5 This leads to a measure of Twitter Sentiment, which we consider
separately for individuals with a lot of followers and few followers. Second, we document that
little can be concluded about the information quality of Twitter Sentiment without imposing the
structure of a model. While there is evidence of predictability of the direction of the exchange rate
change from accounts with a lot of followers, Twitter Sentiment does not predict the magnitude of
    1
      See Brunnermeier (2001) for a review of the literature.
    2
      Opinion surveys existed before, but they were infrequent (usually monthly) and limited in scope.
    3
      There exists lots of anecdotal information suggesting that such information can be important. For example, on
August 13, 2013, Carl Icahn, an activist investor, tweeted about his large position in Apple. As a result, the stock
surged by over four percent in a few seconds. Almost two years later, on April 28, 2015, a data mining company
obtained Twitter’s quarterly earnings and posted it on Twitter before the scheduled release time. Twitter’s stock
plummeted by twenty percent and trading was halted by the NYSE.
   4
     The seminal contribution by Evans and Lyons (2002) established a close relationship between exchange rates
and order flow, with the latter seen as aggregating private information. Reviews of the FX microstructure literature
can be found in Evans (2011), Evans and Rime (2012), King, Osler and Rime (2013) and Lyons (2001).
   5
     We do not consider other currency pairs as a lot of the tweets are in different languages. But the overall method
described here can certainly be applied to other languages and currency pairs.



                                                          1
the future exchange rate changes and implies Sharpe ratios from trading strategies that are very
imprecise (could be large or small). Third, we then estimate a model with dispersed information
in the foreign exchange market and use the results to compute the implied Sharpe ratio. We find
the Sharpe ratio to be high, outperforming the popular carry trade strategy, and very precisely
measured.
   The key contribution of the paper is in the use of a model with a precise information structure.
Without the use of a model, our data sample of 633 days is not long enough to draw strong
conclusions about predictability and Sharpe ratios. Since exchange rates are notoriously hard
to predict (are close to a random walk) and Twitter Sentiment is only directional, much longer
data samples would be needed to draw conclusions about the information content of the tweets.
By taking a stand on the information structure in the context of a specific model, we can learn
much more from our short data sample. The model allows us to interpret many aspects of the
Twitter Sentiment data, such as sentiment volatility, disagreement among agents, the relationship
with current and future exchange rates and the different information quality of different groups of
agents.
   We therefore leverage the short sample by imposing structure to interpret the data. There
remains uncertainty about the parameters of the model, which are estimated. This translates into
uncertainty about the Sharpe ratio from a Twitter Sentiment trading strategy. But by using a
wide variety of data moments, which are driven by a limited set of parameters that describe the
information structure, we can obtain quite precise estimates of model parameters and therefore of
the Sharpe ratio. Of course this all assumes that the model is correct. Our conclusions about the
information content in Twitter Sentiment are critically dependent on this assumption. No model
is exactly correct, but we show that the model cannot be rejected by the data and does a good
job in matching moments in the data.
   The model we use is an extension of a noisy rational expectation (NRE) model for exchange
rate determination developed by Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), from here on BvW. Each
period (day) agents receive new private signals about future fundamentals. As a result of noise
trade the exchange rate does not reveal the aggregate of the private information, a common feature
of NRE models. We extend the model of BvW to allow for two categories of agents, referred to as


                                                2
informed and uninformed traders. They both receive private signals, but informed traders receive
higher quality private signals.6 The information structure in the model is defined by the precision
of the signals of both groups of agents, the horizon of future fundamentals over which they receive
signals, the relative size of the informed group and the known processes of observed fundamentals
and unobserved noise shocks.
       There are no tweets in the model. Tweets are interpreted as the expression of an opinion by a
subset of agents. Several steps are taken to connect the verbal tweets in the data with expectations
of future exchange rate changes by individual agents in the model. First, we develop a large set
of word combinations to classify tweets as positive (+1), negative (-1) or neutral (0) about the
outlook for the Euro/dollar exchange rate. The word combinations are based on language typically
used in the Euro/dollar market by traders. Second, in line with the theory, we separate the tweets
into two groups, those with more than 500 followers and those with fewer than 500 followers.
While we make no assumption in the estimation of the model about which group is the informed
group, the results show that those with more followers have much more precise signals. Third, we
use cutoffs for expectations in the model to obtain a theoretical Twitter Sentiment of +1, -1 or 0
for each agent. The cutoffs are such that the unconditional distribution across the three values in
the model corresponds to that in the data.
       After estimation with the Simulated Method of Moments, the model is used to evaluate pre-
dictability and Sharpe ratios. It should be emphasized that predicting exchange rates is no easy
matter. It is well known since the results by Meese and Rogoff (1983a,b) that the exchange rate
is close to a random walk. Engel and West (2005) show that reasonable estimates of the discount
rate of future fundamentals in exchange rate models (close to 1) indeed imply a near-random walk
behavior. The same will be the case in the model in this paper. Predictability will therefore always
be limited, no matter the quality of the private information. But very limited predictability is
sufficient to generate attractive Sharpe ratios.
       Although we are not aware of other applications to the foreign exchange market, the paper
   6
       The distinction between informed and uninformed agents is actually quite common in NRE models. A good
example is Wang (1994). But in those models it is assumed that uninformed agents do not receive any private
signals. We instead assume lower quality private signals, with the precision of the signals to be estimated.




                                                         3
relates to a literature that has used messages from social media and the internet to predict stock
prices. Results are based on regressions of stock price returns on either “mood” states (like
hope, happy, fear, worry, nervous, upset, anxious, positive, negative) or an opinion about the
direction of stock price changes (along the line of positive, negative or neutral). Predictability is
considered at most a couple of days into the future. Papers focusing on mood states, like Bollen
et.al. (2011), Zhang et.al. (2011), Mittal and Goel (2012) and Zhang (2013), use an entire sweep
of all Twitter messages, or random sets of messages, rather than messages specifically related
to financial markets.7 Some of the literature prior to Twitter did focus specifically on financial
messages. These include Antweiler and Frank (2004) and Das and Chen (2007), who use message
boards like Yahoo!Finance, and Dewally (2003), who uses messages from newsgroups about US
stocks. Evidence of predictability in most of these papers is limited at best, which is not surprising
as they are based on short data samples of no more than a year.
       The main difference in our approach is the use of a model to leverage the short sample and learn
more about the information content of the messages. But there is another important difference
as well. The literature has not employed financial jargon used by traders to classify messages.
Most of the literature uses supervised machine-based learning classifiers that are not specific to
financial markets at all. For example, the Naive Bayes algorithm is a popular classifier, which uses
the words of a message to update the probabilities of various classification categories, based on a
pre-classified training set. Tetlock (2007) has used a dictionary approach to consider the ability
of verbal text to predict stock prices. But it is based on the Harvard IV dictionary that is not
specifically related to financial news. Moreover, it is applied to WSJ articles as opposed to the
diverse opinions expressed by a broad set of individuals on message boards and social media.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the Twitter data
and methodology used to translate opinionated tweets about the Euro/dollar into positive (+1),
negative (-1) and neutral (0) categories. We show that this measure of Twitter Sentiment is unable
to predict future exchange rate changes in a statistically significant way and implies a Sharpe
ratio that is very imprecisely measured. In Section 3 we describe the NRE model of exchange
   7
       Mao et.al. (2015) uses an entire sweep of messages to search for the words “bullish” and “bearish” to classify
tweets.



                                                           4
rate determination used to interpret the data. Section 4 discusses the empirical methodology and
Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Data and Methodology
The objective is to translate daily verbal tweets that express opinions about the dollar/Euro
exchange rate into a numerical measure of Twitter Sentiment (TS) that reflects expectations
about the future direction of the exchange rate. After a discussion about possible biases related
to the reasons for tweeting, we describe how we use a dictionary of financial lexicon to measure
Twitter Sentiment. We then use the results to provide evidence on predictability and Sharpe ratios
without any guidance from theory. We also compute a variety of moments that will be confronted
with the theory in Section 5.


2.1     Why Individuals Tweet

Before we describe Twitter data and the steps of constructing Twitter Sentiment, a brief discussion
of potential motivations by individuals for tweeting their outlook is in order. There are two
potential ways in which such motivations can generate biases that can affect the analysis. The
first bias occurs when individuals are motivated to tweet something that does not correspond to
their actual beliefs. The second bias occurs when individuals are more or less likely to tweet in a
way that is correlated with their outlook for the exchange rate.
    The first bias is not likely to be much of a concern, for various reasons. First, it is hard to think
of a reason to tweet the opposite of one’s belief. Even if the objective of a tweet is to steer the
market in a certain direction, there is little reason to steer it in a direction opposite to one’s beliefs,
especially if the individual has a stake in the outcome. Second, the market for the Euro-dollar
currency pair is one of the most liquid financial markets in the world, so few individuals would
be able to influence the exchange rate through malicious tweets. Finally, the self-provided user
descriptions provide some information about the motivation for the tweets. A significant fraction of
accounts with a lot of followers are controlled by individuals or businesses that provide investment
research services. They occasionally tweet their future outlook to showcase their research and


                                                    5
gain more subscribers for their business. Businesses have no incentive to tweet an opinion that
is in contradiction with their internal research because misleading the followers could hurt their
reputation.
       The second type of bias occurs if people are more likely to tweet when they have particularly
strong beliefs about the direction of the exchange rate. This can bias the average opinion. If this
is the case, the percentage of neutral tweets is inversely related to the total number of tweets.
To test this, we separate the days into the bottom and top 25 percent in terms of the number of
tweets. For days with few tweets (bottom 25 percent), we classify 31.7 percent as neutral tweets.
For days with a large number of tweets (top 25 percent), 29.7 percent are classified as neutral
tweets. If there is any bias, it is clearly not very large.8


2.2        Overall Approach to Computing Twitter Sentiment

It is important to describe in some detail how we translate verbal tweets into a numerical Twitter
Sentiment. We have used Twitter’s publicly available search tools since October 9, 2013, to
download the tweets in real time every half an hour. Every tweet includes the user name, the
number of followers of the individual who posted the tweet, as well as the exact time and date
that the tweet was posted. We start with all Twitter messages that mention EURUSD in their
text and are posted between October 9, 2013 and March 11, 2016. There are on average 578 such
messages coming from distinct Twitter accounts per day, for a total of 268,770 tweets.9 However,
the bulk of these messages do not include an opinion about the future direction in which the
exchange rate will move. For example, many mention changes in the Euro/dollar exchange rate
that have already happened or advertise a link to a web site discussing the Euro/dollar exchange
rate.
       The next step then is to look for opinionated tweets that express a positive, negative, or
neutral outlook about the direction of the exchange rate. The exchange rate is dollars per Euro,
   8
       We find the same if we separate the tweets into those with more than the average number of tweets (top 50
percent) and those with fewer than the average number of tweets (bottom 50 percent). We also get similar results
when we separately consider tweets from those with a lot of followers and those with few followers, as we will do
below.
   9
     Here we count multiple tweets from the same account during a day as one EURUSD tweet.


                                                        6
denoted st in logs. A positive sentiment therefore means an expected Euro appreciation, while a
negative sentiment indicates an expected Euro depreciation. A neutral outlook indicates a lack of
conviction or dependency of the outlook on the outcome of a future event. Numerically we measure
a positive outlook as +1, a negative outlook as -1 and a neutral outlook as 0. Unfortunately the
tweets are not sufficiently precise to capture further gradations. The tweets are also not precise
about the horizon of the expectation, an issue to which we return in Section 4 when discussing
the connection to the theory.
       In order to identify such opinionated tweets, and categorize them as positive, negative or
neutral, we search for many different word combinations. A number of recent papers, such as
Tetlock (2007) and Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2015), use Harvard IV-4 dictionary and word counting
to conduct text analysis. This approach is shown to be effective in analyzing the content of
financial articles and Google search words. However, the dictionary is not structured to capture
the vocabulary used by investors. Since opinionated tweets about the exchange rate are usually
posted by investors, there is a certain type of lexicon that is found in most of these tweets. We
identify this lexicon by studying large numbers of tweets. We then go through several rounds
of improving our dictionary of financial lexicon by comparing the results from the automated
classification to that based on manual classification. We stopped making further changes when
we found only very few errors after manually checking 5000 tweets. We describe this dictionary
further below.
       A day is defined as the 24 hour period that ends 12 noon EST. This corresponds well to our
data on exchange rates as the Federal Reserve reports daily spot exchange rates at 12PM in New
York. We allow only one opinion for each Twitter account on any given day to ensure that the
measure of sentiment is not dominated by few individuals who express their opinion multiple
times. We are not interested in intra-day price fluctuations. When there are multiple tweets from
one account during a day, we only use the last tweet on that day.10
       There are on average 43.5 such opinionated tweets per day, for a total of 27,557 during our
sample. Therefore only about 8.5% of all tweets with the word EURUSD are opinionated tweets.
  10
       On average 16.9% of tweets counted this way are from accounts from which multiple tweets were sent during
a day.



                                                        7
The 27,557 opinionated tweets come from 6,236 separate accounts, implying an average of 4.4
tweets per account over the entire 633 day period of our sample. The opinions are therefore from
a very diverse set of individuals as opposed to the same individuals repeating their opinions day
after day. If the 27,557 tweets all came from individuals tweeting every day, there would have
been only 43 separate accounts. We are clearly capturing a far more dispersed group of people
expressing opinions.


2.3    Financial Lexicon

Tables A1 and A2 in Appendix A provide the list of all word combinations used to identify tweets as
positive, negative or neutral. As can be seen, there are various ways that a tweet can be identified
to be in one of the three categories. It might involve simply the combination of certain words,
or the combination of some words together with the explicit absence of other words (positive and
negative word combinations). In order to provide some perspective, Table 1 provides examples of
tweets and how they are categorized. The words in the tweet used to identify them are underlined.
   In Table 1, the first tweet under the positive category is identified as positive because investors
use “higher high” to describe an uptrend in the price charts. In this example, using the individual
words to extract the opinion could be misleading because the word “risk” might be interpreted as
a negative word and the word “high” by itself is not enough to identify a positive opinion because
investors use the word combination “lower high” to describe a downtrend. The first tweet under
the neutral category is placed in this category because the words “might” and “sell” indicate lack
of a definitive decision. Finally, the first tweet under the negative category is classified as bearish
because the words “further” and “fall” indicate that the individual expects Euro to depreciate
further against the dollar. We should note that the tweet mentions the word “bullish” which is
a positive word. However, as mentioned earlier, we require the existence of certain words in the
absence of other words to place a tweet in a category. In this example, the tweet is not identified
as positive because a tweet should mention “bullish” and not mention “missing” to be placed in
the positive category. This tweet is another example that highlights the significance of using word
combinations instead of words to classify the opinionated tweets.



                                                  8
2.4        Separation by Number of Followers

We separate the opinionated tweets into those coming from individuals with at least 500 followers
from those that have fewer than 500 followers. The idea is that those with more followers may be
better informed investors. There are 4496 accounts with less than 500 followers and 2007 accounts
with more than 500 followers.11 Figure 1 shows the distribution of the number of followers,
separately for accounts with more and less than 500 followers. For those with less than 500
followers, a large number has fewer than 50 followers. Of those that have more than 500 followers,
725 accounts have between 500 and 1000 followers, while 1282 accounts have more than 1000
followers.
       When in Section 5 we confront the data to the theory developed in Section 3, we will see that
the evidence strongly bears out the suspicion that individuals with a lot of followers are more
informed. It should be noted that those with at least 500 followers are not famous people outside
of the financial world, like movie stars who happen to tweet about the Euro/dollar exchange rate.
Typical examples are brokers, technical analysts, financial commentators and people with research
websites. One would expect these individuals to be well informed. From hereon we will simply
refer to these two groups as informed and uninformed investors. The extent of the information
difference will be documented in Section 5.
       With this split, the daily average of opinionated tweets posted by informed and uninformed
investors is respectively 21 and 22, so that we have a similar number of tweets in both groups.
It may be the case that for example individuals with 1000 followers are even more informed than
those with 500 followers, but splitting the data into more than 2 groups based on followers has the
disadvantage of lowering the number of daily tweets per group. Figure 2 shows the distribution of
daily tweets for both groups. It varies a lot across days. The standard deviation of the number
of daily tweets is respectively 12.7 and 13.2 for the informed and uninformed. Since the average
number of daily tweets of both groups is about the same, and there are fewer accounts from
informed individuals, the average number of tweets per account during the sample is larger for
  11
       The total of these accounts is a bit larger than the 6236 mentioned above. This is because 267 individuals
switch between both groups during the sample. We categorize the tweets each day based on the number of followers
on that day.



                                                         9
informed than uninformed individuals, respectively 6.6 and 3.1.
   We will denote the numerical Twitter Sentiment during day t by individual i from the informed
group as T StI,i . Analogously, when the individual is from the uninformed group it is denoted as
T StU,i . Figure 3 shows the distribution of the three values (-1, 0 and 1) that individual Twitter
Sentiment of both groups takes across the entire sample. Especially for the informed group the
percentage of negative values is a bit larger than the percentage of positive values. This is because
the Euro depreciated by 21% during this particular sample.


2.5     Twitter Sentiment Index

For each of the two groups (informed and uninformed) we construct a daily Twitter Sentiment
Index by taking the simple average of the numerical Twitter Sentiment across individuals during
a day. We denote this as T StI and T StU for respectively informed and uninformed investors on day
t. So
                                                         j
                                                      nt
                                                   1 X
                                         T Stj   = j     T Stj,i                                  (1)
                                                  nt i=1
where j = I, U is the group and njt is the number of opinionated tweets on day t in group j. There
are no tweets during 2 days in the sample for the informed group and 3 days for the uninformed.
We set the index to 0 for those days. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the daily Twitter Sentiment
Index for both groups.


2.6     Predictability of Exchange Rate by Twitter Sentiment

Tables 2, 3 and 4 report what we can learn from data on T StI,i , T StU,i , T StI , T StU and st about
exchange rate predictability without any guidance from theory.
   Table 2 reports directional moments, which capture how well tweets predict the subsequent
direction of the exchange rate change. These moments are computed as follows. Consider a tweet
by agent i of group j on day t. We look at how well it can forecast the direction of the exchange
rate change over the next month, two months and three months. For example, st+40 − st is the
change in the exchange rate over the next two months as there are about 20 trading days in a
month. If T Stji = 1 and the subsequent exchange rate change is positive (negative), we assign

                                                    10
the tweet a +1 (-1). Similarly, if T Stji = −1 and the subsequent exchange rate change is positive
(negative), we assign the tweet a -1 (+1). So +1 will be assigned if the direction is consistent
with the Twitter Sentiment and -1 if the direction is inconsistent with the sentiment. A zero is
assigned if T Stji = 0, so that there is no directional opinion. We then take the average across all
the tweets in the sample. A positive number suggests that the direction was more often correct
than wrong, while a negative number suggests the opposite.
   In order to evaluate if there is any information content in the tweets, we need to compare to
what the moment would be if the agents guessed. To this end we conducted 1000 simulations
over 633 days. The simulations are constructed such that on average the fraction of tweets that
are zero corresponds to the average for each group, while on average the number of +1 tweets
corresponds to the number of -1 tweets. The subsequent exchange rate change is unrelated to
the number of +1 or -1 tweets as we consider the effect of guessing. In this case the mean of the
moment is obviously 0. The standard error of the mean across the 1000 simulations is 0.0068 and
does not depend on the horizon of the subsequent exchange rate change.
   Based on this, the moments for the informed group are highly significant. For the one month,
two month and three month subsequent exchange rate change the directional moment is respec-
tively 3.3, 7.6 and 4.0 standard errors away from zero. This is strong evidence that there is
valuable information content in the tweets of the informed group. The same cannot be said of the
uninformed group, where the moments are slightly negative.
   But directional moments themselves do not tell us if Twitter Sentiment is a good predictor of
the actual magnitude of subsequent exchange rate changes. This is important if we wish to use
Twitter Sentiment for trading purposes, where actual returns matter rather than the sign of the
return. To this end we regress the exchange rate change st+m − st on the Twitter Sentiment Index.
We do this again for one month, two month and three month horizons (m = 20, m = 40 and
m = 60), but also for a one-day horizon (m = 1). The one-day horizon is useful as we will report
Sharpe ratios from a strategy based on Twitter Sentiment that is based on daily returns. We regress
either on Twitter Sentiment T Stj at the start of the forecasting period or on Twitter Sentiment
on each of the last 5 days before the forecasting period (T Stj through T St−4
                                                                           j
                                                                               ). The results are
reported in Tables 3 and 4 for respectively the informed and uninformed groups. The regressions


                                                11
are based on overlapping data intervals with Newey-West standard errors in parenthesis.12 The
bottom of the table reports the p-value associated with the F-test of zero coefficients on all lags
of the Twitter Sentiment index.
      There is no evidence of predictability as the coefficients are insignificant. The only exception
is for the one-day horizon for uninformed agents when we use 5 days of Twitter Sentiment. But
in that case the significant coefficients have the wrong sign. This lack of predictability suggests
that the sample is too short to evaluate the ability of Twitter Sentiment to predict the subsequent
exchange rate change without imposing structure through a model. The fact that the directional
moments are significant for the informed group suggests that there is information content. But
profitable trade based on Twitter Sentiment requires predictability of not just the direction, but
also the magnitude of the exchange rate change.


2.7       Sharpe Ratio Trading Strategy Based on Twitter Sentiment

Table 5 reports the Sharpe ratio of a trading strategy based on Twitter Sentiment of both groups.
For group i we take a position of T Sti dollars in Euro denominated bonds and −T Sti dollars in dollar
denominated bonds. We therefore go long in Euros when Twitter Sentiment is positive (expected
Euro appreciation) and short in Euros when Twitter Sentiment is negative. It is important that
positions are proportional to Twitter Sentiment as a stronger Twitter Sentiment implies more
confidence that the exchange rate will go in a certain direction. The return from this strategy is

                                          T Sti (st+1 − st + i∗t − it )                                 (2)

Here it and i∗t are overnight dollar and Euro interest rates. We use overnight Libor rates for both,
obtained from the St. Louis Fed.13
      Table 5 shows that the Sharpe ratio is 1.09 for the informed group and -0.19 for the uninformed
group. These are annualized Sharpe ratios based on daily returns. We annualize by multiplying
by the square root of 250, the number of trading days in a year. The Sharpe ratio of 1.09 for
the informed group is attractive, but it has a large standard error of 0.6. The 95% confidence
 12
      Following Andrews (1991), we use m + 1 lags for the Newey-West standard errors.
 13
      The dollar overnight Libor rate is the series USDONTD156N. The Euro overnight Libor rate is the series
EURONTD156N.

                                                       12
interval is therefore very wide, ranging from -0.09 to 2.27. Based on the short data sample alone,
without using a model, we can therefore say very little about the merits of trading based on
Twitter Sentiment. This is consistent with the results we reported for exchange rate predictability
in Tables 3 and 4. For the uninformed group the 95% confidence interval is [-1.41,1.03]. While
the point estimate of -0.19 suggests that there is no information content in Twitter Sentiment of
the uninformed, with the wide confidence interval we cannot rule out that the true Sharpe ratio
is near 1. We clearly need more precision, which is the purpose of the model in the next section.


2.8        Data Moments

In Section 5 we will confront the model of Section 3 with a variety of data moments involving
T StI,i , T StU,i , T StI , T StU and st . These moments are reported in the first column of Table 7. The
first 3 moments relate to the Twitter Sentiment indices. The first and second moment are the
variance of T StI and T StU . As we will discuss in Section 4, in the model the average variance
of Twitter Sentiment is easier to compute than the average standard deviation. That is why we
use the variance in the data as well. The variance is a bit higher for informed individuals (0.098
versus 0.068). This is not surprising as new information leads to changes in expectations. Figure 4
illustrates this graphically. Average opinions in the uninformed group are more centered towards
the neutral 0, while the informed group shows a wider distribution. The third moment is the
correlation between the TS index of informed and uninformed agents, which is 0.44. This suggests
a significant common component in the average opinions of both groups.
       The next two moments are disagreement moments, which relate to the extent to which opinions
differ among individuals during a particular day. They are the average across the 633 days of the
cross sectional variance of T StI,i and T StU,i across the individuals in that group. We again focus
on the variance for easier comparison to the model. We do not include the few days for which
the number of tweets is 0 or 1.14 Unsurprisingly, the average difference in opinion is a bit larger
for uninformed individuals. This is also illustrated in Figure 5, which shows the distribution of
the daily cross sectional variance for both groups. The distribution of uninformed individuals is
  14
       There are 6 days during which the number of tweets is 0 or 1 for the informed group and 5 days for the
uninformed group.



                                                      13
clearly to the right of that distribution of informed individuals.
    The next eight moments capture the correlation between Twitter Sentiment and future ex-
change rate changes. We consider the correlation of the Twitter Sentiment index with the change
in the exchange rate over the next 1, 20, 40 and 60 trading days for both informed and uninformed
groups. The correlations are positive for the informed group, but negative for the uninformed
group. As we will see in the model, these moments can vary a lot across different 633-day sam-
ples even when there is economically significant predictability. These correlations by themselves
therefore only provide limited information.
    The next six moments are the directional moments described in Section 2.6 over 20, 40 and
60 days for the informed and uninformed groups. As discussed, these moments suggest significant
information content for the informed group.
    The next two moments are the contemporaneous correlation between the weekly Twitter Sen-
timent index and weekly changes in the exchange rate. The weekly Twitter Sentiment Index T Swj
is defined as the average of the daily Twitter Sentiment Index over five trading days in a week.
The correlation is 0.26 for the informed and -0.01 for the uninformed group.
    Finally, the last three moments are the standard deviation and autocorrelation of the daily
change in the exchange rate and the autocorrelation of the weekly change in exchange rate. The
standard deviation of the daily change in the exchange rate is in percent, so it is 0.57%=0.0057.
The daily and weekly autocorrelation are 0.003 and 0.008 respectively, reflecting the near random
walk aspect of the exchange rate.



3     Model Description
It should be emphasized from the start that the concept of a “tweet” does not exist within
the model that we are about to describe. Tweets in reality are just an expression of a belief
about the direction of the exchange rate by a subset of agents. Individuals have many sources
of information, including that from reading tweets by other people. In the end these beliefs still
differ among individuals, reflected in a dispersion of opinions expressed through tweets. In the
model the source of this dispersion is private signals, which can be thought of as related to different


                                                  14
research findings, focusing on different pieces of information or reading different newspaper articles
or different tweets. In the next section we will relate expectations of exchange rate changes that
exist in the model to directional beliefs expressed through tweets.
       The model used to shed light on the data is an extension of BvW. They develop a noisy
rational expectations exchange rate model in which all agents have private signals about future
fundamentals. We will extend the BvW model in only one dimension. In BvW all agents receive
different signals, but the quality of these signals is identical in that the variance of the signal errors
is equal across all agents. In the extension developed here we assume that there are two groups
of agents, which we refer to as informed and uninformed. They are modeled in the same way,
except that the informed agents have higher quality private signals. The variance of signal errors
is smaller for informed agents. We will be relatively brief in the description of the model as BvW
develop the micro foundations and provide further details.
       The model focuses on the demand for Foreign bonds. Let bI,i      U,i
                                                               F,t and bF,t be the demand for

Foreign bonds by informed and uninformed agent i. There is a continuum of such agents, with
i ∈ [0, n] for informed agents and i ∈ [n, 1] for uninformed agents. Since Foreign bonds are in zero
net supply, the market clearing condition is
                                    Z n           Z                  1
                                         I,i
                                        bF,t di +                        bU,i
                                                                          F,t di = 0                               (3)
                                                  0              n

       Portfolio demand by agents is

                                                    EtI,i st+1 − st + i∗t − it
                                           bI,i
                                            F,t   =               2
                                                                               − bI,i
                                                                                  t                                (4)
                                                               γσI
                                                      EtU,i st+1 − st + i∗t − it
                                           bU,i
                                            F,t =                                − bU,i
                                                                                    t                              (5)
                                                                 γσU2

Portfolio demand has two components. The first depends on the expected excess return on the
Foreign bonds, divided by the product of absolute risk aversion γ and the variance of the excess
return.15 st is the log exchange rate (Home currency per unit of Foreign currency), it and i∗t
are the Home and Foreign nominal interest rates. The variance of st+1 is respectively σI2 and σU2
for informed and uninformed agents. The computation of first and second moments of st+1 is
discussed below.
  15
       The effect of allowing for different rates of risk-aversion of the two groups is analogous to changing n.


                                                              15
       The second term in the portfolio is unrelated to expected returns. In BvW it represents a
hedge against non-asset income. In the literature it has alternatively been modeled as noise trade
or liquidity trade. What matters is their aggregate across agents:
                                         Z n         Z 1
                                              I,i
                                    bt =     bt di +     bU,i
                                                          t di                                      (6)
                                             0              n

for which we assume an AR process:

                                           bt = ρb bt−1 + εbt                                       (7)

where εbt ∼ N (0, σb2 ). bt represents the noise that is present in all noisy rational expectations mod-
els. In equilibrium the exchange rate will be affected by both shocks to bt and private information
about future fundamentals. By assuming that bt is unobservable (only its AR process is known),
the equilibrium exchange rate will not reveal the aggregate of private information in the market.
We also follow BvW by assuming that bj,i
                                     t (j = I, U ) contains no information about the average

bt .
       Standard money demand equations are assumed:

                                           mt = pt + yt − αit                                       (8)

                                           m∗t = p∗t + yt∗ − αi∗t                                   (9)

mt is the log money demand, which must equal the log of money supply. yt is log output. pt is the
log price level. The analogous variables for the Foreign country are denoted with a * superscript.
Using PPP (pt = st + p∗t ), subtracting these equations yields
                                                      1
                                         it − i∗t =     (st − ft )                                 (10)
                                                      α
where ft = (mt − m∗t ) − (yt − yt∗ ) is the traditional fundamental. Since the exchange rate is an
I(1) variable in the data, the fundamental is assumed to be I(1) as well. We assume

                                   ft − ft−1 = ρ(ft−1 − ft−2 ) + εft                               (11)

where εft ∼ N (0, σf2 ). The fundamental and its process are known to all agents. We will also write
the fundamental as ft = D(L)εft , where D(L) = ∞             i−1
                                                  P
                                                    i=1 di L     is an infinite order polynomial in the
lag operator L, with di = 1 + ρ + ... + ρi−1 .

                                                      16
                            Rn
       Denote ĒtI st+1 =    0
                                  EtI,i st+1 di/n as the average expectation across informed agents and anal-
ogously ĒtU st+1 for uninformed agents. Substituting (4), (5) and (10) into the market clearing
condition (3), we have
                                                                      1+α     1
                                 ω ĒtI st+1 + (1 − ω)ĒtU st+1 −         st + ft = γσ 2 bt                     (12)
                                                                       α      α
where
                                                                n/σI2
                                                 ω=                                                             (13)
                                                      (n/σI2 ) + ((1 − n)/σU2 )
                                                                   1
                                                 σ2 =                                                           (14)
                                                       (n/σI ) + ((1 − n)/σU2 )
                                                            2


Imposing the market clearing condition (12) allows us to solve for the equilibrium exchange rate.
       Finally, agents receive private signals about future values of the fundamental:

                                                     vtj,i = ft+T + v,j,i
                                                                     t                                          (15)

where v,j,i
       t     ∼ N (0, (σvj )2 ) for j = I, U . We assume that σvI < σvU , so that informed agents receive
more precise signals than uninformed agents. As usual in the noisy rational expectations literature,
the average of the signal errors is assumed to be zero across agents.
       (15) says that each period each agent receives a signal about the value of the fundamental T
periods later. This is equivalent to assuming that agents receive a signal about the growth rate
ft+T − ft of the fundamental over the next T periods. At time t agents will not just use their latest
signal vtj,i to forecast future fundamentals, but all signals from the last T periods. The signal at
time t − T + 1 remains informative about ft+1 .
       The equilibrium exchange rate is solved as follows. Start with the conjecture

                                                 st = A(L)εft+T + B(L)εbt                                       (16)
                    P∞                               P∞
where A(L) =          i=1   ai Li−1 and B(L) =          i=1 bi L
                                                                i−1
                                                                      are polynomials in the lag operator L. Then16

                                       Ētj st+1 = θ0 Ētj (ξt ) + A∗ (L)εft + B ∗ (L)εbt−T                     (17)

                                       σj2 = vartj (st+1 ) = a21 σf2 + b21 σb2 + θ0 vartj (ξt )θ                (18)
  16
       The innovations εft−s are known at t for s ≥ 0. The innovations εbt−T −s are known as well at time t for s ≥ 0
as they can be extracted from the equilibrium exchange rate at time t − T and earlier.

                                                               17
where θ0 = (a2 , a3 , ..., aT +1 , b2 , b3 , ..., bT +1 ), ξt0 = (εft+T , ..., εft+1 , εbt , ..., εbt−T +1 ), A∗ (L) = ∞              i−1
                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                        i=1 aT +i+1 L

and B ∗ (L) = ∞                    i−1
                                        . The conditional variance vartj (st+1 ) only has a superscript j = I, U
             P
                  i=1 bT +i+1 L

for the group. All agents within the same group have the same quality information and therefore
the same perceived uncertainty.
    The expectation and variance of unknown innovations ξt are computed using a signal extraction
problem. Agents have exchange rate signals st ,...,st−T +1 , which all depend on at least some of
the unknown innovations of the vector ξt . They also have the private signals vtj,i ,...,vt−T
                                                                                          j,i
                                                                                              +1 and

knowledge of the unconditional distribution of ξt . Solving the signal extraction problem (see BvW)
yields

                                                    Ētj (ξt ) = Mj H0 ξt                                                     (19)

                                                    vartj (ξt ) = P̃ − Mj H0 P̃                                               (20)

where Mj = P̃H[H0 P̃H + Rj ]−1 , Rj is a 2T by 2T matrix with (σvj )2 on the last T elements of
the diagonal and zeros otherwise, P̃ is the unconditional variance of ξt and
                                                                      
                                  a a ... aT b1 b2 ... bT
                                1 2                                   
                                0 a1 ... aT −1 0 b1 ... bT −1 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                           0
                                0 0 ... a1           0 0 ... b1 
                         H =                                         
                                                                                                                             (21)
                                d1 d2 ... dT         0 0 ...      0 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                0 d1 ... dT −1 0 0 ...            0 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 
                                                                      
                                   0 0 0        d1    0 0 ...      0
    Substituting (19) and (20) into (17) and (18) and the result into the market clearing condition
(12), we have
                                                1+α                      1
                      0
                    θ (ωMI + (1 − ω)MU ) H ξt −       A(L)εt+T + B(L)εt + D(L)εft
                                                      0     f          b
                                                 α                         α
                       ∗   f     ∗   b        2           2 2
                                                                    b
                    +A (L)εt + B (L)εt−T = γσ 1 + ρb L + ρb L + ... εt                                                        (22)

Equating coefficients on the various innovations on both sides yields analytical expressions for
aT +s and bT +s for s ≥ 1 and a set of 2T non-linear equations in the remaining parameters
(a1 , ..., aT , b1 , ..., bT ). The latter are solved numerically.

                                                                18
    Once the equilibrium exchange rate is computed, we can also compute the expectations of
future exchange rates by individual agents. In particular, we have

                                             Etj,i st+k = Ētj st+k + z0k Mj wtj,i                           (23)
                                                                                                  0
where zk = (ak+1 , ..., aT +k , bk+1 , ..., bT +k )0 , wtj,i = 0, ..., 0, v,j,i
                                                                           t     , ..., v,j,i
                                                                                         t−T +1        and
                                                       ∞
                                                       X                         ∞
                                                                                 X
                           Ētj st+k = z0k Ētj ξt +         aT +k+1+l εft−l +         bT +k+1+l εbt−T −l    (24)
                                                       l=0                       l=0

So the expectation of the future exchange rate st+k is equal to the average expectation of all agents
in that group (informed or uninformed) plus an idiosyncratic component z0k Mj wtj,i that depends
on the signal errors of that agent.



4      Empirical Methodology
In this section we discuss the approach we adopt in confronting the model to the data. We first
discuss how we compute Twitter Sentiment in the model. After that we discuss the computation
of moments in the model and the estimation of model parameters through the Simulated Method
of Moments.


4.1      Computing TS in the Theory

The tweets in the data express directional beliefs about the exchange rate without a specific
horizon. In connecting the theory to these data, there are two issues that we need to confront.
The first is how to think about the horizon of opinions expressed through the tweets. The second is
how to relate expected exchange rate changes by individual agents in the model to the directional
beliefs in the tweets that can take on the numeric values -1, 0 and 1.
    The opinions expressed through tweets do not specify the horizon over which the exchange
rate is expected to change. In most of the analysis we will assume that the horizon corresponds to
the period in the model over which agents have private information, which is T . Agents have no
information about fundamental and noise innovations more than T periods into the future other
than that their unconditional mean is zero. So an horizon longer than T makes little sense. In

                                                                 19
sensitivity analysis in Section 5.4 we will also consider results when opinions expressed through
tweets are based on expected exchange rate changes over an horizon shorter than T .
   Regarding the second issue, the model provides no guidance in how to translate expectations
of st+T − st into the numeric values -1, 0 and 1. But it is natural that sufficiently large posi-
tive (negative) expectations of st+T − st are interpreted as a positive (negative) sentiment, while
intermediate expectations are neutral. We will therefore use the following measure of Twitter
Sentiment in the theory. For agent i from group j (j = I, U ), we set
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    1   if Etj,i (st+T − st ) > cj
                                   
                         T Stj,i =   0   if −cj ≤ Etj,i (st+T − st ) ≤ cj                        (25)
                                   
                                   
                                    −1 if E j,i (s
                                   
                                                        − s ) < −cj
                                                   t        t+T   t


We therefore assign an opinion of +1 if the expected change in the exchange rate is above the
cutoff cj , so that agents are sufficiently confident that the Euro will appreciate. Analogously, we
assign a -1 if the expected change is below −cj and 0 otherwise.
   What remains is to identify the proper value for the cutoff cj . Let π j be the fraction of all
observations in the data for group j (j = I, U ) for which T Stj,i is 0. We equate this to the
unconditional probability of drawing a 0 in the model:

                               P rob −cj ≤ Etj,i (st+T − st ) ≤ cj = π j
                                                                  
                                                                                                 (26)

Since
                            Etj,i (st+T − st ) = Ētj (st+T − st ) + z0T Mj wtj,i                (27)

we can compute the unconditional variance of this expectation as

               σE2 (j) = var(Etj,i (st+T − st )) = var(Ētj (st+T − st )) + z0T Mj Rj M0j zT     (28)

where var(Ētj (st+T − st )) is computed by first writing the average expectation as a linear function
of all εt+T −s and εbt−s with s ≥ 0 and then taking the unconditional variance.
   Using that Etj,i (st+T − st )/σE (j) has a N (0, 1) unconditional distribution, and that
                                                                       !
                                        j      j,i                  j
                                      c       E (st+T − st )      c
                          P rob −          ≤ t               ≤           = πj                    (29)
                                    σE (j)         σE (j)       σE (j)


                                                       20
it must be that
                                                        −cj             1 − πj
                                                               
                                               Φ                    =                                          (30)
                                                       σE (j)             2
where Φ(.) is the cumulative normal distribution. Therefore
                                                      1 − πj
                                                            
                                   j             −1
                                  c = −σE (j)Φ                                                                 (31)
                                                        2
For informed and uninformed agents, in the data we have respectively π I = 0.328 and π U = 0.288
(see also Figure 3).17
       For what follows, it is useful to characterize the distribution of T Stj,i conditional on the average
expectation, which we will denote xjt = Ētj (st+T − st ). Then Etj,i (st+T − st ) = xjt + z0T Mj wtj,i . Let
σwj be the standard deviation of the second term, associated with signal errors. We can write

                                              T Stj,i = T Stj (xjt ) + j,i
                                                                        t                                      (32)

Here T Stj (xjt ) is the mean value of T Stj,i conditional on xjt . This is equal to the average Twitter
Sentiment if there were an infinite number of tweets that day. We have
                                                         !              !
                                                j      j        j     j
                                              c   −  x        −c  − x
                         T Stj (xjt ) = 1 − Φ      j
                                                       t
                                                           −Φ     j
                                                                      t
                                                                                                               (33)
                                                  σw             σw

where Φ(.) is the cumulative normal distribution. It follows that
                                                                 j j
                                j   j                              c −xt
                       1 − T St  (xt )  with probability 1 − Φ       j
                                                             j jσ
                    
                                                                     w
                    
                                                              −c −xt
               j,i
                t =    −1 − T Stj (xjt ) with probability Φ      j                                             (34)
                    
                                                            j σwj       j j
                     −T S j (xj )
                                                             c −xt        −c −xt
                                      t  with probability Φ
                                          t                            −Φ         j
                                                                                 σw        j
                                                                                          σw

We now know the distribution of Twitter Sentiment of individual agents conditional on xjt . Below
we will use in particular the variance var(j,i                 j
                                            t ) conditional on xt .




4.2        Computing Model Moments

In order to estimate the model parameters, discussed in Section 4.3, we need to compute the
model moments. We focus on the 24 moments listed in Table 7. In principle the model moments
  17
       While it is possible that these percentages are affected by the Euro depreciation over the sample, the values
   j
of π remain virtually identical for the last 270 days of the sample during which the exchange rate remains almost
unchanged.

                                                            21
correspond to the average across an infinite number of simulations of the model over the 633 days
for which we have data. In practice model moments are usually computed as the average over a
finite number of simulations, like 1000. When considering different sets of model parameters, the
model moments are computed using the same set of shocks for the simulations. In our case the
shocks are εft , εbt and v,j,i
                          t     . However, 1000 simulations, or any other reasonably finite number, cre-
ates too much inaccuracy in the context of our application. The reason is that Twitter Sentiment
is a discrete variable, so that for given set of shocks a tiny change in model parameters can lead
to a discrete change in T Stj,i for some days and agents, which leads to a discrete change in various
moments. Such discontinuities create problems in estimating the parameters as moments are not
smooth functions of parameters.
   We resolve this as follows. Realizations of the signal error shocks εv,j,i
                                                                        t     translate into realizations
of j,i
    t , whose distribution is given by (34). We can then write a specific sample moment as

m = m(e, x), where e consists of the realizations of j,i
                                                      t and x consists of the realizations of the

shocks εft and εbt . We need to compute the mean of m(e, x) across all possible outcomes for e and
x. We do so by first computing a theoretical expression for the mean across all possible outcomes
for e. This theoretical expression is for one particular set of values of x. We next simulate the
model 1000 times by drawing the shocks εft and εbt in order to approximate the mean of the moment
across all values of x.
   As an illustration, consider the sample variance of Twitter sentiment for group j. We can write
                                                                 j
                                                              nt
                                          j      j   j     1 X
                                       T St = T St (xt ) + j     j,i
                                                                  t                                    (35)
                                                          nt i=1

Let S stand for the number of days in the sample (here 633) as well as the set of days in the
sample. Then the sample variance is equal to
                                                  2                                          2
                                          njt                                           njt
          1     X
                      T Stj (xjt ) + 1
                                         X
                                                    − S 1
                                                                X
                                                                    T Stj (xjt ) + 1
                                                                                       X
                                       j      j,i
                                               t                                     j      j,i
                                                                                             t
                                                                                                 
         S−1    t∈S
                                      nt i=1          S − 1   S t∈S
                                                                                    nt i=1


In this case x consists of the values of xjt in the sample, which only depend on the fundamental
and noise shocks. We first compute the theoretical mean of this expression for given values of xjt



                                                      22
over the distribution of the j,i
                              t given in (34). Doing so gives

                                                            X 1
                                      var(T Stj (xjt )) +                j,i
                                                                  j var(t )                     (36)
                                                            t∈S
                                                                Snt

Here the first variance is the sample variance of T Stj (xjt ), while var(j,i
                                                                           t ) is computed from the

distribution (34) for given xjt . We then finally take the mean across realizations of xjt across 1000
simulations of the model. When simulating the model over 633 days, we always assume that the
number of tweets each day, njt , corresponds exactly to that in the data for that day.
   As another illustration, disagreement is measured as the average cross-sectional variance of
Twitter Sentiment across the days in the sample, which is equal to
                                                                   2 
                                  j        njt                njt
                        1 X nt  1 X j,i 2  1 X j,i  
                                                   −             t                             (37)
                        S t∈S njt − 1 njt i=1 t          njt i=1
                                                                       


The mean across the distribution of j,i
                                     t is

                                                 1X
                                                       var(j,i
                                                            t )                                  (38)
                                                 S t∈S

where the variance is again computed from (34) as a function of xjt . We finally take the mean
across 1000 simulations of the model that lead to different values of xjt .
   As a final illustration consider the directional moments based on a subsequent change in the
exchange rate over the next m days. The sample moment is equal to
                                                                j
                                                         nt
                                                  1     XX
                                             P        j             uj,i
                                                                     t                           (39)
                                                 t∈S nt t∈S i=1

where                             
                                  
                                  
                                    1 if sign(T Stj,i ) = sign(st+m − st )
                                  
                         uj,i
                          t     =   −1 if sign(T Stj,i ) = −sign(st+m − st )                     (40)
                                  
                                  
                                   0 if T S ji = 0
                                  
                                             t

The theoretical mean of the sample moment across realizations of j,i
                                                                  t is

                                       1     X
                                  P      j       njt T Stj (xjt )sign(st+m − st )                (41)
                                    t∈S nt t∈S



                                                        23
We again take the average across x through 1000 simulations. Note that the exchange rate change
is part of x as it depends on the shocks εft and εbt .
       In the Appendix we illustrate this approach for the remaining moments. We double check that
the model moments obtained this way are the same as obtained by simulating across all shocks,
including the εv,ji
               t . We have done this for 100,000 simulations for a particular parameterization.

While it is possible to do this for one set of parameters, it is extremely time-consuming (it takes 8
hours) and therefore runs into computational constraints when estimating parameters. In addition,
even for such a large number of simulations the moments are still not completely smooth functions
of the parameters when simulating across all shocks, including the εv,ji
                                                                    t .




4.3        Estimation of Model Parameters

We estimate the model using the Simulated Method of Moments, based on the 24 moments in
Table 7. The parameters are chosen in order to minimize

                                                    0
                                  mdata − mmodel (ν) Σ−1 mdata − mmodel (ν)
                                                                           
                                                                                                                   (42)

Here mdata is the vector of 24 data moments and mmodel (ν) are the corresponding moments in the
model. The latter are a function of the vector ν of model parameters and computed as described
in Section 4.2. Σ−1 is a weighting matrix. While this can in principle be any matrix, parameter
estimates are efficient when Σ corresponds to the variance of the vector of moments. There are
different ways this can be approximated. We compute the variance of the moments based on
1000 simulations of the model.18 Following many others, we only use the diagonal elements of the
weighting matrix as the full matrix can lead to finite sample bias (e.g. Altonji and Segal (1996)).
The objective function is therefore
                                            24                         2
                                            X    mdata (i) − mmodel (i)
                                                                                                                   (43)
                                            i=1
                                                            Σ0.5
                                                             ii

  18
       For this purpose we draw all shocks εft , εbt and v,j,i
                                                          t     over 1000 simulations. We obtain parameter estimates for
a given weighting matrix, then use these parameter estimates to compute a new weighting matrix. We iterate a
couple of times this way until the results no longer change.




                                                            24
This is equal to the sum of the of the squared t-values of all 24 moments.19 Σ0.5
                                                                              ii is the standard

deviation of moment i across simulations of the model.
       The variance covariance matrix of parameter estimates is given by
                                   "         0                #−1
                                      ∂mmodel           ∂mmodel
                                                      
                                 1                 −1
                                                 Σ                                                           (44)
                                S        ∂ν               ∂ν

where S is the sample length and the derivatives ∂mmodel /∂ν are evaluated at the estimated
parameter vector ν̂.
       There is one parameter that we set without estimation, which is the interest elasticity of money
demand α. As shown in BvW, we can write the exchange rate as the present discounted value of
current and future fundamentals f and noise b. The discount rate in this present value equation
is α/(1 + α). Engel and West (2005) report a variety of estimates of this discount rate, which are
close to 0.98 for quarterly data. We therefore set α = 2969 to generate a 0.98 quarterly discount
rate: (2969/2970)60 = 0.98.
       The other parameters of the model are σvI , σvU , σb , ρ, ρb , n, γ, σf and T . We only estimate the
first 6 of these parameters. Some comments are therefore in order about γ, σf and T . From (12) it
can be seen that γ enters the model multiplied by bt . As a result of this we can only estimate γσb .
We therefore normalize γ = 1 and estimate σb . If instead one wishes to set γ = 10 the reported
estimate for σb below simply needs to be divided by 10. We set σf by exploiting a scaling feature
of the model. If we multiply σf , σvI and σvU by a factor q, while dividing σb by q, the only effect is
to scale up the standard deviation of the exchange rate by a factor q. None of the other moments
in the model change. We can therefore choose an arbitrary σf and estimate the other parameters
based on moments other than the standard deviation of the exchange rate. Afterwards we scale
σf , σvI , σvU and σb to match the standard deviation of the daily change in the exchange rate.
       The last parameter, T , is different from the others in that it is discrete. We have considered
T = 20, T = 40 and T = 60. It is hard to compare them based on the value of the objective
function as in each case the estimated weighting matrix is different. We set T = 40 as the
benchmark, but will report results for T = 20 and T = 60 as well in sensitivity analysis. The key
  19
       Since the variance of the moments depends on the parameters themselves, we iterate a couple of times on the
optimal weighting matrix and the estimated parameters.


                                                         25
results do not depend on which of these values of T we choose. We set T = 40 as it leads to the
closest match with the predictive correlations in the data (in terms of average absolute difference,
average squared difference, average t-value as well as average squared t-value).



5     Results
We first discuss the estimated parameters. After that we discuss the fit of the model in terms of the
moments and examine the role that the moments play for the estimation of key model parameters.
We then turn to our ultimate objective, the implications for predictability and Sharpe ratios. We
finally perform some robustness analysis.


5.1    Parameter Estimates

Table 6 reports parameter estimates. The standard errors are generally relatively small, so that
the data is very informative about the values of our parameters. The standard error is not reported
for σf as it is simply scaled to match the standard deviation of the change in the exchange rate
(see Section 4.3).
    The important parameters σvI and σvU relate to the quality of the signals of the informed and
uninformed. The two key findings are:

Result 1 The informed group has higher quality signals than the uninformed group.

Result 2 The uninformed group has significant information as well.

    Result 1 says that σvI < σvU . We can reject σvI = σvU with a p-value of 0.001. One would
have expected that the informed have higher quality signals based on the directional moments and
predictive correlations. But as we will see, other data moments are also consistent with this higher
information quality of the informed. Result 2 is based on the finding that σvU = 0.1. If they had no
private information, σvU would be infinity or a very large number. While the negative directional
moments for the uninformed suggest that they have no information at all, other aspects of the
data strongly suggest that they do carry information.


                                                 26
   A final observation we can make from Table 6 is that the estimate of n is very close to 1, with
a standard error of 0.022. This suggest that a large fraction of the wealth is managed by what
we call informed traders. Agents with few followers that express opinions through Twitter do not
appear to play a big role in the foreign exchange market according to these estimates. However,
this is a conclusion that is not robust and not critical to the results. For example, in sensitivity
analysis we consider horizons for the tweets that are smaller than T , wh9ich generates very similar
results for Sharpe ratios but lower values of n of about 0.8. This is discussed in Section 5.4.


5.2    Moments

Table 7 reports all 24 data moments in the first column and compares them to the corresponding
average model moments based on the 1000 simulations. The “Model” column reports average
model moments. The next column reports the standard deviations of the moments across 1000
simulations. The “Cost” reported in the last column is the contribution of each moment to the
objective function. For moment i this is
                                                                  2
                                         mdata (i) − mmodel (i)
                                     
                                                                                                  (45)
                                                  Σ0.5
                                                    ii

It is the squared t-value of the moment. The sum of these “costs” across the moments is equal to
the value of the objective (42), which is shown at the bottom of the table. When the difference
between the data and model moments is within two standard deviations of the moment, the cost is
less than 4. If the cost is less than 1, the model moment deviates less than one standard deviation
from the data.
   The model matches various features of the data well: the variance of Twitter Sentiment is higher
for the informed than the uninformed, there is a modestly positive correlation between Twitter
Sentiment of both groups, disagreement is larger among the uninformed, predictive correlations
and directional moments are higher for the informed and the exchange rate is close to a random
walk. One point of weakness is that the weekly contemporaneous correlation between Twitter
Sentiment and the exchange rate change is higher for the informed in the data, while it is only
barely higher in the model.
   Overall the model cannot be rejected by the data. The value of the objective function is

                                                   27
16.08. It has a χ2 distribution with 17 degrees of freedom (number of moments minus number of
estimated parameters). Under the null hypothesis that the model is correct, the probability that
the objective function is at least 16.08 is 52%, so the null cannot be rejected.
       We would like to know what role various moments play in Results 1 and 2. Based on the
directional moments and predictive correlations alone, without the use of a model, we would
have expected that the uninformed group has no information. After all, the uninformed get the
direction of the exchange rate change more often wrong than correct. However, the standard
deviations of the directional moments in Table 7 are very large. It is therefore quite possible
that the true directional moments are significantly positive for the uninformed and they have
substantial information.
       One way to see how the moments affect the estimated parameters is to see what happens when
they are removed. The directional moments have little effect on the parameters. Removing them
leaves parameter estimates virtually unchanged. Table 8 reports the results when the predictive
correlations are removed from the estimation. Their values in the model are reported, but there
are no entries under the columns for the standard deviation and the “Cost” as these moments
do not enter the objective function that we minimize. Even without these moments we see that
Results 1 and 2 still hold. We also see that the predictive correlations now become too high
relative to what we see in the data. This implies that the predictive correlations, when used in
the benchmark estimation, actually reduce the ability of agents to predict future exchange rates.
In other words, the strongest evidence of information content in Twitter Sentiment comes from
moments other than the predictive correlations and directional moments. Without a model it
would be impossible to exploit the information in these moments.
       Figure 6 sheds light on the role that some of these other moments play. It shows the variance of
Twitter Sentiment, disagreement and the correlation between Twitter Sentiment of the informed
and uninformed, all as a function of σvU .20 In doing so we keep all other parameters equal to their
estimated values reported in Table 6. It should be kept in mind that the estimated value of σvU is
  20
       For the purpose of Figure 6 we set π I = π U = 0.3 and assume a constant number of daily tweets that is equal
for both groups. On average this is close to the data. In that case the only difference between the informed and
uninformed is associated with the difference between σvU and σvI .




                                                          28
0.1 and the estimated value of σvI is 0.036.
   It is useful to consider the first and second charts of Figure 6 simultaneously as they are
related. The way that we set the cutoff cj , discussed in Section 4.1, implies that the unconditional
distribution of individual Twitter Sentiment T Stj,i is always close to that the data. Using (32) and
(35) we have                                                           
                                                               njt
                                                            1 X
                                  T Stj,i   = T Stj + ji
                                                        t − j      j,m
                                                                    t
                                                                                                       (46)
                                                           nt m=1

As we hold constant the variance of individual Twitter Sentiment, the variance of average Twitter
Sentiment T Stj falls (rises) when the variance of the last term rises (falls). The last term captures
the idiosyncratic component of Twitter Sentiment. When its variance rises, agents disagree more.
There is therefore a close relationship between the variance of the Twitter Sentiment index T Stj
and disagreement. We indeed see in the first two charts of Figure 6 that the variance of Twitter
Sentiment and disagreement of the uninformed move in opposite directions as we change σvU .
   Focusing on disagreement, we can see that only for an intermediate range of values of σvU
between 0.036(= σvI ) and 0.18 is disagreement larger among the uninformed than the informed.
Since in the data disagreement is larger among the uninformed, this explains why the estimate of
σvU is larger than σvI , but not too large. Intuitively, if σvU < σvI , the private signals of the uninformed
would have very little noise, which leads to the counterfactual that disagreement is less among the
uninformed. At the other extreme, if σvU were very large, the uninformed would give little weight
to their poor signals. In the extreme where σvU = ∞, they only pay attention to public signals.
Then there is no disagreement at all, again counterfactual. Only in the intermediate range for
σvU is disagreement higher for the uninformed. In that case their signals still contain significant
information, so that the agents pay attention to them, but since the signals are noisier than for
the informed it causes agents to disagree more than the informed as we see in the data.
   The last chart of Figure 6 shows that the correlation between Twitter Sentiment of the informed
and uninformed drops uniformly as σvU rises and σvU > σvI . As the uninformed have less and less
information about future fundamentals, while the information quality of the informed does not
change, the expectations of the uninformed will deviate more from those of the informed. This
causes a drop in the correlation. This again explains why the uninformed cannot have very poor


                                                      29
signals. It would lead to a correlation between Twitter Sentiment of both groups that is too low
relative to the data.


5.3        Predictability and Sharpe Ratios

We can now turn to the key question of the paper. Is Twitter Sentiment a useful piece of informa-
tion for predictability and trading purposes? As we discussed in Section 2.7, the Sharpe ratio of
a strategy based on Twitter Sentiment leaves inconclusive results based on the limited 633 days
of our sample. The 95 percent confidence interval is [-0.09,2.27] for the informed and [-1.41,1.03]
for the uninformed. We would need a much longer sample, which we do not have. That is why
we have used a model to obtain more precision.
       In the model we compute the Sharpe ratio in the same way as in the data, as described in
Section 2.7. The difference of course is that we are not constrained in the model in terms of sample
length. We will therefore compute the Sharpe ratio by simulating the model over 200 years (50,000
trading days).21 However, there remains uncertainty about the precise level of the Sharpe ratio as
there is uncertainty about the exact model parameters (which in turn is associated with the short
data sample). We therefore take 1000 draws from the distribution of the estimated parameters
and for each draw compute the Sharpe ratio by simulating the model over 200 years. The findings
are reported in Table 9 and Figure 7.
       Table 9 shows that the Sharpe ratio for the informed is now on average 1.68, with a 95 percent
confidence interval of [1.59,1.78]. The Sharpe ratio is measured with great precision as the model
parameters have relatively small standard errors. By taking a stand on the model we have therefore
significantly reduced the uncertainty about the level of the Sharpe ratio. Moreover, a Sharpe ratio
in the range [1.59,1.78] is very high by any reasonable standard.
       We can compare to Sharpe ratios for the popular currency carry trade strategy based on
interest differentials. Burnside et.al (2010) report an average annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.44 for 20
currencies against the dollar based on a carry trade strategy. This is based on data from February
1976 to July 2009. When using an equally weighted strategy that uses all 20 currencies, they find
  21
       In doing so we assume that for both groups the number of tweets each day is drawn from the distribution of
tweets per day from our 633 day sample.



                                                        30
a Sharpe ratio of 0.91. Since these are annualized Sharpe ratios based on monthly returns, for
comparison we have computed the Sharpe ratio based on Twitter Sentiment for monthly returns
as well. The strategy remains the same, but the returns are accumulated over one month (20
trading days). We do not report the results as the annualized Sharpe ratios based on monthly
returns are virtually identical to those based on daily returns in Table 9. These Sharpe ratios
clearly compare very favorably to the popular carry trade.
   For the uninformed the annualized Sharpe ratio for daily returns has a 95 percent confidence
interval of [0.64,0.90]. Results are again similar for monthly returns. Figure 7 shows the distribu-
tion of the Sharpe ratios for both the informed and uninformed. While as expected the Sharpe
ratio for the uninformed is well below that for the informed, a mean Sharpe ratio of 0.77 for the
uninformed is not bad, particularly in comparison to carry trade Sharpe ratios. As discussed in
Section 5.2, while the directional moments and predictive correlations suggest that the uninformed
have little information, several other moments strongly suggest that they do have good quality
signals.
   Figure 8 illustrates why a 633 day sample of data, without any model guidance, will tell us little
about the Sharpe ratio. It reports the distribution of the Sharpe ratio for both the informed and
uninformed based on 1000 simulations of the model over 633 days, using the estimated parameters.
The range of Sharpe ratios from these simulations is very wide for both groups of investors. This
gets back to the key point that one either needs a much longer sample than we have or use a
model to leverage the small sample and obtain more precision.
   Moving on to predictability, Table 10 reports the R2 from predictability regressions. We regress
st+m −st on T Stj for m = 1, 20, 40, 60 for both informed and uninformed. The reported R2 numbers
are based on simulating the model over 100,000 days based on the estimated parameters. They
therefore measure true predictability, not a random small sample relationship. For the informed
the R2 is largest for the one month (20 day) horizon, but even then it is only 0.0144. For the
uninformed the highest R2 is only 0.0022. Such limited predictability is a result of the near-random




                                                 31
walk behavior of exchange rates, but it is sufficient to achieve strong Sharpe ratios.22
       We can also bring the predictability results in Tables 3 and 4 for the data into perspective
with the model. Figure 9 reports the distribution of the t-statistic of regressions of st+m − st on
T Stj , with m = 1 in the upper chart, m = 20 in the middle chart and m = 40 in the bottom chart.
These distributions are based on 1000 simulations of the model over 633 days, using the estimated
parameters. Figure 9 shows that the probability that the t-stat is less than 2 is in all cases very
high. Even though the agents have high quality information, as we know from the Sharpe ratios,
the sample is too short to expect statistically significant predictability. This emphasizes once again
that data regressions with such a short sample are not sufficient to learn about the information
content form Twitter Sentiment.


5.4        Robustness Checks

Table 11 reports results from some robustness checks. It only reports estimates of the most critical
parameters, σvI and σvU and Sharpe ratios for both groups of agents, together with standard errors.23
       We have assumed that the horizon of the agents implicit in Twitter Sentiment corresponds
to the horizon T in the model over which agents have private signals. This is the horizon over
which expected changes in exchange rates are computed in the model in order to compute Twitter
Sentiment. In the three rows below the benchmark, we keep T = 40, but lower the horizon k
implicit in Twitter Sentiment to three values less than 40 (10, 20 and 30). It remains the case
that the information quality of the informed agents is well above that of the uninformed. Even
more importantly, the Sharpe ratio results remain similar. Sharpe ratios are high and precisely
measured with a low standard error. This is the case even though n is now well below that under
the benchmark, respectively 0.80 and 0.82 for k = 10 and k = 20, suggesting that n near 1 is not
  22
       When we compute the R2 by simulating the model 1000 times over 633 days, the result is very similar when
m = 1, but we obtain a higher average R2 of respectively 0.0274, 0.0285 and 0.0305 when m = 20, 40, 60. These
are for the informed. These higher R2 numbers are a result of upward bias of the R2 in small samples.
  23
     To compute the Sharpe ratio and its standard error we take 100 draws from the distribution of the estimated
parameters, for each draw simulating the model over 200 years. For the benchmark Sharpe ratio results reported
in Table 9 we took 1000 draws from the distribution of parameters. We limited it to 100 here for computational
reasons as the results are virtually the same with 100 draws as with 1000 draws.



                                                       32
critical to the results.
       The next two rows report results for T = 20 and T = 60. The standard deviation of signal
errors drops when T = 20 and rises when T = 60. But this is because there are fewer signals when
T = 20 (agents form expectations based on 20 private signals) and more signals when T = 60. So
it does not represent an overall change in the quality of private information and it remains the
case that the informed have better quality signals. Again the Sharpe ratio results remain very
similar.
       Finally, in the last two rows we report results when we remove days where the number of tweets
is less than 5 and less than 10. Such days may not be very informative because of the low number
of tweets. For the informed (uninformed) this reduces the number of days from 633 to 616(623)
with at least 5 tweets and 561(554) with at least 10 tweets.24 We find that this has very little
effect on our estimates of σvj and Sharpe ratios.25



6        Conclusion
Private information is by its nature unobservable. However, with the advent of social media many
traders openly express their individual views about future asset prices. This opens up the question
what can be learned from these private opinions. In this paper we have used opinionated tweets
about the Euro/dollar exchange rate to illustrate how information can be extracted from social
media. We have developed a detailed lexicon used by FX traders to translate verbal tweets into
opinions that are ranked positive, negative and neutral. Our approach is methodologically different
from a related literature that has used social media and the internet to predict future stock price
changes. We have aimed to learn from data on Twitter Sentiment and exchange rates through
the lens of a model with a precise information structure. This is necessary as in the absence of a
model the sample is too short to draw conclusions about predictability and Sharpe ratios.
  24
       In order to compute the weekly contemporaneous correlations we only use weeks for which there are tweets
each day of the week. For the informed (uninformed) this reduces the number of weeks from 127 to 115 (120) with
at least 5 tweets and 77 (74) with at least 10 tweets.
  25
     The estimate for n drops to 0.89 with at least 10 tweets, again suggesting that the benchmark value of n near
1 is not critical to the results.



                                                       33
   The information structure in the model we have used is rich enough to encompass many
aspects. There is dispersed heterogeneous information. There are two groups of agents that have
different information quality. The horizon over which agents have information is specified. There
are unobserved noise shocks as well as observed fundamentals. The parameters of this information
structure are mapped into a wide range of moments involving Twitter Sentiment and the exchange
rate, allowing us to estimate them with great precision.
   The model does a good job in matching the moments in the data and the null that the model is
correct cannot be rejected. Estimation provides parameter estimates with small standard errors,
which translates into precise estimates of the Sharpe ratio from a trading strategy based on Twitter
Sentiment. The large Sharpe ratios that we have reported suggest that there are significant gains
from trading strategies based on Twitter Sentiment. The methodology developed here can easily
be applied to other currencies or portfolios of currencies, as well as other financial markets such
as the stock market.




                                                34
Appendix: Computation of Moments
     As discussed in Section 4.2, we compute the model moments by first taking the theoretical
mean of the moments across realizations of ji                                      f      b
                                            t for given realizations of the shocks εt and εt , and

then taking the average across the latter shocks through 1000 simulations of the model. In Section
4.2 we illustrate how to compute the theoretical mean across realizations of ji
                                                                              t for the variance

of Twitter Sentiment, the cross-sectional disagreement of Twitter Sentiment and the directional
moments. Here we consider the remaining moments: the correlation between Twitter Sentiment of
the informed and uninformed and the moments involving correlations between Twitter Sentiment
and exchange rate changes.
     First a general comment is in order about all correlation moments. In principle we should first
write down an expression for the sample correlation and then take the mean over realizations of
ji                                                                                 ji
 t . However, the resulting expression is a complicated non-linear function of the t for which we

cannot compute the theoretical mean. We therefore proceed slightly differently. We first compute
the mean over realizations of ji
                               t for the covariance and the variance of both variables. We then use

this result to compute the correlation (covariance divided by product of the standard deviations).
It turns out that this delivers virtually identical results. We have verified this by numerically
computing the correlation both ways for given realizations of εft and εbt . In addition, we have
compared the results based on 100,000 simulations of all the shocks over 633 days (εbt , εft , v,ji
                                                                                                t ),

computing the correlation as the average across the simulations, to the moments obtained with
our approach. The results are again virtually identical. The reason it makes little difference is that
across different draws for the ji
                                t across simulations, the variance of variables entering correlations

changes very little.
     In what follows we will use that for two variables xt and yt , we can write the sample covariance
as
                              1 X                          1X               1      X
              cov(x, y) =             (xt − x̄)(yt − ȳ) =       xt yt −               xt y t    (47)
                            S − 1 t∈S                      S t∈S         S(S − 1) t 6=t 1 2
                                                                                   1   2

Here x̄ and ȳ are the sample means of x and y.
     Next apply this to the covariance between T StI and T StU . Let S be the number of days, as




                                                    35
well as set of days, for which we have data on both variables. The sample covariance is
                                                                                    
                                             nIt                             nU
                                                                              t
                 1  X
                        T StI (xIt ) + 1
                                            X
                                                       T StU (xUt ) + 1
                                                                            X
                                                  Ii
                                                   t                              U i 
                 S t∈S                   I
                                        nt i=1                         nUt i=1 t
                                                           nIt                              nU
                                                                                                  
                                                              1                              t2
                        1     X
                                     T StI (xIt ) + 1
                                                           X
                                                                     T StU (xUt ) + 1
                                                                                            X
                 −                                              Ii
                                                                 t1                             U i    (48)
                   S(S − 1) t 6=t          1     1      I
                                                       nt1 i=1             2     2
                                                                                        nt2 i=1 t2
                                                                                         U
                                 1   2


Taking the mean across the ji
                            t gives

                      1X                                  1      X
                            T StI (xIt )T StU (xUt ) −                T StI1 (xIt1 )T StU2 (xUt2 )       (49)
                      S t∈S                            S(S − 1) t 6=t
                                                                     1   2


This is simply the sample covariance between T StI (xIt ) and T StU (xUt ). We divide this by the
product of the square root of the variance of T StI and T StU , whose computation is discussed in
Section 4.2. This results in an expression that depends on the values of xIt and xUt over the sample,
for which we take the average across 1000 simulations.
    Next consider predictive correlations. These are the correlation between the Twitter Sentiment
Index and the change in the exchange rate over the next m days. We first consider the sample
covariance between T Stj and st+m − st . Since st+m − st only depends on realizations of εft and εbt ,
the average of this sample covariance across realizations of ji
                                                              t is equal to the sample covariance

between T Stj (xjt ) and st+m − st . This is because T Stj (xjt ) is the mean of T Stj across realizations of
ji                                                  j   j
 t . We then divide the sample covariance between T St (xt ) and st+m − st by the product of the

square root of the variance of T Stj and st+m − st . We discussed the variance of T Stj in Section
4.2. The variance of st+m − st only depends on realizations of εft and εbt . We finally again take the
mean of the resulting correlation across values of εft and εbt over 1000 simulations.
    The final moments involving the relationship between Twitter Sentiment and exchange rate
changes are the contemporaneous weekly correlation between Twitter Sentiment and the exchange
rate change. We only consider non-overlapping weeks. Let w be a particular week (5 days in the
model). The average Twitter Sentiment in week w is
                                                   5
                                                1X
                                                     T Sj                                                (50)
                                                5 m=1 5∗(w−1)+m

The exchange rate change in the corresponding week is s5w -s5w−4 . Since again the exchange rate
change does not depend on the ji
                               t , the mean of the sample covariance is equal to the sample


                                                          36
covariance of
                                      5
                                   1X       j
                                         T S5∗(w−1)+m (xj5∗(w−1)+m )                       (51)
                                   5 m=1
and s5w -s5w−4 .
   In order to compute the correlation we also need the variance of (50). This can be computed
analogous to the variance of T Stj . After writing down the sample variance and taking the mean
across the distribution of the ji
                                t , we get

                              5
                                                           !
                           1X       j           j
                                                              X 1           ji
                    var          T S5∗(w−1)+m (x5∗(w−1)+m ) +        j var(t )            (52)
                           5 m=1                              t∈S
                                                                  5Snt




                                                  37
References
 [1] Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal (1996), “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
    Covariance Structures,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3), 353-366.

 [2] Andrews, Donald W.K. (1991), “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covari-
    ance Matrix Estimation,” Econometrica 59(3), 817-858.

 [3] Antweiler, Werner and Murray Z. Frank (2004), “Is All that Talk Just Noise? The Information
    Content of Internet Stock Message Boards,” The Journal of Finance 59 (3), 1259-1294.

 [4] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2006), “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain
    the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle?,” American Economic Review 96(3), 522-576.

 [5] Bollen, Johan, Huina Mao and Xuaojun Zeng (2011), “Twitter Mood Predicts Stock Market,”
    Journal of Computational Science 2, 1-8.

 [6] Brunnermeier, Markus K. (2001), “Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information,” Oxford
    University Press, (Oxford).

 [7] Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski and Sergio Rebelo (2010), “Do Peso
    Problems Explain the Returns to Carry Trade?, “Review of Financial Studies 24(3), 853-891.

 [8] Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg and Pengjie Gao (2015),“The Sum of All FEARS: Investor Senti-
    ment and Asset Prices,” Review of Financial Studies 28(1), 1-32.

 [9] Das, Sanjiv R. and Mike Y. Chen (2007), “Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment Extraction from
    Small Talk on the Web,” Management Science 53(9), 1375-1388.

[10] Dewally, Michael (2003), “Internet Investment Advice: Investing with a Rock of Salt,” Fi-
    nancial Analyst Journal 59(4), 65-77.

[11] Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals,” Journal
    of Political Economy 113(3), 485-517.

[12] Evans, Martin D.D. (2011), “Exchange-Rate Dynamics,” Princeton University Press.

                                               38
[13] Evans, D.D. and Richard K. Lyons (2002), “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics,”
    Journal of Political Economy 110(1), 170-180.

[14] Evans, D.D. and Dagfinn Rime (2012), “Micro Approaches to Foreign Exchange Determina-
    tion,” in Handbook Of Exchange Rates, edited by Jessica James, Ian W. Walsh and Lucio
    Sarno. Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley and Sons.

[15] King, Michael R., Carol L. Osler and Dagfinn Rime (2013), “The Market Microstructure Ap-
    proach to Foreign Exchange: Looking Back and Looking Forward,” Journal of International
    Money and Finance 38, 95-119.

[16] Lyons, Richard K. (2001), “The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates.” MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.

[17] Mao, Huina, Scott Counts and Johan Bollen (2015), “Quantifying the Effects of Online
    Bullishness on International Financial Markets,” ECB Statistics Paper 9, July 2015.

[18] Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogoff (1983a), “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
    Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?,” Journal of International Economics 14, 345-373.

[19] Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogoff (1983b), “The Out of Sample Failure of Empirical
    Exchange Models,” in Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, edited by Jacob
    A. Frenkel. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press (for NBER).

[20] Mittal, Anshul and Arpit Goel (2012), “Stock Prediction Using Twitter Sentiment Analysis,”
    working paper, Stanford University.

[21] Tetlock, Paul C. (2007), “Giving content to investor sentiment: the role of media in the stock
    market,” The Journal of Finance 62,1139-1168.

[22] Wang, Jiang (1994), “A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume,” Journal of Political
    Economy 102, 127-168.

[23] Zhang, Linhao (2013), “Sentiment on Twitter with Stock Price and Significant Keyword
    Correlation,” working paper, University of Texas at Austin.

                                                39
[24] Zhang, Xue, Hauke Fuehres and Peter A. Gloor (2011), “Predicting Stock Market Indicators
    Through Twitter “I Hope it is not as Bad as I Fear”,” Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences
    26, 55-62.




                                              40
                                                                                                                                               ∗
                                                              Figure 1 Distribution of the Number of Followers
          40                                       Informed                                       40                                    Uninformed

          35                                                                                      35


          30                                                                                      30


          25                                                                                      25
Percent




                                                                                        Percent
          20                                                                                      20


          15                                                                                      15


          10                                                                                      10


          5                                                                                       5


          0                                                                                       0
                       500-1k          1k-2k      2k-5k     5k-10k   10k-20k   > 20k                              < 50       50-100     100-200 200-300 300-400 400-500
                                               Number of Followers                                                                    Number of Followers

               ∗
                   Informed have more than 500 followers. Uninformed have fewer than 500 followers.




                                                             Figure 2 Distribution of the Daily Number of Tweets
                              25                             Informed                                            25                           Uninformed


                              20                                                                                 20



                              15                                                                                 15
                    Percent




                                                                                                       Percent




                              10                                                                                 10



                               5                                                                                  5



                               0                                                                                  0
                                   5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70                                          5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
                                                          Number of Tweets                                                                 Number of Tweets




                                                                                       41
                                                Figure 3 Distribution of Individual TS
                40            Informed                                                  40                        Uninformed



                30                                                                      30
      Percent




                                                                              Percent
                20                                                                      20



                10                                                                      10



                0                                                                       0
                     -1            0                       1                                             -1           0        1



                           Figure 4 Distribution of Daily Twitter Sentiment Index
                                           25
                                                     Uninformed
                                                     Informed

                                           20



                                           15
                                 Percent




                                           10



                                            5



                                            0
                                             -1            -0.5          0                   0.5              1



                                                                                                              ∗
                                 Figure 5 Distribution of Daily Disagreement
                                            15
                                                     Uninformed
                                                     Informed




                                            10
                                  Percent




                                             5




                                             0
                                                 0       0.2      0.4        0.6                   0.8        1
∗
    Disagreement is defined as cross sectional variance of Twitter Sentiment across the individuals.
                                                                        42
Figure 6 Moments of the Informed and Uninformed Agents as a Function of σvU .


                                        Variance TS
                                                         Uninformed
               0.35                                      Informed

                0.3

               0.25

                0.2

               0.15

                0.1

               0.05
                      0   0.05    0.1      0.15   0.2      0.25       0.3
                                            σU
                                             V


                                    Disagreement
               0.7
                                                         Uninformed
                                                         Informed
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2
                     0    0.05    0.1      0.15   0.2     0.25        0.3
                                           σU
                                            V


                                 Correlation(TSI,TSU )
               0.7

               0.6

               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1
                     0    0.05    0.1      0.15   0.2     0.25        0.3
                                           σU
                                            V
                                          43
                                           Figure 7 Distribution of Sharpe Ratio∗
                                          50     Uninformed                           Informed


                                          40



                                          30
                                Percent




                                          20



                                          10



                                           0
                                           0.5                 1                1.5                  2
∗
    The Sharpe ratios are computed using daily observations over 200 years across 1000 draws from the distribution
of estimated parameters.




                  Figure 8 Distribution of Sharpe Ratio due to Small Sample Variation∗
                                          15
                                                  Uninformed
                                                  Informed




                                          10
                                Percent




                                           5




                                           0
                                            -1   -0.5   0      0.5   1    1.5     2     2.5      3
∗
    The Sharpe ratios are computed using daily observations over 633 trading days across 1000 simulations.




                                                                     44
                          Figure 9 Distribution t-stat in Predictability Regressions∗
                                           20                  1 Day Horizon
                                                  Uninformed
                                                  Informed


                                           15




                                 Percent
                                           10




                                            5




                                            0
                                             -5                           0                        5


                                           20                  20 Day Horizon
                                                  Uninformed
                                                  Informed


                                           15
                                 Percent




                                           10




                                            5




                                            0
                                             -5       -3        -1             1         3         5


                                           20                  40 Day Horizon
                                                  Uninformed
                                                  Informed


                                           15
                                 Percent




                                           10




                                            5




                                            0
                                             -5       -3        -1             1         3         5
∗
    The distribution of t-stats of regressions of st+m − st on        T Stj   are reported based on 1000 simulations of the model
over 633 days. The horizon m is 1, 20 and 40 days, respectively, in the top, middle and bottom figure.


                                                                     45
          Table 1 Examples of Positive, Neutral and Negative Tweets

Score   Category   Text
 +1     Positive   $EURUSD Risks Higher High on Dovish Fed.
 +1     Positive   $EURUSD: Buy dips near term.
 +1     Positive   Buy eurusd market 1.2370 Stop: 1.2230 Target : 1.2600
 +1     Positive   Looking to buy eurusd 1.1330
 +1     Positive   Stay Long $EURUSD For 1.3700; Add At 1.3474/64
 +1     Positive   $EURUSD is right between the two Fibonacci pivot points:
                   1.3520 and 1.3720. I remain bullish & eventually expect a
                   rally twd 1.4045 Fibo lvl
 +1     Positive   Stay calm, hold EURUSD long and USDJPY short
 +1     Positive   USD Will Resume Decline; Keep EUR/USD Long For A Run
                   Above 1.40
 +1     Positive   Dollar to Face Further Losses on Dismal NFP- EURUSD to
                   Target 1.3960
 0      Neutral    I might consider selling $EURUSD at 1.36 if we spike up.1st
                   probe the market with a small position, and add if we decide
                   to plunge aftrwrds.
 0      Neutral    EURUSD trading steady ahead of the Building Permits data
                   from the United States. FOMC Meeting Minutes on focus.
 0      Neutral    $EURUSD sits tight and awaits the FOMC fireworks. Levels
                   to eye.
 -1     Negative   EUR/USD Set For Further Falls With Bullish Signal Missing.
 -1     Negative   $EURUSD Risks Further Losses as Growth Outlook Deterio-
                   rates.
 -1     Negative   $EURUSD The pair remain bearish and looking for 1.1922
                   area when a 100% extension will happen .
 -1     Negative   Stay Short $EURUSD, Long $USDJPY, & Resell $AUDUSD
 -1     Negative   I expect $eurusd move lower, just not yet. Daily SRC ap-
                   proaching 5% mark and FT already below -3.530 A Short
                   near 1.3480 makes sense.
 -1     Negative   EURUSD Downtrend Intact, Waiting for Sell Signal.
 -1     Negative   ...    said sell $EURUSD on interest rate differentials, TP
                   1.2800, SL 1.3700. Fair value at 1.3200. #TradersNotes #FX
 -1     Negative   After ECB & Euro Squeeze, ... Adds To $EURUSD Short
                   Exposure.
 -1     Negative   We re looking to big gap at usd pairs. #eurusd will fall to
                   the 1.23 this week. 46
                                                                                               ∗
                                           Table 2 Directional Moments in the Data

                                                     st+20 − st     st+40 − st    st+60 − st


                                      Informed         0.0224        0.0519       0.0273


                                    Uninformed         -0.0078       -0.0089      -0.0147
        ∗
            Percentage of tweets that correctly forecast the direction of subsequent exchange rate change minus the percentage
        of incorrect directional forecasts by individuals in group j. Neutral tweets are counted as neither correct nor
        incorrect forecasts.



                                  Table 3 Predictability in the Data for the Informed Agents.

                           (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)      (7)           (8)
                       st+1 − st    st+1 − st    st+20 − st      st+20 − st    st+40 − st   st+40 − st   st+60 − st   st+60 − st


T StI                    0.0998       0.118         0.342          0.205         1.196         0.748       1.418         0.975
                        (0.0725)     (0.076)       (0.456)        (0.310)        (0.840)       (0.495)    (1.084)       (0.686)
   I
T St−1                                -0.065                       0.082                       0.501                     0.698
                                     (0.077)                      (0.288)                      (0.428)                  (0.571)
   I
T St−2                                0.068                        0.277                       0.652                     0.738
                                     (0.077)                      (0.268)                      (0.463)                  (0.544)
   I
T St−3                                0.004                        0.185                       0.771                     0.531
                                     (0.077)                      (0.256)                      (0.499)                  (0.522)
   I
T St−4                                -0.123                       0.266                       0.792                     0.663
                                     (0.076)                      (0.286)                      (0.537)                  (0.568)


Observations              633          629           633            629           633              629      633           629
    2
R                        0.003        0.009         0.002          0.006         0.012         0.035       0.011         0.024
p-value∗                 0.169        0.318         0.453          0.603         0.155         0.402       0.191         0.612
                                       Newey West Standard errors are in parentheses
                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        ∗
            p-values are the probability associated with the F-test that all coefficients are zero.



                                                                    47
                                Table 4 Predictability in the Data for the Uninformed Agents.

                          (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)       (7)          (8)
                       st+1 − st     st+1 − st     st+20 − st    st+20 − st       st+40 − st   st+40 − st   st+60 − st   st+60 − st


T StU                   -0.0481       -0.002         -0.367          -0.278        -0.766       -0.599       -0.675       -0.468
                       (0.0872)       (0.090)       (0.474)          (0.360)       (0.818)      (0.606)      (1.053)      (0.777)
   U
T St−1                              -0.274***                        -0.319                     -0.559                    -0.534
                                     (0.0899)                        (0.315)                    (0.490)                   (0.656)
   U
T St−2                                0.0119                         -0.100                     -0.200                    -0.199
                                      (0.091)                        (0.291)                    (0.485)                   (0.567)
   U
T St−3                                 0.125                         -0.146                     -0.0643                   -0.401
                                      (0.090)                        (0.318)                    (0.577)                   (0.641)
   U
T St−4                               -0.211**                        -0.304                     -0.148                    -0.535
                                      (0.090)                        (0.344)                    (0.584)                   (0.678)


Observations              633           629           633             629            633            629        633          629
R2                       0.000         0.025         0.002           0.005          0.003           0.006     0.002        0.005
             ∗
p-value                  0.582         0.007         0.439           0.694          0.349           0.395     0.522        0.673
                                        Newey West Standard errors are in parentheses
                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        ∗
            p-values are the probability associated with the F-test that all coefficients are zero.




                                Table 5 Annualized Sharpe Ratio of Daily Returns in the Data

                                                         Estimate          S.E.   95% Conf. Int.
                                        Informed              1.09         0.60    [-0.09 , 2.27]
                                        Uninformed           -0.19         0.62    [-1.41 , 1.03]




                                                                      48
                                     ∗
Table 6 Parameter Estimates

       σvI   0.0362     (0.0067)
       σvU   0.1031     (0.0189)
       σb    0.9906     (0.1877)
       ρ     0.0001     (0.1584)
       ρb    0.9263     (0.0029)
       n     0.9999     (0.0221)
       σf    0.0057
∗
    Standard errors are in parentheses.




                   49
                                       Table 7 Data and Model Moments∗

                                               Data      Model      Standard       Cost
                                                                    Deviation
                       Variance of Twitter Sentiment
                       T StI                  0.0983     0.1074      (0.0150)     0.3660
                       T StU                  0.0682     0.0740      (0.0086)     0.4584
                       Correlation Twitter Sentiment
                       T StI , T StU          0.4424     0.3385      (0.0846)     1.5091
                       Disagreement
                       Mean Informed          0.5634     0.5643      (0.0111)     0.0058
                       Mean Uninformed        0.6356     0.6372      (0.0079)     0.0395
                       Predictive Correlations
                       T StI , st+1 − st      0.0547     0.1083      (0.0378)     2.0146
                       T StU , st+1 − st      -0.0219    0.0440      (0.0396)     2.7720
                       T StI , st+20 − st     0.0448     0.1158      (0.1184)     0.3596
                       T StU , st+20 − st     -0.0400    0.0393      (0.1029)     0.5937
                       T StI , st+40 − st     0.1107     0.0859      (0.1452)     0.0292
                       T StU , st+40 − st     -0.0590    0.0180      (0.1281)     0.3615
                       T StI , st+60 − st     0.1031     0.0689      (0.1604)     0.0455
                       T StU , st+60 − st     -0.0409    0.0018      (0.1367)     0.0974
                       Directional Moments
                       T StI , st+20 − st     0.0224     0.0333      (0.0392)     0.0777
                       T StU , st+20 − st     -0.0078    0.0135      (0.0293)     0.5286
                       T StI , st+40 − st     0.0519     0.0263      (0.0487)     0.2762
                       T StU , st+40 − st     -0.0089    0.0111      (0.0367)     0.2982
                       T StI , st+60 − st     0.0273     0.0224      (0.0548)     0.0081
                       T StU , st+60   − st   -0.0147    0.0087      (0.0400)     0.3433
                       Weekly Contemporaneous Correlations
                       T SwI , st − st−4      0.2659     0.1018      (0.0844)     3.7752
                       T SwU , st − st−4      -0.0113    0.0926      (0.0857)     1.4684
                       Exchange Rate Moments
                       St. Dev. ∆s            0.5718     0.5718                   0.0000
                       Auto Corr. ∆s          0.0028     0.0108      (0.0103)     0.6097
                       Auto Corr. ∆sw         0.0076     -0.0120     (0.0865)     0.0513
                       Objective                                                  16.0889
∗
    “Cost” is the square of the difference between the model and data moment, divided by the variance of the
corresponding moment. St. Dev ∆s is the standard deviation of the daily change in the exchange rate in percentage
terms (e.g. 0.5718%=0.005718)
                                                        50
                                    Table 8 Excluding Predictability Moments∗

                                                 Data       Model     Standard    Cost
                                                                      Deviation
                            Variance of Twitter Sentiment
                            T StI                0.0983     0.1062     (0.0150)   0.2773
                            T StU                0.0682     0.0751     (0.0086)   0.6517
                            Correlation Twitter Sentiment
                            T StI , T StU        0.4424     0.3912     (0.0846)   0.3659
                            Disagreement
                            Mean Informed        0.5634     0.5676     (0.0111)   0.1439
                            Mean Uninformed      0.6356     0.6369     (0.0079)   0.0259
                            Predictive Correlations
                            T StI , st+1 − st    0.0547     0.3004
                            T StU , st+1 − st    -0.0219    0.1596
                            T StI , st+20 − st   0.0448     0.2013
                            T StU , st+20 − st   -0.0400    0.1002
                            T StI , st+40 − st   0.1107     0.1377
                            T StU , st+40 − st   -0.0590    0.0582
                            T StI , st+60 − st   0.1031     0.1074
                            T StU , st+60 − st   -0.0409    0.0343
                            Directional Moments
                            T StI , st+20 − st   0.0224     0.0556     (0.0392)   0.7147
                            T StU , st+20 − st   -0.0078    0.0262     (0.0293)   1.3463
                            T StI , st+40 − st   0.0519     0.0395     (0.0487)   0.0652
                            T StU , st+40 − st   -0.0089    0.0187     (0.0367)   0.5686
                            T StI , st+60 − st   0.0273     0.0325     (0.0548)   0.0090
                            T StU , st+60 − st   -0.0147    0.0144     (0.0400)   0.5312
                            Weekly Contemporaneous Moments
                               I
                            T Sw , st − st−4     0.2659     0.2153     (0.0844)   0.3593
                               U
                            T Sw , st − st−4     -0.0113    0.0126     (0.0857)   0.0777
                            Exchange Rate Moments
                            St. Dev. ∆s          0.5718     0.5718                0.0000
                            Auto Corr. ∆s        0.0028     0.0106     (0.0103)   0.5743
                            Auto Corr. ∆sw       0.0076     -0.0183    (0.0865)   0.0896
                                                                         s.e.
                            σvI                             0.0291     (0.0057)
                            σvU                             0.0680     (0.0131)
                            σb                              2.2986     (0.6936)
                            σf                              0.0019
                            ρ                               0.6579     (0.0865)
                            ρb                              0.7718     (0.0197)
                            n                               0.2533     (0.0089)

∗
    The Table reports results when predictive correlations are excluded from the estimation. The excluded set of
moments is shaded.                                         51
                     Table 9 Annualized Sharpe Ratio of Daily Returns in the Model

                                                  Estimate        S.E.   95% Conf. Int.
                               Informed              1.68         0.05    [1.59 , 1.78]
                               Uninformed            0.77         0.06    [0.64 , 0.90]


                                Table 10 R2 from Predictability Regressions∗
                                                      Informed       Uninformed
                                      st+1 − st        0.0130            0.0022
                                      st+20 − st       0.0144            0.0015
                                      st+40 − st       0.0073            0.0006
                                      st+60 − st       0.0042            0.0003
∗
    The exchange rate and Twitter Sentiment (TS) are simulated over 100,000 days. The change in the future
exchange rate is regressed on T St , for both informed and uninformed agents, and the R2 is reported in the table.


                                                                             ∗
                                           Table 11 Sensitivity Tests

                                            σvI             σvU      Sharpe Ratio (I)     Sharpe Ratio (U)
         Benchmark                         0.0362      0.1031              1.6852              0.7704
                                          (0.0067)    (0.0189)            (0.0502)            (0.0642)
         k = 10                            0.0313      0.0757              1.3524              0.6952
                                          (0.0037)    (0.0088)            (0.0437)            (0.0548)
         k = 20                            0.0410      0.1001              1.4867              0.7666
                                          (0.0076)    (0.0184)            (0.0525)            (0.0549)
         k = 30                            0.0400      0.0996              1.5543              0.7839
                                          (0.0057)    (0.0142)            (0.0497)            (0.0574)
         T = 20                            0.0176      0.0412              1.4648              0.8122
                                          (0.0012)    (0.0028)            (0.0522)            (0.0519)
         T = 60                            0.0740      0.2120              1.6269              0.7451
                                          (0.0212)    (0.0602)            (0.1116)            (0.0913)
         Number of Tweets ≥ 5              0.0362      0.1031              1.7187              0.7670
                                          (0.0066)    (0.0187)            (0.0493)            (0.0632)
         Number of Tweets ≥ 10             0.0396      0.1029              1.6180              0.7702
                                          (0.0047)    (0.0123)            (0.0427)            (0.0482)
∗
    Standard errors are in parentheses.



                                                             52
Appendix A
Tables A1 and A2 show all word combinations used to categorize tweets as positive,
negative and neutral. Table A1 lists the word combinations in each category that require
the explicit absence of some other words. Table A2 shows the list of word combinations
whose existence in a tweet is enough to place the tweet in one of the categories.
“*” and “?” are wildcard characters. “*” represents one or more characters and “?” rep-
resents one character. For instance, “*buy??eur*” is a match with any tweet that contains
the words “buy” and “eur” in this order and with exactly two characters between them.
“*” before “buy” and after “eur” means that there could be any number of characters in a
tweet before “buy” or after “eur”. This word combination is intended to identify positive
tweets that contain expressions such as “buy $eurusd” or “buy #euro”. In both cases, all
the criteria of a match with “*buy??eur*” are satisfied. There are exactly two characters
between “buy” and “eur”. In the case of “buy $eurusd”, there are three characters after
“eur” and in “buy #euro” there is only one character after “eur”. Both are acceptable re-
placements for the wildcard character “*”. In both examples, there is no character before
“buy”. Since “*” could be replaced with zero or any number of characters, no character
before “buy” is considered a match with “*buy??eur*”.




                                              53
           Table A1: Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Positive
Include ...                and not include ...
”*buy??eur*” or            ”*close*buy*eur*” , ”*exit*buy*eur*”,
”*buy?eur*”                ”*close*buy?eurusd*”, ”*close*buy?eurusd*”,
                           ”*close*buy??eur\usd*”, ”*buy*,*eur*”, ”*buy*:*eur*”,
                           ”*buy*fade*”, ”*close*buy??eur\usd*”
                           ”*never*buy*eur*”
”*buy*lot*eur*”            ”*close*buy*lot*eur*”
”*long??eur*”              ”*long?term*”, ”*was?long*”, ”*close*long??eur*”,
                           ”*close*long?eur*”, ”*exit*long??eur*”, ”*exit*long?eur*”
”*bullish*”                ”*absent*”, ”*absence*”, ”*void*”, ”*lack*”,
                           ”*bullish*fail*”, ”*fail*bullish*”, ”*bullish*invalid*”,
                           ”*bullish*break*”, ”*nothing*bullish*”, ”*missing*”,
                           ”*were?bullish*”, ”*was?bullish*”, ”*no?bullish*”,
                           ”*not?bullish*”, ”*market is bullish*”
”*covered*short*”          ”*short?term*”
”*buy?the?eur*”            ”*never?buy?the?eur*”, ”*not?buy?the?eur*”
”*eur?usd*look?good*”      ”*eur?usd*not*look?good*”
”*eur?usd*looks?good*”     ”*eur?usd*not*looks?good*”
”*double*long*”            ”*long?term*”
”*took*long*position*”     ”*long?term*”
”*out*of*eur*short*”       ”*short?term*” , ”*stop*out*of*eur*short*”
”*add*eur*long*”           ”*long?term*” , ”*addict*” , ”*dadd*”




                                           54
  Table A1 (Continued): Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Positive
Include ...                          and not include ...
”*increase*eur*long*”                ”*long?term*” , ”*long?off*”
”*up*accelerate*trend*”              ”*update*”
”*signals?buy*eur*”                  ”*forexsignals*”
”*long?signal*”                      ”*long?term*” , ”*wait*for*long?signal*”
”*higher?high*”                      ”*if*higher?high*”
”*take*eur?usd*long*”                ”*took*profit*”
”*took*eur?usd*long*”                ”*took*profit*” , ”*took*opportunity*”
”*further*buying*”                   ”*buying*usd*”
”*further*eur*gain*”                 ”*against*”
”*dip*buy*” or                       ”*dip*;*eurusd*”, ”*dip*;*eur?usd*”,
”*buy*dip*”                          ”*buy*dips?in?cable*”, ”*buy*dip?in?cable*”
                                     ”*sell*rall*”
”*look*to*buy*”                      ”*looks?like*” , ”*look*to*buy*put*”
”*buying?the?eur*”                   ”*buying?the?eur*was*”,
                                     ”*about*buying?the?eur*”,
                                     ”*buying?the?eur*tomorrow*”
”*trigger*further*eurusd*gain*” or   ”*against*”
”*trigger*further*eur?usd*gain*”
”*offer*long*entr*”                  ”*long?term*”
”*look*to*long*”                     ”*long?term*” , ”*looks*”
”*eur?usd*may*extend*gain*” or       ”*against*”
”*eurusd*may*extend*gain*” or
”*eur?usd*will*extend*gain*” or
”*eurusd*will*extend*gain*” or
”*eur?usd*set*extend*gain*” or
”*eurusd*set*extend*gain*”
”eurusd*targets?higher*” or          ”*higher?low*”
”*eur?usd*target?higher*”



                                        55
 Table A1 (Continued): Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Negative
Include ...               and not include ...
”*bearish*”               ”*absent*”, ”*bearish*void*”, ”*bearish*lack*”,
                          ”*missing*”, ”*bearish*fail*”, ”*void*bearish*”,
                          ”*lack*bearish*”, ”*fail*bearish*”, ”*bearish*break*”,
                          ”*were?bearish*”, ”*was?bearish*”, ”*not?bearish*”,
                          ”*bearish*invalid*”, ”*nothing*bearish*”,
                          ”*market is bearish*”, ”*no?bearish*”
”*short?eurusd*” or       ”*covered*short*”, ”*exit*short*”,
”*short??eurusd*” or      ”*stop*short*eur*”, ”*close*short*”
”*short?eur?usd*” or
”*short??eur?usd*” or
”*short?euro*”
”*took*short*position*”   ”*short?term*”
”*short?signal*”          ”*short?term*”
”*sell?signal*”           ”*buy*signal*”
”*shorted??euro*” or      ”*short?term*”
”*shorted??eurusd*” or
”*shorted??eur?usd*”
”*sell?eurusd*” or        ”*close*sell*eur*”, ”*exit*sell*eur*”,
”*sell??eurusd*” or       ”*stop*sell*eur*”, ”*if*sell*eur*”,
”*sell?eur?usd*” or       ”*where*sell*eur*”, ”*no?reason*sell*eur*”
”*sell??eur?usd*”




                                       56
Table A1 (Continued): Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Negative
Include ...             and not include ...
”*sell the eur*”        ”*where*sell the eur*”
”*short the eur*”       ”*was*short the eur*”
”*add*eur*short*”       ”*short?term*” , ”*addict*”
                        , ”*dadd*”
”*sold*rally*”          ”*oversold*”
”*sold*bounce*”         ”*oversold*bounce*”
”*eurusd*toppy*” or     ”*stopp*” , ”*dollar?topp*”
”*eurusd*topping*” or   , ”*audusd??topp*”
”*eur?usd*toppy*” or
”*eur?usd*topping*”
”*bounce*sold*”         ”*oversold*”
”*good?short*”          ”*short?term*”
”*take*eur*short*”      ”*take*profit*eur*short*”, ”*take*out*eur*short*”,
                        ”*take*rest*eur*short*”
”*took*eur*short*”      ”*took*profit*eur*short*”, ”*took*out*eur*short*”,
                        ”*took*rest*eur*short*”
”*further*loss*”        ”*dollar*further*loss*”
”*further?fall*”        ”*dollar*further?fall*”
”*next*leg*lower*”      ”*long?term*”
Neutral
”*watch*”               ”*video*”, ”*marketwatch*”,
                        ”*watchlist*”, ”*iwatch*”
”*out*eur*long*”        ”*break*out*”




                                       57
                 Table A2: Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Positive
”*buy??fxe*”                   ”*long??fxe*”                    ”*buy?signal*”
”*upside*breakout*”            ”*eur?usd*bull*intact*”          ”*expect*move*higher*”
”*oversold*eur*”               ”*eur?usd*oversold*”             ”*ascending*triangle*”
”*increase*bullish*bet*”       ”*bought*rebound*”               ”*will*move*higher*today*”
”*bought*dip*”                 ”*bought*bounce*”                ”*will*higher*today*”
”*should?buy*dip*”             ”*rally*has*leg*”                ”*buy*above*moving*average*”
”*tradable*bottom*”            ”*eur?usd*good?buy*”             ”*raise*eur*exposure*”
”*will*see*higher*” or         ”*eur?usd*bias*upside*” or       ”*eur?usd?will?rise*” or
”*going?to*see*higher*”        ”*eur?usd*bias*positive*”        ”*eur?usd?will?continue?to?rise*”
”*euro?bottoming*” or          ”*staying?long?eur?usd*” or      ”*eur?usd*heads*higher*” or
”*eur?usd?bottoming*”          ”*staying?long??eur?usd*”        ”*eur?usd*heading*higher*”
”*bottom?is?in*”               ”*oversold*bounce*”              ”*sticking*with*long*”
”*potential?buy*”              ”*resume*bull*trend*”            ”*dollar*further*loss*”
”*long?favor*”                 ”*suggest*bull*control*”         ”*suggest*advance*continue*”
”*spark*eur*buy*” or           ”*eurusd?could?bottom*” or       ”*further*rise*ahead*” or
”*initiat*eur*buy*”            ”*euro?could?bottom*”            ”*further*advance*ahead*”
”*stay??eurusd?long*” or       ”*currently?long??eurusd*” or    ”*increase*eurusd?long*”
”*stay?eurusd?long*” or        ”*currently?long?eurusd*” or     ”*increase*long?eurusd*”
”*stay??eur?usd?long*” or      ”*currently?long??eur?usd*” or   ”*increase*eur\usd?long*”
”*stay?eur?usd?long*”          ”*currently?long?eur?usd*”       ”*increase*long?eur\usd*”
”*increase*eurusd?long*” ,
”*decrease*eurusd?long*” ,
”*hold*eurusd?long*” ,
”*keep*eurusd?long*” ,
”*increase*eur?usd?long*” ,
”*decrease*eur?usd?long*” ,
”*hold*eur?usd?long*” ,
”*keep*eur?usd?long*”




                                                   58
         Table A2 (Continued): Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Negative
”*short?fxe*” or               ”*buy?uup*” or                    ”*eurusd*buying?put*” or
”*short??fxe*”                 ”*buy??uup*”                      ”*eur?usd*buying?put*”
”*eur*overbought*”             ”*expect*move*lower*”             ”*descending*triangle*”
”*sell?resistance*”            ”*selling?resistance*”            ”*down*accelerate*trend*”
”*buy?euo*” or                 ”*eurusd?will?fall*” or           ”*staying?short*eur?usd*” or
”*buy??euo*”                   ”*eur?usd?will?fall*”             ”*staying?short*eurusd*”
”*fade*rally*”                 ”*eur*overpriced*”                ”*signals?sell*eur*”
”*bias*down*”                  ”*eur*overvalued*”                ”*stall*retrace*”
”*top?is?in*”                  ”*deeper?correction*”             ”*sticking*with*short*”
”*sell*bounce*”                ”*will*see*lower*”                ”*prepare*eur*downturn*”
”*recovery*fail*”              ”*bear*intact*”                   ”*eyes*downside*target*”
”*eur*look?bad*” or            ”*eur?usd*has*topped*” or         ”*buy the u.s. dollar*” or
”*eur*looks?bad*”              ”*eurusd*has*topped*”             ”*buy?the?dollar*”
”*potential?sell*”             ”*downside*remain*”               ”*eur*eyes*downside*”
”*stay??eurusd?short*” or      ”*eur?usd*bias*downside*” or      ”*increase*eur?usd?short*”
”*stay?eurusd?short*” or       ”*eur?usd*bias*negative*” or      ”*decrease*eur?usd?short*”
”*stay??eur?usd?short*” or     ”*eurusd*bias*downside*” or       ”*hold*eur\usd?short*”
”*stay?eur?usd?short*”         ”*eurusd*bias*negative*” or       ”*keep*eur\usd?short*”
”*eurusd*over?bought*” or      ”*further?selling*” or            ”*increase*eurusd?short*”
”*euro*over?bought*” or        ”*further?eurusd?selling*” or     ”*increase*short?eurusd*”
”*eur?usd*over?bought*” or     ”*further??eurusd?selling*” or    ”*increase*eur?usd?short*”
”*eurusd*overbought*” or       ”*further?eur?usd?selling*” or    ”*increase*short?eur?usd*”
”*euro*overbought*” or         ”*further??eur?usd?selling*” or
”*eur?usd*overbought*”
”*look*to*sell*” or            ”*will*selling?the?eur*” or       ”*will*head*lower*” or
”*look*to*buy*put*”            ”*am?selling?the?eur*”            ”*heads*lower*” or
                                                                 ”*heading*lower*”
”*increase*eurusd?short*” or   ”*currently?short??eurusd*” or
”*decrease*eurusd?short*” or   ”*currently?short?eurusd*” or
”*hold*eurusd?short*” or       ”*currently?short??eur?usd*” or
”*keep*eurusd?short*”          ”*currently?short?eur?usd*”

                                                 59
       Table A2 (Continued): Word combinations used to identify opinionated tweets.

Neutral
”*were?bearish*” or        ”*no?bearish*” or         ”*not*expect*move*higher*” or
”*were?bullish*” or        ”*no?bullish*” or         ”*not*expect*move*lower*”
”*was?bearish*” or         ”*not?bearish*” or
”*was?bullish*”            ”*not?bullish*”
”*bullish*absent*” or      ”*bullish*lack*” or       ”*bullish*missing*” or
”*bearish*absent*” or      ”*lack*bullish*” or       ”*missing*bullish*” or
”*bullish*void*” or        ”*bearish*lack*” or       ”*bearish*missing*” or
”*bearish*void*”           ”*lack*bearish*”          ”*missing*bearish*”
”*bought*sold*” or         ”*will*buy*if*” or        ”*might*buy*eur*”
”*sold*bought*”            ”*will*sell*if*”          ”*might*sell*eur*”
”*could?go?higher*” or     ”*needs?confirm*” or      ”*bullish*fail*” or
”*could?go?lower*” or      ”*need?to?see*” or        ”*fail*bullish*” or
”*could?move?higher*” or   ”*needs?to?hold*” or      ”*bearish*fail*” or
”*could?move?lower*”       ”*need?to?hold*”          ”*fail*bearish*”
”*must?close*” or          ”*buy*signal*watch*” or   ”*bullish*decline*” or
”*should?close*”           ”*sell*signal*watch*”     ”*bullishness*decrease*”
”*bull*lose*steam*” or     ”*neutral?on??eur*” or    ”*eur*need*go*lower*” or
”*bear*lose*steam*”        ”*neutral?on?eur*”        ”*eur*need*go*higher*”
”*wait*”                   ”*not*trading*”           ”*staying?in?cash*”
”*rally*weak*”             ”*patience*”              ”*no?need*do?anything*”
”*not?yet*”                ”*looking?for*”           ”*not?doing?much*”
”*staying?flat*”           ”*bounce?possible*”       ”*will?be?telling*”
”*all?eyes*on*”            ”*steady*ahead*”          ”*could*accelerate*”
”*bull*doubt*” or          ”*no*new*trade*”          ”*out*eur*short*” or
”*bear*doubt*”                                       ”*out*eur*long*”
”*no?trend*”               ”*range?in?focus*”        ”*may*hold*range*”
”*indecision*”             ”*look?to?see*”           ”*bias*remain*neutral*”
”*hesitation*”




                                               60
