                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  ROOTS OF AUTOCRACY

                                         Oded Galor
                                         Marc Klemp

                                      Working Paper 23301
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23301


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2017




The authors are grateful for valuable comments from Alberto Alesina, James Fenske, Martin
Fiszbein, Elhanan Helpman, Stelios Michalopoulos, Nathan Nunn, Nico Voigtlaender,
participants in the conferences CEPR Growth Conference 2016, London, Deep Determinants of
International Comparative Development, Brown University, Towards Sustained Economic
Growth, Barcelona, MEHR, Copenhagen, NBER Political Economy 2016, Association for the
Study of Religion, Economics, and Culture 2016, ASSA 2017, as well as seminar participants at
Copenhagen, Harvard, Kiel, Louvain, Oxford, Tel Aviv, and Warwick. The research of Galor is
supported by NSF grant SES-1338426. The research of Klemp has been funded partially by the
Carlsberg Foundation and the Danish Research Council reference no. 1329-00093 and reference
no. 1327-00245. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Oded Galor and Marc Klemp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Roots of Autocracy
Oded Galor and Marc Klemp
NBER Working Paper No. 23301
March 2017
JEL No. O10,O43,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

Exploiting a novel geo-referenced data set of population diversity across ethnic groups, this
research advances the hypothesis and empirically establishes that variation in population diversity
across human societies, as determined in the course of the exodus of human from Africa tens of
thousands of years ago, contributed to the differential formation of pre-colonial autocratic
institutions within ethnic groups and the emergence of autocratic institutions across countries.
Diversity has amplified the importance of institutions in mitigating the adverse effects of non-
cohesiveness on productivity, while contributing to the scope for domination, leading to the
formation of institutions of the autocratic type.


Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and CEPR
and also NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu

Marc Klemp
Økonomisk Institut
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5, bygning 26
1353 København K
and Brown University
marc.klemp@econ.ku.dk
1       Introduction
Political institutions have been widely viewed as major determinants of economic growth and com-
parative economic development. The origins of the existing variation in the nature of political
institutions across the globe has been attributed to a variety of proximate factors underlying the
contribution of economic prosperity and the threat of revolution to the onset of democracy as
well as the association between inequality, ethnic fractionalization, and class stratification with
the formation of autocratic intuitions.1 Recently, attention has been drawn towards more funda-
mental factors that have been argued to a↵ect the nature of the prevailing political institutions
across former colonies, highlighting institutional legacy as well as economic incentives that lead to
the implementation of di↵erential political institutions by the various colonial powers in di↵erent
geographical environments.2
    This research explores the origins of variation in the nature and the persistence of pre-colonial
political institutions, highlighting one of the deepest roots of autocracy molded during the dawn
of the dispersion of anatomically modern humans across the globe.3 The study advances the
hypothesis and establishes empirically that variation in the population diversity across human
societies, as determined in the course of the exodus of Homo sapiens out of Africa tens of thousands
of years ago, shaped the characteristics of political institutions in early stages of development and
has persistently a↵ected the attributes of contemporary institutions across societies.
    The hypothesized contribution of population diversity to the emergence of autocratic institu-
tions rests on two fundamental building blocks. First, in view of the adverse e↵ect of population
diversity on social cohesiveness and aggregate productivity, the emergence of formal or informal
institutions, and their associated code of conduct, would have plausibly mitigated the detrimental
e↵ects of population heterogeneity on the efficiency of the productive process. The scope for the
emergence of institutions has therefore been larger in more diverse societies. Second, population
diversity, and its manifestation in heterogeneity in cognitive as well as physical traits, has conceiv-
ably fostered the degree of inequality and class stratification in society, amplifying the scope for
domination, and permitting elites to implement autocratic institutions. Thus, the dual e↵ect of
population diversity on the demand for institutions and on class stratification has contributed to
the emergence of autocratic institutions.4
    1
      See Lipset (1960), Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), Aghion et al. (2004), and Alesina and Giuliano (2015).
    2
      See Engerman and Sokolo↵ (1997), La Porta et al. (1999), and Acemoglu et al. (2001).
    3
      Furthermore, pre-colonial state formation has been attributed to the establishment of sedentary communities
and the subsequent rise in social complexity in the post-Neolithic Revolution era (Mann, 1986; Belfer-Cohen and Bar-
Yosef, 2002). State formation has been associated with the rise in population density in the post-Neolithic period
(Diamond, 1997), the rise in food surplus necessary for the creation of a non-food producing class due to climatic
shocks, technological advancements, and the gains from trade (Gosden, 1989; Allen, 1997; Arnold, 1993; Fenske, 2014;
Litina, 2014), and the existence of storable crops that permitted extraction by the ruling elite Mayshar et al. (2015).
    4
      The hypothesis that genetic diversity is associated with the scope for domination is supported by evidence from
stow of the closest species to human beings. The Chimpanzees whose level of genetic diversity of 0.82, is larger
than the one present in the human species (Pemberton et al., 2013) are characterized by extreme social stratification
associated with a dominating alpha male. In contrast, the Bonobo, that diverged from the common chimpanzees
due to their geographical isolation dictated by the Congo River, are characterized by greater genetic homogeneity
and more egalitarian. This evidence suggests that the hypothesis advanced in this paper may be relevant for the


                                                          1
    The conjectured e↵ect of population diversity on the degree of autocratic institutions and the
proposed mechanism that governs this e↵ect are examined empirically across ethnic groups during
the pre-colonial era as well as across nations during the contemporary period. The ethnic level
empirical analysis is conducted on a novel geo-referenced dataset consisting of ethnic groups, for
which population diversity is either observed, or can be predicted, and geographic, ethnographic
and institutional characteristics are mostly available, whereas the country-level empirical analysis
exploits existing data on population diversity as constructed by Ashraf and Galor (2013).
    The empirical analysis is conducted in several layers as outlined in Figure 1. The first layer
of the empirical analysis explores the impact of population diversity on the degree of autocratic
institutions across ethnic groups, as well as the hypothesized mechanism that governs this reduced-
form relationship. In particular, consistent with the conjecture that ethnic groups characterized
by higher population diversity are more likely to form institutions that would mitigate the adverse
e↵ect of the inherent non-cohesiveness associated with diversity, the empirical analysis establishes
that, among the ethnic groups for which data on observed population diversity and institutions
are available, ethnic groups that are characterized by a higher level of population diversity tend to
possess more elaborate institutions, as captured by the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy in those
societies, accounting for potentially confounding geographical characteristics as well as regional
fixed e↵ects.
    In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity and the
size and the representativeness of the ethnic group sample with observed population diversity, the
research exploits two empirical strategies to identify the causal e↵ect of population diversity on
autocracy and to demonstrate the robustness of the estimated e↵ect. First, in view of the negative
e↵ect of migratory distance from the cradle of humankind in East Africa to various settlements
across the globe on population diversity, migratory distance from Africa is exploited as an instru-
mental variable for observed population diversity, establishing a highly significant causal e↵ect of
diversity on the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy. Second, using migratory distance from Africa to
predict population diversity for 1,267 ethnic groups in the Ethnographic Atlas, the analysis further
establishes the robustness of the result for this extended sample.
    Further, consistent with the second element of the proposed mechanism about the impact
of population diversity on social stratification, the empirical analysis establishes that, among the
ethnic groups for which data on observed population diversity and social stratification are available,
ethnic groups that are characterized by a higher level of population diversity tend to have a higher
level of class stratification. In addition, among the ethnic groups for which data on observed
population diversity and the presence of slavery are available, ethnic groups that are characterized
by a higher level of population diversity tend to be have a higher intensity of slavery. Moreover,
exploiting migratory distance from Africa as: (i) an instrumental variable for observed population
diversity, and (ii) to predict population diversity for all ethnic groups in the Ethnographic Atlas, the


undersetting of the emergence of domination across variety of groups distinguished regardless of their scale or their
cognitive functioning.


                                                         2
empirical analysis establishes a highly significant causal and robust e↵ect of population diversity on
class stratification and the intensity of slavery, accounting for potentially confounding geographical
characteristics as well as regional fixed e↵ects.
   Moreover, the ethnic-level empirical analysis explores the contribution of the dual e↵ect of pop-
ulation diversity, on the emergence of intuitions as well as on the degree of social stratification,
to the emergence of autocratic institutions. In line with the proposed mechanism, the empirical
analysis establishes that the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy and the degree of social
stratification are associated with the presence of autocratic institutions, captured by various mea-
sures reported by the Standard Cross Cultural Survey (SCCS) such as: (i) degree of absence of
checks on leader’s power, (ii) difficulty of removal of leaders, (iii) leader’s exercise of authority, (iv)
degree of lack of community decisions, and (v) perception of leader’s power. Hence, these find-
ings indicate that the impact of diversity on the prevalence of autocratic institutions could have
plausibly operated through its dual e↵ect on the formation of institutions as well as class stratifi-
cation. Finally, the ethnic-level analysis suggests that there exists a positive reduced-form e↵ect of
predicted population diversity on the various measures of autocracy reported by the SCCS.
   Thus, consistent with the proposed hypothesis, the first layer of empirical analysis suggests that
population diversity contributed to the degree of pre-colonial autocratic institutions across ethnic
groups, while lending credence to the hypothesized mechanism that governs this reduced-form
relationship, according to which population diversity contributed to the demand for institutions as
well as for the scope for domination, giving rise to institutions of the autocratic type.
   The second layer of the empirical analysis explores that importance of the impact of popu-
lation diversity on pre-colonial autocratic institutions across ethnic groups for understanding the
contemporary variation in autocratic institutions across nations. In particular, it examines the
persistence of ethnic institutions that were formed in the pre-colonial era and their association
with contemporary national institutions. Aggregating pre-colonial ethnic institutions into pre-
colonial national institutions, the analysis suggests that indeed pre-colonial ethnic institutions have
contributed to the contemporary institutions, beyond the persistent e↵ect of geographical determi-
nants. In particular, the degree of autocratic institutions and the absence of executive constraints
in the contemporary period are positively and significantly associated with the degree of autocratic
institutions in the pre-colonial era, accounting for potentially confounding e↵ects of geographical
characteristics and population diversity. Moreover, the findings suggest that the persistence of in-
stitutions can be partly attributed to the direct e↵ect of population diversity on both pre-colonial
and contemporary institutions.
   The third layer of the empirical analysis examines the reduced-form relationship between popu-
lation diversity and the nature of contemporary national institutions. Consistent with the proposed
hypothesis, it establishes that population diversity at the national level, as captured by predicted
population diversity has a significant direct e↵ect on the degree of autocracy across countries and
of the absence of executive constraints, accounting for a large number of confounding geographical
characteristics, regional fixed e↵ects, colonial history (i.e., duration and colonizer nation), legal ori-


                                                    3
                                                          Section 4.3




                                         Jurisdictional
                                           Hierarchy
                                                           Se
                            n   3.2                                cti
                                                                         on
                    c   tio                                                   3.4
                 Se                                                                 .1



 Population                              Section 3.4.3                                   Pre-Colonial   Section 4.2    Modern
  Diversity                                                                               Autocracy                   Autocracy
                  Se                                                             .2
                        cti
                              on                                       n   3.4
                                   3.3                         c   tio
                                                          Se


                                            Social
                                         Stratification


Figure 1: Overview of the empirical analysis with references to the relevant sections of the paper.


gins, pre-colonial development and ethnolinguistic fractionalization (and its geographical origins).
Moreover, the e↵ect remains nearly intact if one accounts for arguably endogenous controls such
as income per capita and education.
    Thus, the third layer of the empirical analysis suggests that the spatial distribution of population
diversity across the globe has also contributed to contemporary variation in the degree of autocracy
across countries. This reduced-form e↵ect of population diversity on the prevalence of contemporary
autocratic institutions across nations may reflect either persistence of institutions from the pre-
colonial to the modern era, as established in the second layer of the analysis, or a direct e↵ect of
population diversity on contemporary autocratic institutions, capturing the e↵ect of diversity on
the demand for institutions as well as for the scope for domination.


2     Empirical Framework
2.1    Empirical Strategy
This research advances the hypothesis that diversity contributed to the concentration of power
over the course of human history within social groups, such as ethnic groups or nation states.
Furthermore, it suggests that this e↵ect was governed by the impact of population diversity on the
emergence of institutions as well as on the degree of social stratification.




                                                                         4
   The proposed hypothesis is examined empirically across ethnic groups during the pre-colonial
era as well as across nations during the contemporary period. This empirical setup is desirable
for several reasons. First, the inclusion of the pre-colonial as well as the modern era is designed
to capture the e↵ect of institutions over the course of human history. Second, the analysis of the
pre-colonial era as well as the modern one permits the analyses to capture the e↵ect of population
diversity across groups of various dimensions (i.e., ethnic groups as well as nations). Third, in
view of the important e↵ect of colonialism on institutions, the pre-colonial analysis is immune from
the potential confounding e↵ect of colonialization. Fourth, this intertemporal setup permits the
examination of the persistence e↵ect of pre-colonial institutions on the contemporary ones and it
allows the isolation of the direct e↵ect of population diversity on contemporary institutions from
its lingering e↵ect via the persistence of past institutions. Fifth, the focus on ethnic groups permits
that analysis to disentangle the e↵ect of phenotypic diversity (within an ethnic group) from ethnic
diversity (across groups).

2.2   Measure of Population Diversity
This research highlights the pivotal contribution of population diversity for the emergence of auto-
cratic institutions. While population diversity can be captured by ethnolinguistic fractionalization,
ethnolinguistic polarization, or genetic diversity, several reasons suggests that genetic diversity
ought to be used in order to properly capture the hypothesized e↵ects of population diversity.
   First, while population diversity at the national level can be captured by each of the three
measures, diversity within ethnic groups can be captured only by existing measures of genetic di-
versity. Second, for the country level analysis, measures of ethnolinguistic fractionalization captures
primarily the proportional representation of each ethnic group in the population, while measures
of ethnic polarization incorporate proxies for pairwise dissimilarities amongst ethnic groups within
the population. In contrast, the genetic diversity of a national population is an index that incor-
porates information on all three dimensions of heterogeneity at the country level: the proportional
representation of each ethnic group, the pairwise dissimilarities across these groups (as captured
by genetic distance), and most importantly, the degree of interpersonal diversity within each group
(as captured by genetic diversity within the group). Third, since the hypothesized e↵ect popula-
tion diversity on inequality and social stratification is operating via heterogeneity in cognitive as
well as physical traits, the measure of population diversity ought to reflect phenotypic diversity.
A-priori the degree of either fractionalization or polarization does not necessarily reflect the degree
of phenotypic diversity, whereas genetic diversity is correlated with phenotypic diversity.
   Thus the study employs various measures of genetic diversity (i.e., observed genetic diversity
within ethnic groups, predicted genetic diversity within ethnic groups, predicted genetic diversity
within countries, and ancestry adjusted predicted genetic diversity within countries) to capture
population diversity.




                                                  5
2.2.1    Observed Population Diversity within Ethnic Groups

Population geneticists use an index known as expected heterozygosity to measure the extent of
diversity in genetic material across individuals in a given population (e.g., an ethnic group). Genetic
diversity captures the probability that two individuals, selected at random from a given population,
di↵er from one another with respect to a spectrum of genetic traits. In particular, the overall
expected heterozygosity for a given population is the average gene-specific heterozygosity (based
on the proportional representations of di↵erent alleles of this trait in the population) over multiple
DNA loci.
    Existing measures of expected heterozygosity for indigenous ethnic groups are created by popu-
lation geneticists utilizing data on allelic frequencies within a particular class of DNA loci labelled
microsatellites, located in non-protein-coding regions of the human genome and are largely re-
garded as selectively neutral. This attribute has a major advantage, assuring that this measure of
genetic diversity is una↵ected by factors that are correlated with political institutions that could
have governed the process of natural selection. Nevertheless, a conceptually meaningful measure
of genetic diversity (i.e., a measure that can capture the e↵ect of political and economic outcomes)
ought to reflect diversity in phenotypically expressed traits. Reassuringly, diversity in microsatel-
lites is positively correlated with heterogeneity in phenotypically expressed genomic material. In
particular, similarly to expected heterozygosity in neutral genetic markers, evidence suggests that
a serial founder e↵ect associated with migratory distance from East Africa has a negative e↵ect on
various forms of morphological and cognitive diversity (Henn et al., 2012), including diversity in
skeletal features pertaining to cranial characteristics (Manica et al., 2007; von Cramon-Taubadel
and Lycett, 2008; Betti et al., 2013), dental characterisitics (Hanihara, 2008), and pelvic attributes
(Betti et al., 2013), as well as phonemic diversity (Atkinson, 2011).
    This research employs a newly assembled data (Pemberton et al., 2013) on observed genetic
diversity in 232 predominantly indigenous ethnic groups across the globe that have been largely
isolated from genetic flows from other ethnic groups.5 The distribution of these ethnic groups across
the globe is depicted in Figure 2 and the summary statistics of this measure of genetic diversity as
documented in Table B.1 establishes that observed genetic diversity ranges from 0.77 in Africa to
0.58 in South America.6 Moreover, the study creates a novel geo-referenced dataset consisting of




   5
      This dataset combines eight human genetic diversity datasets based on the 645 loci that they share, including
the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel used by Ashraf and Galor (2013).
    6
      The analysis excludes observations that are not marked as clean by Pemberton et al. (2013). These omitted
observations either reflect genetic diversity of a large geographical region (e.g., Patagonia), rather than an ethnic
group, or ethnicities that were subjected to significant admixture. Furthermore, it excludes two ethnicities (the
Surui and the Ache of South America) that are largely viewed as extreme outliers in terms of genetic diversity (e.g.
Wang et al., 2007). The exclusion of these ethnicities is not particular to our study. In particular, Ramachandran
et al. (2005) omits the Surui, being “an extreme outlier in a variety of previous analyses”, and did not include the
Ache either. Furthermore, these ethnicities have the lowest levels of genetic diversity in the clean sample and the
largest residuals of an OLS regression of genetic diversity on migratory distance from Addis Ababa. Including these
observations, nevertheless, does not a↵ect the qualitative analysis.


                                                         6
Figure 2: This figure depicts the interior centroids of the historical homelands of ethnic groups in
the data. The red points mark observations with known observed and predicted genetic diversity
and the blue points mark observations with known predicted genetic diversity.



ethnic groups, for which observed population diversity is matched to geographic, ethnographic and
institutional characteristics.7

2.2.2    Predicted Population Diversity within Ethnic Groups

The research exploits the tight negative relationship between migratory distance from East Africa
and observed genetic diversity across the ethnic group in the sample of Pemberton et al (2013) in
order to generate a measure of predicted genetic diversity for all ethnic group in the Ethnographic
Atlas, overcoming sample limitations as well as potential concerns about omitted variables and
reverse causality that may a↵ect the relationship between observed genetic diversity and political
institutions.8
    The composition of genetic traits within populations has evolved in the course of a stepwise
migration process of anatomically modern human out of Africa 90,000–60,000 BP. The “out of
Africa” migration was associated with a decline in the degree of genetic diversity in populations
that settled at greater migratory distances from Africa. In particular, following the serial founder
e↵ect, since the spatial di↵usion of humans occurred in a sequence of steps, in which a subgroup
of individuals left their parental colony to establish a new settlement farther away, carrying only
a subset of the genetic diversity of their parental colony, the extent of genetic diversity observed
within an indigenous ethnic group decreases with its migratory distance from East Africa (e.g.,




    7
      A georeferenced mapping of the ethnographic characteristics of the ethnic groups to shed light on contemporary
cultural traits was first introduced by Nunn (2008).
    8
      Since predicted population diversity for each of the ethnic groups in the sample is a generated regressor, the
analysis based on predicted population diversity employs a two-step bootstrapping algorithm to compute the standard
errors (Table B.2 and B.3 in the Appendix).


                                                         7
                                                       TZA

                                     0.76
                                                    TZA
                                                      TZA
                                                        TZA
                                                      TZA
                                                  KENTZA
                                                      TZA
                                                       RWA          CMR
                                                                    GAB
                                             KEN
                                            ETH KEN
                                                  KEN
                                                   KEN
                                                 KEN
                                                   KEN TZA
                                                     TZA
                                                      TZA      CMRCMR
                                                                    CMR
                                                                    GAB
                                                                      CMR      ZAF
                                              KEN
                                               KENKENTZA
                                                      TZA    TCD CMR
                                                               TCD
                                                               CAF
                                                                NGACMRCMR
                                                                      CMR
                                                                     CMR
                                                                      CMR
                                                                        NGA
                                                                          NGA GHA
                                                KEN
                                                  KEN
                                                  KENTZA ZAR
                                                KEN          TCD
                                                               COGAGO
                                                              TCD
                                                              TCD  CMR
                                                                    GAB
                                                                    CMR
                                                                     CMR
                                                                       NGA
                                                                        NGA
                                                  KEN       ZAR
                                                              CMR     CMR NGA GHA
                                                                               ZAF
                                             KEN KEN TZA
                                               KEN
                                                 KEN
                                                              TCD
                                                            TCD
                                                               TCD
                                                               CMR
                                                               NGA
                                                              TCD
                                                                   CMR
                                                                 CMR
                                                                 CMR
                                                               CMR
                                                                    CMR
                                                                     NGA NGA
                                                                                CIV
                                            ETH ERI ZAR        CMR                 SEN
                                                SSD
                                                KEN
                                                SSDSDN
                                                   SSD
                                                     TZA       CMR ZAF

                                                 KEN
                                                SDN                    NAM
                                                                 NGA

                                                              CMRPAK       DZA
                                                              SYR            IND ITA
                                                             PSE     PAK PAK
                                                                    PAK    IND
                                                                          PAKIND IND  CHN
                                                                                       IND
                                                                                         IND
                                                     TZA           PAK                   RUS
                                                                                        FRA
                                                                      RUS PAK
                                                                      AFG     IND IND
                                                                                IND IND
                                                                                   ITA
                                                   YEM                  IND IND
                                                                       IND                      GBR
                                                              SYR                 ITA

                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                               RUS
                                                                                                      CHN
                                                                                                    MNG
                                                                                                    KHM        CHN
                                                                                    CHN         CHN
                                                                                                  CHN CHN              RUS

                                                                                                        CHN                  JPN
                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                               CHNCHN          RUS
                                                                             PAK                                                    PNG
                                                                                                                 CHN                          CAN         CAN
                 Genetic Diversity

                                                                                                              CHN                     PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                               CHN                                    PNG
                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                    PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                   PNG  PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                                    WSM
                                                                                                                                   PNG                                     MEX
                                                                                                                                   PNG
                                                                                                              TWN                    PNG
                                                                                                                                       CAN                                               COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PER
                                                                                                                                          PNG                                                                               ARG
                                                                                                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                                                                                           GTM
                                                                                                                                    PNG              NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                    PNG
                                                                                                                                    PNG
                                                                                                              TWN
                                                                                                                                    PNG                                                                              BRA
                                                                                                                                    PNG
                                                                                                                                        PNG                              MEX           COL
                                                                                                                                                                         MEX                          PER

                                                                                                                                                                                        COL

                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                     PNG                                               COL
                                                                                                                                                                                       COL    COL                     BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                                                MEX




                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA

                                                                                                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                        COL




                                     0.56                                                                                                                                                             BRA



                                            0                                                                                                                                                                              25000
                                                                                          Migratory Distance from East Africa (in km)
                                                       South America                                  North America                Oceania                        Asia             Europe                         Africa




Figure 3: This figure depicts the negative impact of migratory distance from East Africa on genetic
diversity across the 230 ethnic groups in the sample. The location of each ethnic group and its
degree of genetic diversity is represented by a point and a World Bank code of the country in which
the ethnic group resides.



Harpending and Rogers 2000; Ramachandran et al. 2005; Prugnolle, Manica, and Balloux 2005;
Ashraf and Galor 2013b).9
    Reflecting this chain of ancient population bottlenecks originating in East Africa, the scatter
plot in Figure 3 depicts the highly significant negative e↵ect of migratory distance from the cradle of
mankind in East Africa on genetic diversity in the ethnic-group sample of Pemberton et al (2013).
In particular, regressing genetic diversity on migratory distance from Addis Ababa in this sample
suggest that expected heterozygosity falls by 6.7 percentage points for every 10,000 km increase
in migratory distance from East Africa. Furthermore, migratory distance explains more than 84
percent of the cross-group variation in observed genetic diversity.10

    9
      In the pre-colonial era, the geographical locations of societies reflected the locations to which their ancestral
populations had arrived at the culmination of their prehistoric “out of Africa” migration from the cradle of humankind,
and as such, the diversity of a precolonial society was presumably determined by the ancient serial founder e↵ect
originating in East Africa.
   10
      As further elaborated in the Appendix, in estimating the migratory distance from Addis Ababa (East Africa)
for each of the ethnic groups in the data, the shortest traversable paths from Addis Ababa to the interior centroid
of each ethnic group was computed. Given the limited ability of humans to travel across large bodies of water, the
traversable area included bodies of water at a distance of 100km from land mass (excluding migration from Africa
into Europe via Italy or Spain).


                                                                                                                               8
    The distribution of ethnic groups across the globe in this predicted diversity sample is depicted
in Figure 2 and the summary statistics of this measure of genetic diversity as documented in Table
B.1 establishes that observed genetic diversity ranges from 0.77 in Africa to 0.59 in South America.

2.2.3    Predicted Population Diversity within Countries

While the observed and predicted population diversity for ethnic groups is sufficient in order to con-
duct the ethnic-level analysis, the examination of the e↵ect of population diversity on autocratic
institutions across countries requires the use of a genetic diversity measure for national popula-
tions. However, national contemporary populations are composed of multiple ethnicities, which
may not be indigenous to their current geographical locations. Thus, one needs to construct an
index of genetic diversity for contemporary national populations that accounts for the proportional
representation of each ethnic group within the country, the expected heterozygosity within each
subnational group, as well as the diversity that arises from the genetic distances between the pre-
colonial ancestral populations. Hence, the country-level analysis employs the measure of genetic
diversity, as constructed by Ashraf and Galor (2013b), accounting for these three important ele-
ments of population diversity with a national population.11 The summary statistics of this measure
of genetic diversity is documented in Table B.1.

2.3     Measures of Political Institutions, Autocracy, and Social Stratification
In view of the hypothesis that diversity contributed to demand for institutions as well as to the
emergence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions which persisted over time and a↵ected the nature
of contemporary institutions, measures of pre-colonial institutions and pre-colonial and modern
autocracy will be used.
    For the analysis of pre-colonial institutions, the study exploits the arguably largest and most
comprehensive collection of ethnographic tabulations found in the Ethnographic Atlas, consisting
of ethnographic data for 1,267 worldwide ethnic groups (Murdock, 1967). Pre-colonial ethic level
institutions are captured by “Jurisdictional Hierarchy Beyond Local Community”, as reported by
the Ethnographic Atlas. This widely used measure of pre-colonial institution (or statehood) consists
of five gradations: (i) no political authority beyond the local community, (ii) one level (e.g., petty
chiefdoms), (iii) two levels (e.g., larger chiefdoms), (iv) three levels (e.g., states), and (v) four levels
(e.g., large states).
    The presence of autocratic institutions in the pre-colonial era is captured by various measures
such as: (i) degree of absence of checks on leader’s power, (ii) difficulty of removal of leaders, (iii)
leader’s exercise of authority, (iv) degree of lack of community decisions, and (v) perception of
leader’s power, as reported by the Standard Cross Cultural Survey (Murdock and White, 1969).
Furthermore, the degree of contemporary autocratic institutions is captured by the indexes of

  11
     Since predicted population diversity for each country is a generated regressor, the empirical analysis based on
predicted population diversity employs a two-step bootstrapping algorithm to compute the standard errors (Table
B.2 and B.3 in the Appendix).


                                                         9
“Autocracy” and “Constraints on the Executive” as reported by the gold standard in comparative
research in political institutions: The Polity IV Project dataset (Marshall et al., 2014).
    In light of the hypothesis that diversity contributed to the degree of social stratification, con-
tributing to the emergence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions, various measures of social strat-
ification will be used. First, “Class Stratification” as reported by the Ethnographic Atlas. This
measure of social stratification is aggregated into three gradations: (i) absence of stratification,
(ii) the presence of wealth distinctions or elite, and (iii) the presence of complex social classes or
hereditary aristocracy.


3    Population Diversity and Autocracy in the Pre-Colonial Era
This section explores the impact of population diversity on the degree of pre-colonial autocratic
institutions across ethnic groups. Moreover, it examines the hypothesized mechanism that may
govern this reduced-form relationship. In particular, it investigates: (i) the e↵ect of population
diversity on pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy, (ii) the e↵ect of population diversity on pre-colonial
social stratification and slavery, (iii) the associations between pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy,
social stratification and slavery, on the one hand, and pre-colonial autocracy on the other hand,
and (iv) the e↵ect of population diversity on pre-colonial autocracy.
    In view of the conjecture that ethnic groups characterized by higher population diversity are
more likely to form institutions that would mitigate the adverse e↵ect of non-cohesiveness on
productivity, the empirical analysis first examines whether ethnic groups that are characterized
by a higher level of observed population diversity tend to possess more elaborate institutions, as
captured by the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy in those societies.
    In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity as well as
the size and the representativeness of the ethnic group sample with observed population diversity,
the research exploits two empirical strategies to identify the causal e↵ect of population diversity
on autocracy and to demonstrate the robustness of the estimated e↵ect. First, migratory distance
from Africa is exploited as an instrumental variable for observed population diversity, in order to
examine the potential causal e↵ect of diversity on the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy, accounting
for the potentially confounding e↵ects of geographical characteristics as well as regional fixed e↵ects.
Second, using migratory distance from Africa to predict population diversity for 1,267 ethnic groups
in the Ethnographic Atlas, the analysis explores the robustness of the result for this extended
sample.
    Further, in light of the second element of the proposed mechanism about the impact of popu-
lation diversity on social stratification, the empirical analysis explores whether ethnic groups that
are characterized by a higher level of observed population diversity tend to have a higher level of
class stratification and a higher intensity of slavery. Moreover, exploiting migratory distance from
Africa as: (i) an instrumental variable for observed population diversity, and (ii) as a predictor
of population diversity for all ethnic groups in the Ethnographic Atlas, the empirical analysis ex-


                                                   10
plores the causal and robust e↵ect of population diversity on class stratification and the intensity
of slavery, accounting for the potentially confounding e↵ects of geographical characteristics as well
as regional fixed e↵ects.
   Finally, the ethnic-level empirical analysis explores the contribution of population diversity to
the emergence of autocratic institutions. In light of the proposed mechanism, the empirical analysis
explores the association between jurisdictional hierarchy and the presence of autocratic institutions
as captured by: (i) degree of absence of checks on leader’s power, (ii) difficulty of removal of leaders,
(iii) leader’s exercise of authority, (iv) degree of lack of community decisions, and (v) perception
of leader’s power, Furthermore, it examines the association between social stratification and the
intensity of slavery and these measures of autocracy. Moreover, the empirical analysis explores the
reduced-form e↵ect of predicted population diversity on each of these measures of autocracy.

3.1       Baseline Regression Specifications
This section presents the baseline econometric models that will be used in the empirical analysis
of the relationship between population diversity and autocracy in the pre-colonial era.

3.1.1      Population Diversity and Ethnographic Characteristics

In estimating the association between observed population diversity and pre-colonial (i) jurisdic-
tional hierarchy, (ii) stratification, and (iii) intensity of slavery, the following empirical specification
is adopted and estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS):12

                                     Yi =    0   +   1 Gi    + Xi0   2   + Ci0   3   + "i ,                   (1)

where Yi is a measure of either jurisdictional hierarchy, social stratification, or intensity of slavery,
for ethnicity i; Gi is observed population diversity for ethnicity i, Xi is a vector of potentially
confounding geographical control variables for ethnicity i; Ci is a vector of continental dummies for
ethnicity i; and "i is an error term clustered at the country level for ethnicity i.
   Moreover, considering the remarkably strong predictive power of migratory distance from East
Africa for genetic diversity, the baseline regression specification employed to test the e↵ect of
predicted population diversity on pre-colonial (i) jurisdictional hierarchy, (ii) stratification, and (iii)
intensity of slavery (in the extended sample of the entire set of ethnic groups in the Ethnographic
Atlas) is estimated via OLS based on the following empirical specification:13

                                     Yi =    0   +   1 Ĝi   + Xi0   2   + Ci0   3   + "i ,                   (2)




  12
     As   established in Table B.4 in the Appendix, the results are robust to the use of an alternative estimation
method    (i.e., ordered probit).
  13
     As   established in Table B.5 in the Appendix, the results are robust to the use of an alternative estimation
method    (i.e., ordered probit).


                                                              11
where Ĝi is the level of population diversity predicted by migratory distance from East Africa for
ethnicity i.
   Furthermore, the causal e↵ect of population diversity on pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy,
stratification, and inequality is estimated via a 2SLS procedure, instrumenting observed population
diversity with the migratory distance from East Africa in the sample of observed genetic diversity.
In particular, the second stage of the 2SLS regression is given by equation (1), while the first stage
of the 2SLS regression is estimated by the equation

                                     Gi = ↵0 + a1 Zi + Xi0 ↵2 + Ci0 ↵3 + "i ,                                 (3)

where Zi is the migratory distance from East Africa to the centroid of the homeland of ethnicity i.

3.1.2      Ethnographic Characteristics and Pre-Colonial Autocracy

In estimating the association between pre-colonial autocracy and pre-colonial (i) jurisdictional
hierarchy, (ii) stratification, and (iii) intensity of slavery, the following empirical specification is
adopted and estimated via (OLS):14

                                     Ai =    0   +   1 Yi    + Xi0   2   + Ci0   3   + "i ,                   (4)

where Ai is a measure of pre-colonial autocracy for ethnicity i; Yi is a measure of either jurisdictional
hierarchy, social stratification, or intensity of slavery, for ethnicity i.

3.1.3      Population Diversity and Pre-Colonial Autocracy

In estimating the association between predicted population diversity and pre-colonial autocracy,
the following empirical specification is adopted and estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS):15

                                     Ai =    0   +   1 Ĝi   + Xi0   2   + Ci0   3   + "i .                   (5)

3.2       Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy
This subsection establishes the e↵ect of population diversity on pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy
across ethnic groups.

3.2.1      Observed Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy

The first layer of this empirical analysis establishes that ethnic groups that are characterized by a
higher level of observed population diversity tend to possess more elaborate institutions, as captured
by the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy in those societies.
  14
     As   established in Table B.6 in the Appendix, the results are robust to the use of an alternative estimation
method    (i.e., ordered probit).
  15
     As   established in Table B.7 in the Appendix, the results are robust to the use of an alternative estimation
method    (i.e., ordered probit).


                                                              12
                 Table 1: Observed Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy


                                             Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
     Genetic Diversity              2.685⇤⇤⇤     4.197⇤⇤⇤       4.350⇤⇤⇤   7.894⇤⇤⇤    9.503⇤⇤⇤     9.645⇤⇤⇤
                                    (0.922)      (0.875)        (0.908)    (2.330)     (3.023)       (2.828)
     Log Absolute Latitude                       0.151⇤⇤⇤       0.153⇤⇤⇤   0.091⇤⇤      0.079⇤       0.096⇤⇤
                                                 (0.030)        (0.032)    (0.035)     (0.042)       (0.043)
     Elevation                                                                          -0.000        0.000
                                                                                       (0.000)       (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                                                                  0.000        0.000
                                                                                       (0.000)       (0.000)
     River Length                                                                      0.001⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                       (0.000)       (0.001)
     River Density                                                                       0.017        0.027
                                                                                       (0.029)       (0.023)
     Share Desert                                                                       -0.167      -0.504⇤⇤
                                                                                       (0.304)       (0.253)
     Average Temperature                                                                             0.028⇤⇤
                                                                                                     (0.011)
     Temperature Range                                                                                0.016
                                                                                                     (0.024)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)           No           No            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
     Continental FE                    No           No            No         Yes          Yes          Yes
     N                                 131          131           131        131          131          131
     Adjusted R2                      0.038        0.143         0.171      0.288        0.275        0.317
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of
     a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of
     jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables
     at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan
     Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. *
     Significant at the 10 percent level.



   Table 1 presents the results from OLS regression analyses of the log number of levels of juris-
dictional hierarchy in the pre-colonial era on observed population diversity. Consistent with the
prediction of the proposed hypothesis, column 1 establishes a highly statistically and economi-
cally significant correlation between the measure of jurisdictional hierarchy and observed genetic
diversity, based on the 131 ethnic groups for which information on both population diversity and
jurisdictional hierarchy is available. In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in observed pop-
ulation diversity is associated with a 2.7 percent increase in the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy. In light of the potentially confounding e↵ects of geographical characteristics on this
association, columns 2–4 establish that this association is robust to the gradual inclusion of control


                                                           13
variables, capturing a range of geographical factors. In particular, the association remains highly
significant while accounting for the absolute latitude of the centroid of the homeland of the eth-
nicity (column 2), soil quality decile fixed e↵ects (column 3),16 and continental fixed e↵ects which
capture unobserved heterogeneity across continents (column 4). In addition, column 5 establishes
that the association remain highly significant while accounting for the potentially confounding ef-
fects of elevation of the homelands, terrain ruggedness, length and density of rivers, and the share
of desert. Similarly, column 6 establishes that the association remain highly significant once the
average and range of temperatures is accounted for.
    Thus, Table 1 establishes that the estimated association between observed genetic diversity and
pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly statistically and economically significant, accounting
for a wide range of potentially confounding geographical characteristics and continental fixed e↵ects.
In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in observed population diversity is associated with a 9.6
percent increase in the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy. This partial association between
jurisdictional hierarchy and population diversity, as derived in column 6, is plotted in Panel A of
Figure A.1.

3.2.2    Observed Diversity & Jurisdictional Hierarchy: Instrumental Variable Analysis

In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity, the second
layer of this empirical analysis exploits an instrumental variable strategy to identify the causal
e↵ect of population diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy. In view of the negative e↵ect of migratory
distance from the cradle of humankind in East Africa to various settlements across the globe on
population diversity, migratory distance from Africa is exploited as an instrumental variable for
observed population diversity, establishing a highly significant causal e↵ect of diversity on the
degree of jurisdictional hierarchy.
    Table 2 presents the results from 2SLS regression analyses of the log number of levels of ju-
risdictional hierarchy in the pre-colonial era on observed population diversity. Interestingly, in
comparison to their OLS counterparts in Table 1, the estimated 2SLS coefficients associated with
the e↵ect of diversity remain relatively stable in magnitude, suggesting that omitted variable bias
or endogeneity of genetic diversity need not be a source of concern. In particular, column 1 estab-
lishes that migratory distance from East Africa is a very strong instrument for genetic diversity
(the Kleibergen-Paap F -statistic is 237) and that there is a highly statistically and economically
significant e↵ect of observed genetic diversity on the log number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy.
In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in the level of observed genetic diversity increases the
number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy by 2.9 percent.
    Furthermore, columns 2–5 establish that this e↵ect is robust to the gradual inclusion of control
variables capturing a range of geographical factors. In particular, migratory distance from East
Africa remains a strong instrument for population diversity, and the e↵ect of population diversity

  16
    Considering decile fixed e↵ects better accounts for the potential non-linearity of soil-quality on the various
outcomes, but the results are robust to the use of a linear continuous specification.


                                                       14
        Table 2: Observed Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — IV Analysis


                                              Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                 (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)
          Genetic Diversity                    2.911⇤⇤     4.570⇤⇤⇤     4.750⇤⇤⇤      5.407⇤⇤⇤     5.203⇤⇤⇤
                                               (1.161)     (1.233)      (1.120)       (1.504)      (1.356)
          Log Absolute Latitude                            0.156⇤⇤⇤     0.157⇤⇤⇤      0.144⇤⇤⇤     0.193⇤⇤⇤
                                                           (0.031)      (0.031)       (0.035)      (0.041)
          Elevation                                                                    0.000         0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)
          Terrain Ruggedness                                                           0.000         0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)      (0.000)
          River Length                                                                0.002⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                      (0.000)      (0.001)
          River Density                                                                0.029        0.031⇤
                                                                                      (0.021)      (0.016)
          Share Desert                                                                 0.107        -0.088
                                                                                      (0.240)      (0.234)
          Average Temperature                                                                      0.023⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                   (0.008)
          Temperature Range                                                                         -0.012
                                                                                                   (0.024)
          Soil Quality (Climatic)                No             No         Yes          Yes           Yes
          N                                     131          131           131          131          131
          1st Stage F -statistic (K-P)        237.138      194.590       177.812      188.822      173.749
          This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level,
          of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of
          levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory
          distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional
          on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent stan-
          dard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
          at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.



on jurisdictional hierarchy remains highly significant while controlling for absolute latitude of the
centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity (column 2), soil quality decile fixed e↵ects (column 3),
elevation of the homelands, terrain ruggedness, length and density of rivers, and the share of desert
(column 4), average temperature, as well as the temperature range (column 5). In particular, a 1
percentage point increase in observed genetic diversity increases the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy by 5.2 percent.17
   17
      In light of the modest sample size of these regressions involving observed population diversity, migratory distance
from East Africa is a powerful predictor of population diversity across the globe, but not within continental regions
and thus, continental fixed e↵ects cannot be used in these instrumental variable regressions. Reassuringly, however,
the subsequent section establishes the causal e↵ect of population diversity while accounting for continental fixed
e↵ects.


                                                           15
                 Table 3: Predicted Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy


                                                 Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
  Predicted Genetic Diversity           5.121⇤⇤⇤     5.771⇤⇤⇤     5.838⇤⇤⇤     5.496⇤⇤⇤      5.732⇤⇤⇤      5.949⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.293)      (0.320)      (0.317)      (1.010)       (1.097)        (1.106)
  Log Absolute Latitude                              0.068⇤⇤⇤     0.080⇤⇤⇤     0.110⇤⇤⇤      0.109⇤⇤⇤      0.130⇤⇤⇤
                                                     (0.013)      (0.014)      (0.018)       (0.019)        (0.021)
  Elevation                                                                                   0.000        0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.000)        (0.000)
  Terrain Ruggedness                                                                         -0.000⇤      -0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.000)        (0.000)
  River Length                                                                               0.003⇤⇤       0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.001)        (0.001)
  River Density                                                                               -0.003         -0.002
                                                                                             (0.002)        (0.002)
  Share Desert                                                                                0.011           0.019
                                                                                             (0.062)        (0.072)
  Average Temperature                                                                                       0.007⇤
                                                                                                            (0.004)
  Temperature Range                                                                                        -0.020⇤⇤
                                                                                                            (0.008)
  Soil Quality (Climatic)                  No           No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
  Continental FE                           No           No           No           Yes           Yes          Yes
  N                                      1,076         1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076         1,076
  Adjusted R2                            0.199         0.217        0.225        0.290        0.297         0.300
  This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of
  pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy)
  on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the
  homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Specifications
  marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects.
  Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent
  level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.



3.2.3    Predicted Population Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy

In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity and the size
and the representativeness of the ethnic group sample with observed population diversity, the
third layer of this empirical analysis exploits an additional empirical strategy to identify the causal
e↵ect of population diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy and to demonstrate the robustness of the
estimated e↵ect. Using migratory distance from Africa to project population diversity for 1,267
ethnic groups in the Ethnographic Atlas, the analysis further establishes the robustness of the
highly significant e↵ect of population diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy in this extended sample.



                                                           16
   Table 3 presents the results from OLS regressions of the log number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy in the pre-colonial era on predicted population diversity using the extended sample with
predicted genetic diversity. Reassuringly, in comparison to the estimates in Table 1 and Table
2, the estimated coefficients on predicted genetic diversity in Table 3 are of the same order of
magnitude and remain highly statistically significant. Furthermore, the estimates are very stable
across specifications.
   Column 1 establishes that population diversity, as predicted by migratory distance from East
Africa, has a highly statistically and economically significant e↵ect on the log number of levels of
jurisdictional hierarchy. In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in the level of predicted popula-
tion diversity increases the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy by 5.1 percent. Furthermore,
columns 2–6 establish that this e↵ect is robust to the inclusion of control variables capturing a range
of geographical factors. In particular, the estimated e↵ect of predicted genetic diversity on juris-
dictional hierarchy remains highly significant while controlling for absolute latitude of the centroid
of the homeland of the ethnicity (column 2), soil quality decile fixed e↵ects (column 3), continen-
tal fixed e↵ects (column 4), elevation of the homelands, terrain ruggedness, length and density of
rivers, and the share of desert (column 5), average temperature, as well as the temperature range
(column 6).
   Thus, Table 3 establishes that the estimated e↵ect of predicted population diversity on pre-
colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly statistically and economically significant, accounting for a
wide range of potentially confounding geographical characteristics and continental fixed e↵ects. In
particular, the conditional e↵ect of a 1 percentage point increase in predicted population diversity
increases the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy by 5.9 percent. This partial association
between jurisdictional hierarchy and predicted population diversity, derived in column 6, is plotted
in Panel B of Figure A.1.

3.2.4   Robustness

The findings are una↵ected qualitatively by alternative geographical characteristic that has been
shown to be correlated with the emergence of the state in general and the presence of autocracy in
particular. First, as suggested by Bentzen et al. (2017) irrigation suitability, and its potential e↵ect
on the desirability of cooperation, is associated with the presence of autocracy across contemporary
countries and regions. As reported in Tables B.8 and B.9, irrigation suitability is also associated
with jurisdictional hierarchy across ethnic groups. Nevertheless, accounting for the potentially con-
founding e↵ect of irrigation suitability does not alter the qualitative impact of population diversity
on jurisdictional hierarchy in the predicted as well as the observed samples. Furthermore, in line
with the proposed hypothesis about the contribution of population diversity for the scope for dom-
ination, the interaction between genetic diversity and irrigation suitability is positive and highly
significant (Table B.10). Moreover, the association between irrigation suitability and jurisdictional
hierarchy becomes significantly positive only in sufficiently diverse societies.



                                                  17
   Second, as suggested by Fenske (2014), ecological diversity is associated with jurisdictional
hierarchy. Nevertheless, accounting for the potentially confounding e↵ect of ecological diversity
does not alter the qualitative impact of population diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy in the
predicted as well as the observed samples (Tables B.11 and B.12). Third, as proposed by Mayshar
et al. (2015), the suitability of land for tubers is associated with jurisdictional hierarchy. Accounting
for the potentially confounding e↵ect of major crop types does not alter the qualitative impact of
population diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy in the predicted as well as the observed samples
(Tables B.13 and B.14).
   The findings are robust to additional confounding geographical and ethnographic characteris-
tics. First, variability of soil suitability that, as established by Michalopoulos (2012), contributes
to ethnolinguistic fractionalization and thus population diversity has no qualitative impact on the
findings (Tables B.15 and B.16). Second, while the scale of each society may be associated with
jurisdictional hierarchy, it has no qualitative impact on the e↵ect of population diversity on ju-
risdictional hierarchy (Tables B.17 and B.18). Third, the exclusion of the African continent has
no impact on the qualitative results (Tables B.19 and B.20). Fourth, the year of description of
each ethnic group, as recorded in the Ethnographic Atlas, has no qualitative impact on the findings
(Tables B.21 and B.22).
   The findings are further robust to alternative specifications and estimation methods. In partic-
ular, the use of ordered probit rather than OLS has no impact on the results (Table B.5 and B.4),
and the analysis is una↵ected by the use of the number (rather than the logarithm of the number)
of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy as the outcome variable (Tables B.23 and B.24).

3.3     Population Diversity and Social Stratification Slavery
This subsection establishes the e↵ect of population diversity on the pre-colonial the degree of social
stratification and slavery across ethnic groups.

3.3.1    Observed Population Diversity and Social Stratification Slavery

The first layer of this empirical analysis establishes that ethnic groups that are characterized by a
higher level of observed population diversity tend to be characterized by a higher degree of social
stratification and by the presence of slavery.
   Table 4 presents the results from OLS regression analyses of social stratification and slavery in
the pre-colonial era on observed population diversity. Consistent with the prediction of the proposed
hypothesis, columns 1–3 establish a highly statistically and economically significant correlation
between the measure of social stratification and observed genetic diversity, based on the 121 ethnic
groups for which information on both population diversity and social stratification are available.
Column 1 presents the correlation accounting for absolute latitude. Column 2 establishes that the
association remains highly statistically significant while accounting for the baseline geographical
controls, and column 3 establishes robustness of the association to the inclusion of continental fixed
e↵ects. The point estimate implies that a 1 percent increase in observed population diversity is

                                                   18
                     Table 4: Observed Genetic Diversity and Stratification & Slavery



                                                   Social                              Intensity of
                                                Stratification                           Slavery

                                        (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
       Genetic Diversity             5.663⇤⇤⇤    6.549⇤⇤⇤       22.740⇤⇤⇤   7.239⇤⇤⇤    9.191⇤⇤⇤      11.406⇤
                                     (1.511)      (2.076)        (5.371)    (1.373)     (2.078)       (6.149)
       Log Absolute Latitude         0.263⇤⇤⇤    0.388⇤⇤⇤       0.277⇤⇤⇤    0.188⇤⇤⇤    0.278⇤⇤⇤      0.338⇤⇤⇤
                                     (0.056)      (0.084)        (0.091)    (0.053)     (0.080)       (0.104)
       Elevation                                 0.000⇤⇤          0.000                   0.000         0.000
                                                  (0.000)        (0.000)                (0.000)       (0.000)
       Terrain Ruggedness                          0.000          0.000                   0.000         0.000
                                                  (0.000)        (0.000)                (0.000)       (0.000)
       River Length                              0.003⇤⇤⇤       0.002⇤⇤⇤                 -0.001        -0.001
                                                  (0.001)        (0.001)                (0.001)       (0.001)
       River Density                               0.004           0.045                0.079⇤⇤       0.086⇤⇤
                                                  (0.035)        (0.043)                (0.034)       (0.040)
       Share Desert                              -0.804⇤⇤       -1.874⇤⇤⇤                -0.066        0.293
                                                  (0.365)        (0.363)                (0.467)       (0.578)
       Average Temperature                       0.052⇤⇤⇤       0.055⇤⇤⇤                0.039⇤⇤⇤        0.025
                                                  (0.012)        (0.015)                (0.011)       (0.016)
       Temperature Range                          -0.077⇤         -0.022                 -0.013        -0.031
                                                  (0.045)        (0.042)                (0.039)       (0.042)
       Soil Quality (Climatic)         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
       Continental FE                  No           No            Yes         No           No           Yes
       N                               121          121           121         120          120          120
       Adjusted R2                    0.155        0.218         0.322       0.182        0.277        0.285
       This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of
       measures of pre-colonial stratification and inequality on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a
       range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
       accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-
       consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. **
       Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.



associated with a 0.23 higher score on the social stratification scale.18 This partial association
between social stratification and population diversity is plotted in Panel A of Figure A.2.
    Similarly, columns 4–6 establish that there is a highly statistically and economically significant
correlation between population diversity and the intensity of slavery, based on the 120 ethnic groups
for which information on both measures is available. Column 4 presents the correlation account-
ing for absolute latitude. Column 5 establishes that the association remains highly statistically
  18
     It should be noted that the estimated e↵ect is much larger within continents compared to the estimated e↵ect
across the world as a whole.


                                                           19
significant while accounting for the baseline geographical controls, and column 6 establishes that
the association remains highly statistically significant when also accounting for continental fixed
e↵ects. The point estimate implies that a 1 percent increase in observed population diversity is
associated with a 0.11 higher score on the intensity of slavery.19

3.3.2    Observed Diversity and Social Stratification & Slavery: IV Analysis

In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity, the second
layer of this empirical analysis exploits an instrumental variable strategy to identify the causal
e↵ect of population diversity on social stratification and slavery. In view of the negative e↵ect
of migratory distance from the cradle of humankind in East Africa to various settlements across
the globe on population diversity, migratory distance from Africa is exploited as an instrumental
variable for observed population diversity, establishing a highly significant causal e↵ect of diversity
on the degree of social stratification and slavery.
    Table 5 presents the results from a series of 2SLS regressions. The table reveals that the e↵ect
of genetic diversity on social stratification and the intensity of slavery is statistically significant. In
particular, column 1 establishes that migratory distance from East Africa is a very strong instru-
ment for genetic diversity (the Kleibergen-Paap F -statistic is 156) and that there is a statistically
and economically significant e↵ect of observed genetic diversity on social stratification, controlling
for absolute latitude. Furthermore, column 2 establishes that the order of magnitude and the sig-
nificance of the estimate is robust to the inclusion of the baseline geographical controls. The point
estimate implies that a 1 percent increase in observed population diversity is associated with a 0.05
higher score on the social stratification scale.
    Similarly, column 3 establishes that there is a highly statistically and economically significant
e↵ect of observed genetic diversity on the intensity of slavery, controlling for absolute latitude, while
column 4 establishes that the order of magnitude and the significance of the estimate is robust to
the inclusion of the baseline geographical controls. The point estimate implies that a 1 percent
increase in observed population diversity is associated with a 0.08 higher score on the intensity of
slavery scale.

3.3.3    Predicted Population Diversity and Stratification & Slavery

In light of potential concerns about the endogeneity of observed population diversity and the size
and the representativeness of the ethnic group sample with observed population diversity, the third
layer of this empirical analysis exploits an additional empirical strategy to identify the causal e↵ect
of population diversity on social stratification and the degree of slavery and to demonstrate the
robustness of the estimated e↵ect. Using migratory distance from Africa to project population
diversity for 1,267 ethnic groups in the Ethnographic Atlas, the analysis further establishes the


  19
     It should be noted that the estimated e↵ect is much larger within continents compared to the estimated e↵ect
across the world as a whole.


                                                       20
Table 5: Observed Population Diversity and Stratification & Slavery — Instrumental Variable
Analysis



                                                         Social                  Intensity of
                                                      Stratification               Slavery

                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
             Genetic Diversity                    4.418⇤⇤       4.856⇤⇤      6.874⇤⇤⇤     7.816⇤⇤⇤
                                                  (1.753)       (2.184)      (1.817)      (2.493)
             Log Absolute Latitude                0.251⇤⇤⇤     0.380⇤⇤⇤      0.185⇤⇤⇤     0.272⇤⇤⇤
                                                  (0.054)       (0.076)      (0.050)      (0.072)
             Elevation                                          0.000⇤⇤                    0.000
                                                                (0.000)                   (0.000)
             Terrain Ruggedness                                  -0.000                     0.000
                                                                (0.000)                   (0.000)
             River Length                                      0.003⇤⇤⇤                   -0.001⇤
                                                                (0.001)                   (0.001)
             River Density                                       -0.013                    0.065⇤
                                                                (0.031)                   (0.035)
             Share Desert                                      -0.771⇤⇤                    -0.042
                                                                (0.337)                   (0.422)
             Average Temperature                               0.052⇤⇤⇤                   0.040⇤⇤⇤
                                                                (0.011)                   (0.010)
             Temperature Range                                  -0.075⇤                    -0.012
                                                                (0.042)                   (0.035)
             Soil Quality (Climatic)                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
             N                                      121           121          120           120
             1st Stage F -statistic (K-P)         156.101       151.207      168.137       155.249
             This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-
             group level, of measures of pre-colonial stratification and inequality on observed
             genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the
             interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control
             variables at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors
             are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
             at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.



robustness of the highly significant e↵ect of population diversity on social stratification and the
degree of slavery in this extended sample.
   Table 6 presents the results from OLS regressions of social stratification and slavery in the
pre-colonial era using the extended sample of predicted population diversity. Reassuringly, in com-
parison to the estimates in Table 4 and Table 5, the estimated coefficients on predicted genetic
diversity in Table 6 are largely of the same order of magnitude and remain highly statistically
significant. Furthermore, the estimates are very stable across specifications. In particular, columns


                                                        21
               Table 6: Predicted Population Diversity and Stratification & Inequality



                                                     Social                                Intensity of
                                                  Stratification                             Slavery

                                          (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
  Predicted Genetic Diversity          6.845⇤⇤⇤     6.529⇤⇤⇤      9.520⇤⇤⇤      8.066⇤⇤⇤    7.618⇤⇤⇤       7.534⇤⇤⇤
                                       (0.555)       (0.553)        (2.000)     (0.557)      (0.571)       (2.172)
  Log Absolute Latitude                0.182⇤⇤⇤     0.257⇤⇤⇤      0.251⇤⇤⇤       0.027       0.152⇤⇤⇤      0.198⇤⇤⇤
                                       (0.022)       (0.035)        (0.037)     (0.024)      (0.032)       (0.035)
  Elevation                                            0.000         0.000                     0.000        0.000
                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)                  (0.000)       (0.000)
  Terrain Ruggedness                                0.000⇤⇤⇤        0.000⇤⇤                   0.000⇤       0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                     (0.000)        (0.000)                  (0.000)       (0.000)
  River Length                                       0.003⇤⇤        0.003⇤⇤                   -0.001        -0.000
                                                     (0.001)        (0.001)                  (0.001)       (0.001)
  River Density                                       -0.003       -0.005⇤⇤                   -0.000         0.001
                                                     (0.002)        (0.002)                  (0.005)       (0.003)
  Share Desert                                        -0.064        -0.212⇤                   -0.116         0.047
                                                     (0.109)        (0.124)                  (0.113)       (0.123)
  Average Temperature                               0.018⇤⇤⇤      0.019⇤⇤⇤                  0.026⇤⇤⇤       0.019⇤⇤⇤
                                                     (0.005)        (0.006)                  (0.004)       (0.006)
  Temperature Range                                 -0.090⇤⇤⇤     -0.068⇤⇤⇤                 -0.052⇤⇤⇤     -0.077⇤⇤⇤
                                                     (0.014)        (0.016)                  (0.013)       (0.014)
  Soil Quality (Climatic)                 Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
  Continental FE                          No           No            Yes          No            No            Yes
  N                                       982          982           982          979           979          979
  Adjusted R2                            0.127        0.215         0.229        0.208         0.266        0.330
  This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures
  of pre-colonial stratification and inequality on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance
  from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control
  variables at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan
  Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
  in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the
  10 percent level.




1–3 establish that predicted population diversity has a highly statistically and economically sig-
nificant e↵ect on the measure of social stratification. Column 1 presents the e↵ect accounting for
absolute latitude. Column 2 establishes that the point estimate is very similar and remains highly
significant in the presence of the baseline geographical control variables, and column 3 establishes
that the point estimate is of the same order of magnitude and remain highly significant as one
accounts for continental fixed e↵ects. This partial association between social stratification and
population diversity is plotted in Panel B of Figure A.2.


                                                          22
    Similarly, columns 4 to 6 establish that predicted population diversity has a highly statistically
and economically significant e↵ect on the intensity of slavery. Column 5 establishes that the point
estimate is very similar and remains highly significant in the presence of the baseline controls.
Furthermore, column 6 establishes that the point estimate is nearly unchanged and remains highly
significant as one accounts for continental fixed e↵ects.
    Thus, Table 6 establishes that the estimated e↵ect of predicted population diversity on pre-
colonial social stratification and slavery is highly statistically and economically significant, ac-
counting for a wide range of potentially confounding geographical characteristics and continental
fixed e↵ects. In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in predicted population diversity increases
the score on the social stratification index by 0.1 and the intensity of slavery index by 0.08.

3.4     Jurisdictional Hierarchy, Stratification, & Pre-Colonial Autocracy
This part of the pre-colonial ethnic-level empirical analysis explores the association between the
emergence of intuitions as well as the degree of social stratification with the emergence of pre-
colonial autocratic institutions. In line with the proposed mechanism, the empirical analysis es-
tablishes that the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy and the degree of social stratification
and slavery are associated with the presence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions, as captured by:
(i) degree of absence of checks on leader’s power, (ii) difficulty of removal of leaders, (iii) leader’s
exercise of authority, (iv) degree of lack of community decisions, and (v) perception of leader’s
power. Moreover, the empirical analysis establishes the reduced form e↵ect of predicted population
diversity on each of these measures of pre-colonial autocracy.

3.4.1    Jurisdictional Hierarchy and Pre-Colonial Autocratic Institutions

The first layer of this empirical analysis establishes that the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy is associated with the presence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions.
    Table 7 presents the results from OLS regression analyses of the various measures of pre-
colonial autocratic institutions on jurisdictional hierarchy.20 Columns 1 and 2 establish that pre-
colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly significantly associated with the degree of absence of
checks on the leader’s power. Columns 3 and 4 suggest that pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is
highly significantly associated with the difficulty of removal of leaders. Columns 5 and 6 find that
pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly significantly associated with the leader’s exercise of
authority. Columns 7 and 8 establish that pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly significantly
associated with the degree of lack of community decisions. Finally, columns 9 and 10 suggest that
pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy is highly significantly associated with the perception of the
leader’s power.



  20
     Given the limited number of observations in the SCCS-dataset, the analysis cannot account for continental fixed
e↵ects.


                                                        23
                                                Table 7: Jurisdictional Hierarchy and Autocratic Institutions



                                                   Degree of Absence          Difficulty of                                 Degree of Lack of
                                                                                                    Leader’s Exercise                                 Perception of
                                                     of Checks on             Removal of                                      Community
                                                                                                      of Authority                                   Leader’s Power
                                                    Leader’s Power              Leaders                                        Decisions
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                        ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤
     Log Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy       0.853       0.738       0.941       0.802         0.947      0.904       0.907       0.896       0.842       0.841⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.166)     (0.167)     (0.206)     (0.212)       (0.133)    (0.145)     (0.136)     (0.155)     (0.145)     (0.157)
     Log Absolute Latitude                          -0.030      -0.119      0.061        0.069        -0.116     -0.071    -0.162⇤⇤      -0.100      -0.026      0.039
                                                   (0.083)     (0.149)     (0.088)     (0.142)       (0.070)    (0.123)     (0.063)     (0.097)     (0.074)     (0.115)
     Elevation                                                  -0.000                  -0.000                   -0.000                   0.000                   0.000
                                                               (0.000)                 (0.000)                  (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                                         0.000                  0.000⇤                     0.000                   0.000                  -0.000
                                                               (0.000)                 (0.000)                  (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
     River Length                                                0.007                  -0.008                   -0.000                  -0.007                  0.006
24




                                                               (0.007)                 (0.010)                  (0.005)                 (0.007)                 (0.006)
     River Density                                              -0.022                  -0.001                    0.003                   0.032                  0.002
                                                               (0.050)                 (0.033)                  (0.032)                 (0.032)                 (0.030)
     Share Desert                                               0.293                    0.271                   -0.509                   0.100                   0.149
                                                               (0.462)                 (0.578)                  (0.453)                 (0.389)                 (0.426)
     Average Temperature                                        -0.004                  0.012                    0.018                    0.012                   0.008
                                                               (0.016)                 (0.017)                  (0.015)                 (0.012)                 (0.014)
     Temperature Range                                           0.079                   0.058                    0.048                  -0.016                  -0.051
                                                               (0.060)                 (0.067)                  (0.057)                 (0.050)                 (0.044)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)                         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
     N                                               78           78         71          71           79         79           82          82          82          82
     Adjusted R2                                    0.223       0.243       0.207       0.271        0.360      0.338       0.391        0.360       0.341       0.286
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on a measure of
     pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy), conditional on a range of control variables at
     the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the
     5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
    Thus, Table 7 establishes that jurisdictional hierarchy, as reflected by the number of levels of
jurisdictional hierarchy, is highly statistically significantly associated with the various measures of
pre-colonial autocratic institutions.

3.4.2     Stratification and Pre-Colonial Autocratic Institutions

The second layer of this empirical analysis establishes that the degree of social stratification and
slavery is associated with presence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions.
    As presented in Table 8, social stratification is significantly associated with the degree of absence
of checks on the leader’s power (columns 1 and 2), and highly significantly associated with the
difficulty of removal of leaders (columns 3 and 4); the leader’s exercise of authority (columns 5 and
6); the degree of lack of community decisions (columns 7 and 8); the perception of the leader’s
power (columns and 10).
    As presented in Table 9, the intensity of slavery is highly significantly associated with: the
degree of absence of checks on the leader’s power (columns 1 and 2); the difficulty of removal of
leaders (columns 3 and 4); the leader’s exercise of authority (columns 5 and 6); the degree of lack
of community decisions (columns 7 and 8); the perception of the leader’s power (columns and 10).
    Thus, Table 8 and Table 9 establish that the associations between social stratification, the
intensity of slavery, and various measures of pre-colonial autocratic institutions are mostly highly
statistically significant.

3.4.3     Predicted Genetic Diversity and Pre-Colonial Autocracy

The third layer of this empirical analysis establishes that predicted population diversity has a
positive e↵ect on presence of pre-colonial autocratic institutions. Given the limited number of
observations in the SCCS-dataset, the analysis uses predicted diversity, rather than the observed
one.21
    As reported in Table 10, predicted population diversity has a significant e↵ect on the degree
of absence of checks on the leader’s power (columns 1 and 2); the difficulty of removal of leaders
(columns 3 and 4); the leader’s exercise of authority (columns 5 and 6); the degree of lack of
community decisions (columns 7 and 8); the perception of the leader’s power (columns and 10).22
Overall, Table 10 establishes that predicted population diversity has significant e↵ects on the various
measures of pre-colonial autocratic institutions.




   21
      Table B.26 in the appendix establishes that observed population diversity is associated with pre-colonial autoc-
racy if the measure of “Succession to the Office of Local Headman” from the Ethnographic Atlas is used to proxy for
pre-colonial autocracy.
   22
      It should be noted that the e↵ect of predicted population diversity on pre-colonial autocracy is not quadratic.
In particular, if predicted genetic diversity squared is included to the baseline specifications, the estimated coefficient
of this square term is insignificant in all specifications.


                                                            25
                                                      Table 8: Social Strata and Autocratic Institutions



                                    Degree of Absence            Difficulty of                                   Degree of Lack of
                                                                                       Leader’s Exercise                                     Perception of
                                      of Checks on               Removal of                                        Community
                                                                                         of Authority                                       Leader’s Power
                                     Leader’s Power                Leaders                                          Decisions
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
     Social Stratification         0.532⇤⇤⇤     0.480⇤⇤⇤     0.532⇤⇤⇤     0.412⇤⇤⇤     0.486⇤⇤⇤    0.451⇤⇤⇤     0.507⇤⇤⇤      0.537⇤⇤⇤    0.428⇤⇤⇤     0.504⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.099)      (0.104)      (0.122)      (0.149)      (0.095)     (0.109)       (0.086)      (0.103)     (0.103)       (0.104)
     Log Absolute Latitude          -0.053       -0.064       0.057         0.093       -0.132      -0.029      -0.189⇤⇤⇤      -0.066      -0.049        0.071
                                   (0.089)      (0.153)      (0.090)      (0.138)      (0.082)     (0.139)       (0.065)      (0.099)     (0.077)       (0.119)
     Elevation                                    0.000                    0.000                    0.000                      0.000⇤                   0.001⇤⇤
                                                (0.000)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)                   (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                           0.000                    0.000                    0.000                      -0.000                  -0.000⇤⇤
                                                (0.000)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)                   (0.000)
26




     River Length                                 0.012                    -0.002                    0.007                     -0.000                   0.012⇤
                                                (0.008)                   (0.010)                  (0.007)                    (0.006)                   (0.007)
     River Density                               -0.004                    0.011                    0.012                      0.044                     0.013
                                                (0.049)                   (0.035)                  (0.033)                    (0.039)                   (0.035)
     Share Desert                                 0.537                     0.338                   -0.388                      0.287                    0.324
                                                (0.455)                   (0.617)                  (0.532)                    (0.434)                   (0.447)
     Average Temperature                          0.003                    0.016                     0.024                      0.018                    0.013
                                                (0.017)                   (0.018)                  (0.017)                    (0.013)                   (0.016)
     Temperature Range                            0.015                    0.036                    0.002                     -0.079⇤                  -0.109⇤⇤
                                                (0.057)                   (0.069)                  (0.057)                    (0.044)                   (0.047)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     N                                78            78          71           71           79          79            82          82           82            82
     Adjusted R2                     0.245        0.254        0.167        0.200       0.256        0.206        0.345        0.325        0.260        0.258
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on a measure of
     pre-colonial social stratification, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                                          Table 9: Slavery and Autocratic Institutions



                                     Degree of Absence            Difficulty of                                  Degree of Lack of
                                                                                        Leader’s Exercise                                    Perception of
                                       of Checks on               Removal of                                       Community
                                                                                          of Authority                                      Leader’s Power
                                      Leader’s Power                Leaders                                         Decisions
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)
     Intensity of Slavery           0.332⇤⇤⇤     0.251⇤       0.588⇤⇤⇤     0.525⇤⇤⇤    0.360⇤⇤⇤      0.297⇤⇤     0.413⇤⇤⇤     0.402⇤⇤⇤    0.322⇤⇤⇤     0.326⇤⇤⇤
                                    (0.116)      (0.130)      (0.128)      (0.143)     (0.106)       (0.123)     (0.099)      (0.112)     (0.105)      (0.117)
     Log Absolute Latitude           -0.010       -0.139       0.107         0.041      -0.085        -0.098     -0.140⇤       -0.107      -0.008       0.033
                                    (0.095)      (0.190)      (0.075)      (0.115)     (0.086)       (0.167)     (0.076)      (0.110)     (0.085)      (0.130)
     Elevation                                    -0.000                    -0.000                    -0.000                    0.000                   0.000
                                                 (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                            0.000                    0.000⇤                     0.000                    0.000                   -0.000
                                                 (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
27




     River Length                                  0.013                    -0.008                     0.006                   -0.002                   0.011
                                                 (0.010)                   (0.012)                   (0.009)                  (0.006)                  (0.009)
     River Density                                -0.045                    -0.004                    -0.023                    0.012                   -0.018
                                                 (0.053)                   (0.035)                   (0.035)                  (0.043)                  (0.038)
     Share Desert                                  0.307                     0.268                    -0.578                    0.218                    0.253
                                                 (0.472)                   (0.627)                   (0.513)                  (0.413)                  (0.460)
     Average Temperature                          -0.007                     0.000                     0.013                    0.008                   0.005
                                                 (0.020)                   (0.018)                   (0.018)                  (0.013)                  (0.017)
     Temperature Range                             0.094                    0.082                      0.074                   -0.026                   -0.058
                                                 (0.074)                   (0.068)                   (0.071)                  (0.048)                  (0.061)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     N                                 77           77           70          70           78            78          81          81           81           81
     Adjusted R2                     0.082        0.076         0.254       0.254        0.139        0.100       0.229        0.159        0.167        0.105
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on a measure of
     slavery, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
     *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                             Table 10: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Autocratic Institutions



                                           Degree of Absence            Difficulty of                                   Degree of Lack of
                                                                                              Leader’s Exercise                                     Perception of
                                             of Checks on               Removal of                                        Community
                                                                                                of Authority                                       Leader’s Power
                                            Leader’s Power                Leaders                                          Decisions
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity          6.317⇤⇤⇤     5.042⇤⇤      7.374⇤⇤⇤      5.858⇤⇤     6.048⇤⇤⇤     5.489⇤⇤⇤     6.589⇤⇤⇤    6.023⇤⇤⇤     5.529⇤⇤⇤      5.504⇤⇤
                                          (2.101)      (2.306)      (2.222)       (2.236)     (1.895)      (1.984)      (1.514)     (1.679)      (1.753)       (2.094)
     Log Absolute Latitude                 0.035        -0.080       0.143          0.111      -0.053       -0.030       -0.100      -0.044       0.026          0.090
                                          (0.099)      (0.189)      (0.092)       (0.148)     (0.091)      (0.173)      (0.069)     (0.120)      (0.087)       (0.144)
     Elevation                                          -0.000                     -0.000                   -0.000                   0.000                       0.000
                                                       (0.000)                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                                0.000⇤                     0.000⇤⇤                    0.000                    0.000                     -0.000
                                                       (0.000)                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)
     River Length                                        0.013                     -0.000                    0.008                   0.001                     0.014⇤
28




                                                       (0.009)                    (0.010)                  (0.007)                  (0.007)                    (0.007)
     River Density                                      -0.061                     -0.031                   -0.044                   -0.016                     -0.043
                                                       (0.050)                    (0.040)                  (0.033)                  (0.041)                    (0.033)
     Share Desert                                        0.235                     0.157                    -0.561                    0.072                      0.125
                                                       (0.533)                    (0.613)                  (0.543)                  (0.479)                    (0.473)
     Average Temperature                                -0.003                      0.014                    0.020                   0.015                       0.011
                                                       (0.020)                    (0.021)                  (0.019)                  (0.015)                    (0.017)
     Temperature Range                                   0.091                     0.087                     0.061                   -0.013                     -0.047
                                                       (0.068)                    (0.067)                  (0.063)                  (0.049)                    (0.054)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     N                                      78             78          71           71          79           79            82          82           82           82
     Adjusted R2                           0.067         0.111        0.079        0.168       0.121        0.109        0.198        0.146        0.164        0.108
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on predicted genetic
     diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables
     at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at
     the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
     As reported in Table B.25, irrigation suitability is associated with some measures of autocracy
across ethnic groups. Nevertheless, accounting for the potentially confounding e↵ect of irrigation
suitability does not alter the qualitative impact of population diversity on autocracy.23
     Hence, the findings establish the impact of predicted population diversity on the prevalence of
autocratic institutions, while indicating that this e↵ect could have plausibly operated through the
e↵ect of population diversity on the formation of institutions as well as stratification.


4        Roots of Autocracy in the Modern Era
This section explores the determinants of contemporary national institutions.24 It examines the
importance of the impact of population diversity on pre-colonial autocratic institutions across ethnic
groups for understanding the contemporary variation in autocratic institutions across nations, via
institutional persistence. Moreover, it analyzes the reduced-form relationship between population
diversity and the nature of contemporary national institutions.

4.1      Baseline Regression Specifications
4.1.1     Persistence of Autocracy

In estimating the persistence of institutions from the pre-colonial to the modern era, the following
empirical specification is adopted and estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS):

                                   Am,i =      0   +   1 Ap,i   + Xi0   2   + Ci0   3   + "i ,                    (6)

where Am,i is a measure of modern autocracy for country i; Ap,i is a measure of pre-colonial
autocracy for country i; Xi is a vector of geographical control variables for country i; Ci is a vector
of continental dummies for country i; and "i is an country-specific error term.

4.1.2     Population Diversity and Modern Autocracy

In estimating the e↵ect of population diversity on contemporary institutions, the following empirical
specification is adopted and estimated via OLS:

                                                          0
                           Am,i =     0   +   1 Gm,i   + Xm,i     2   + Hi0    3
                                                                                      0
                                                                                   + Cm,i        4   + "i ,       (7)

where Gm,i is the predicted level of ancestry-adjusted genetic diversity for country i and Hi is a
vector of non-geographical control variables for country i.



    23
      Unlike the significant positive interaction between population diversity and irrigation suitability reported in
Tables B.9, B.8, and B.10, the interaction term here is insignificant, reflecting possibly the limited sample size.
   24
      The overall negative association between autocratic institutions and economic development is reflected in Figure
A.3 in the appendix.


                                                            29
4.2   Persistence of Autocracy
The first layer of the empirical analysis of the determinants of modern institutions establishes
the importance of the impact of population diversity on pre-colonial autocratic institutions across
ethnic groups for the understanding of the contemporary variation in autocratic institutions across
nations. In particular, it suggests that ethnic institutions that were formed in the pre-colonial era
persisted over time and are associated with contemporary national institutions.
   Aggregating pre-colonial ethnic institutions into pre-colonial national institutions, based on the
average level of autocracy across ethnic-group homelands within each modern country, the analysis
suggests that indeed pre-colonial ethnic institutions have contributed to contemporary institutions,
beyond the persistent e↵ect geographical determinants. In particular, the degree of autocratic
institutions and the absence of executive constraints in the contemporary period are positively and
significantly associated with the degree of autocratic institutions in the pre-colonial era, accounting
for potentially confounding e↵ects of geographical characteristics and population diversity.
   The presence of autocratic institutions in the pre-colonial era is captured by the degree of
absence of checks on leader’s power, as reported by the Standard Cross Cultural Survey, whereas
the degree of contemporary autocratic institutions is captured by the corresponding indexes of
“Constraints on the Executive” and “Autocracy” as reported by the Polity IV Project dataset.
   In view of the cross continental migration in the post-1500 period and its potential e↵ects on
cross continental di↵usion of institutions as well as on changes in genetic diversity in the new
world, the analysis is restricted initially to the sample of Old World countries in order to properly
assess the presence of institutional persistence, and the role of geographical factors and population
diversity in this persistence.
   Table 11 establishes the presence of institutional persistence in the sample of Old World coun-
tries. Column 1 establishes that, unconditionally, the pre-colonial degree of absence of checks on
leader’s power is negatively and highly significantly associated with the executive constraints in
the modern period. Column 2 suggests that the association established in column 1 is partly gov-
erned by geographical factors and their persistence over time, as reflected by the drop in the point
estimate of past autocracy on modern autocracy. Nevertheless, institutional persistence remains
significant at the 10% level. Furthermore, column 3 suggests that predicted population diversity
has a significant e↵ect on executive constraints in the modern period, and that the association
established in column 2 is partly governed by population diversity, as reflected by the additional
drop in the point estimate of past autocracy on modern autocracy. Nevertheless, institutional
persistence remains significant at the 10% level.
   Similarly, column 4 establishes a highly significant negative unconditional association between
the pre-colonial degree of absence of checks on leader’s power and the index of autocracy for the
modern period. Moreover, column 5 suggests that the association established in column 4 is partly
governed by geographical factors and their persistence over time, as reflected by the drop in the point
estimate of past autocracy on modern autocracy. Nevertheless, institutional persistence remains
significant at the 1% level. Furthermore, column 6 suggests that predicted population diversity


                                                    30
                                                    Table 11: Persistence of Autocracy



                                                                              Executive
                                                                                                                    Autocracy
                                                                             Constraints

                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
     Degree of Absence of Checks on Leader’s Power               -0.206⇤⇤⇤     -0.110⇤       -0.098⇤    0.553⇤⇤⇤     0.395⇤⇤      0.360⇤⇤
                                                                  (0.052)      (0.057)       (0.057)    (0.111)      (0.148)      (0.153)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                            -2.231⇤⇤                              6.609⇤⇤
                                                                                             (1.055)                              (2.597)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                                       -0.075      -0.090⇤                   0.088        0.133
                                                                                (0.050)      (0.050)                 (0.134)      (0.121)
     Soil Fertility                                                              0.322         0.225                  -1.122       -0.836
                                                                                (0.416)      (0.414)                 (1.071)      (0.993)
     Roughness                                                                   0.023        -0.149                  0.378         0.889
31




                                                                                (0.499)      (0.516)                 (1.351)      (1.377)
     Elevation                                                                  -0.207⇤       -0.172                   0.503        0.401
                                                                                (0.106)      (0.115)                 (0.319)      (0.349)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                      -0.301⇤⇤     -0.246⇤⇤                   0.317        0.155
                                                                                (0.113)      (0.117)                 (0.289)      (0.316)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                    0.004        0.005                  -0.002       -0.006
                                                                                (0.004)      (0.004)                 (0.010)      (0.010)
     Temperature                                                              -0.024⇤⇤⇤     -0.019⇤⇤                   0.027        0.012
                                                                                (0.008)      (0.008)                 (0.018)      (0.018)
     Colony                                                                      0.156        0.069                   -0.304       -0.047
                                                                                (0.127)      (0.142)                 (0.252)      (0.285)
     N                                                              42            42           42          42          42           42
     Adjusted R2                                                   0.191        0.387        0.418        0.272       0.259        0.320
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of measures of contemporary
     autocracy on measures of pre-colonial autocracy on the sample of Old-World countries. Specifications marked with “Continental
     FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent
     level.
has a significant e↵ect on executive constraints in the modern period, and that the association
established in column 5 is partly governed by population diversity, as reflected by the additional
drop in the point estimate of past autocracy on modern autocracy. Nevertheless, institutional
persistence remains significant at the 5% level.25 Moreover, as reported in Table B.27 in the
Appendix, institutional persistence is present in the global sample as well.26

4.3     Contemporary Population Diversity and Modern Autocracy
The second layer of the empirical analysis of the determinants of modern institutions explores the
contribution of modern population diversity to contemporary autocratic national institutions. It
examines whether population diversity at the national level, as captured by predicted population
diversity, has a significant e↵ect on the degree of autocracy and the absence of executive constraints
across countries, accounting for a large number of confounding geographical characteristics, regional
fixed e↵ects, colonial history (i.e., duration and colonizer nation), legal origins, pre-colonial devel-
opment and the degree of ethnolinguistic fractionalization and its potential geographical origins.
    The country-level analysis employs the measure of genetic diversity, as constructed by Ashraf
and Galor (2013), accounting for three important elements of population diversity with a national
population: the proportional representation of each ethnic group within the country, the expected
heterozygosity within each subnational group, as well as the diversity that arises from the genetic
distances between the pre-colonial ancestral populations.

4.3.1    Population Diversity and Constraint on the Executive

This subsection establishes that consistent with the proposed hypothesis population diversity at
the national level has a highly significant adverse e↵ect on the degree of executive constraints,
accounting for a large number of confounding factors.
    As reported in Table 12, column 1 establishes based on data from 145 countries that, uncon-
ditionally, the level of predicted genetic diversity within a country in the modern era has a highly
significant negative e↵ect on the constraint on the chief executive.27 The estimated e↵ect indicates
that a 1 percentage point increase in predicted genetic diversity generates a 4.1 percent decrease in
the average level of the “Constraint on the Chief Executive” over the period 1994–2013.28 Columns
   25
      As established in Table B.28 in the appendix, these findings are robust to using indigenous autocracy, rather
than the degree of absence of checks on leader’s power, as a measure of autocracy across ethnic-group homelands
within modern country borders. Moreover, as shown in Table B.29 in the appendix, using a measure of indigenous
democracy derived from an alternative aggregation procedure from the ethnic group level to the country level, based
on Giuliano and Nunn (2013), produces similar results on a larger set of countries.
   26
      The e↵ect of population diversity on institutional persistence in this global sample is harder to assess due to the
fact that population diversity has changed in some countries over this time period, and the measures of population
diversity either in the pre-colonial period or in the modern period do not fully capture the dynamic of this variable
in the time period in between these two time points.
   27
      It should be noted that the e↵ect of predicted population diversity on autocracy in the modern era is not
quadratic. In particular, if predicted genetic diversity squared is included to the baseline specifications, the estimated
coefficient of this square term is insignificant in all specifications.
   28
      The examination of the e↵ect of genetic diversity on autocracy in earlier periods covered by the Polity IV data
set is not feasible since the data is available only for a small and selected group of countries whose institutions


                                                           32
2–4 establish that the e↵ect remains highly significant once additional confounding geographical
characteristics are accounted for. In addition, column 5 indicates that the negative e↵ect of pre-
dicted population diversity remains highly significant while accounting for continental fixed e↵ects,
capturing unobserved heterogeneity across continents. Reassuringly, as reported in columns 6 and
7, the e↵ect of genetic diversity on contemporary executive constraints is una↵ected by colonial
history and legal origins fixed e↵ects. This partial association between constraint on the executive
and population diversity, as derived in column 7, is plotted in Figure A.4.
    Furthermore, Table B.30 in the appendix establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust
to focusing on constraint on the executive in 2013. Moreover, accounting for the potentially con-
founding e↵ect of irrigation suitability does not alter the qualitative impact of population diversity
on autocracy (Table B.31).29 In addition, the findings are robust to the use of additional geo-
graphical controls, such as the percentage of land near a waterway (Table B.32), inequality of land
suitability (Table B.33), and percentages of population living in various climate zones (Table B.34).
Furthermore, they are robust to the inclusion of additional measures of colonial history, such as
colonizer nation (Table B.35) and colonial duration (Table B.36). Moreover, the findings are robust
to the inclusion of arguably endogenous controls, such as income per capita (Table B.37), years of
schooling (Table B.38), population density in 1500 (Table B.39), and social infrastructure (Table
B.40). Finally, the use of ethnolinguistic fractionalization as an alternative measure of population
diversity suggests that, while fractionalization has no e↵ect on executive constraints, the e↵ect of
genetic diversity remains nearly intact (Table B.41).

4.3.2    Population Diversity and Executive Constraints: IV Analysis

In light of the potential e↵ect on autocracy on population diversity via the cross-continental mi-
gration in the post-1500 era, the empirical analysis exploits an instrumental variable strategy to
identify the causal e↵ect of population diversity on constraints on the executives. In view of the
negative e↵ect of migratory distance from the cradle of humankind in East Africa to various settle-
ments across the globe on population diversity, migratory distance from Africa is exploited as an
instrumental variable for population diversity.
    The causal e↵ect of population diversity on the constraint on the executive is established in Table
13, which presents the estimation results from 2SLS regression analyses instrumenting population
diversity by the migratory distance from East Africa. Column 1 establishes that the level of
population diversity has a highly significant e↵ect on the constraint on the chief executive in 1994–
2013. Columns 2–4 establish that the e↵ect remains highly significant once additional confounding
geographical characteristics are accounted for. In addition, column 5 indicates that the negative


were sufficiently growth promoting so as to be included in the sample. In particular, those countries are generally
developed countries with less autocratic institutions today. Furthermore, the analysis based on the Ethnographic
Atlas provides captures some of this period since the description of ethnic groups in these sample is primarily based
on their characteristics around the turn to the 20th century.
   29
      Unlike the significant positive interaction between population diversity and irrigation suitability reported in
Tables B.9, B.8, and B.10, the interaction here is insignificant, reflecting possibly the limited sample size.


                                                         33
                      Table 12: Predicted Population Diversity and Constraint on the Executive (1994–2013)


                                                                             Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                      -4.050⇤⇤⇤    -4.094⇤⇤⇤    -2.814⇤⇤⇤     -2.804⇤⇤⇤    -3.280⇤⇤    -3.356⇤⇤    -3.472⇤⇤
                                                       (0.825)      (0.836)      (0.888)       (0.867)      (1.435)     (1.350)     (1.342)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                          0.094⇤⇤⇤     0.055⇤         -0.059        0.022       0.018      0.026
                                                                    (0.028)      (0.030)       (0.042)      (0.042)     (0.038)     (0.037)
     Soil Fertility                                                              0.500⇤⇤       0.415⇤         0.166      0.310        0.306
                                                                                 (0.242)       (0.230)      (0.208)     (0.202)     (0.203)
     Roughness                                                                     0.135         0.038        0.341      0.383        0.464
                                                                                 (0.316)       (0.326)      (0.324)     (0.297)     (0.290)
     Elevation                                                                    -0.065        -0.103       -0.008      -0.062      -0.058
                                                                                 (0.095)       (0.095)      (0.110)     (0.103)     (0.096)
                                                                                 -0.170⇤      -0.248⇤⇤⇤     -0.161⇤
34




     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                                                                -0.070      -0.050
                                                                                 (0.094)       (0.090)      (0.085)     (0.091)     (0.092)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                     0.002        0.001        0.002        0.002       0.002
                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                              -0.020⇤⇤⇤      -0.007      -0.009      -0.015
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)
     Colony                                                                                                                         0.264⇤
                                                                                                                                    (0.147)
     Continental FE                                      No           No            No           No          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                     No           No            No           No          No           Yes         Yes
     N                                                   145          145          145           145         145          145         145
     Adjusted R2                                        0.068        0.108        0.221         0.292       0.405        0.456       0.472
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
     accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
     in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
e↵ect of predicted population diversity remains highly significant while accounting for continental
fixed e↵ects, capturing unobserved heterogeneity across continents. Reassuringly, as reported in
columns 6 and 7, the e↵ect of genetic diversity on contemporary executive constraints is una↵ected
by colonial history and legal origins fixed e↵ects.

4.3.3    Population Diversity and Autocracy

This subsection establishes that consistent with the proposed hypothesis population diversity at
the national level has a highly significant adverse e↵ect on the index of autocracy, accounting for
a large number of confounding geographical characteristics, regional fixed e↵ects, colonial history,
legal origins, pre-colonial development and the degree of ethnolinguistic fractionalization and its po-
tential geographical origins. Moreover, the e↵ect remains nearly intact if one accounts for arguably
endogenous controls such as income per capita and education.
    As reported in Table 14, column 1 establishes based on data from 145 countries that, uncon-
ditionally, the level of predicted genetic diversity within a country in the modern era has a highly
significant negative e↵ect on the level of autocracy. The estimated e↵ect indicates that a 1 percent-
age point increase in predicted genetic diversity generates an 8.7 percent increase in the average
level of the autocracy measure over the period 1994–2013. Columns 2–4 establish that the e↵ect re-
mains highly significant once additional confounding geographical characteristics are accounted for.
In addition, column 5 indicates that the negative e↵ect of predicted population diversity remains
highly significant while accounting for continental fixed e↵ects, capturing unobserved heterogeneity
across continents. Reassuringly, as reported in columns 6 and 7, the e↵ect of genetic diversity on
contemporary autocracy is una↵ected by colonial history and legal origins fixed e↵ects. This partial
association between constraint on the executive and population diversity, as derived in column 7,
is plotted in Figure A.5.
    Furthermore, Table B.42 in the appendix establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust
to focusing on constraint on the executive in 2013. Moreover, accounting for the potentially con-
founding e↵ect of irrigation suitability does not alter the qualitative impact of population diversity
on autocracy (Table B.43).30 In addition, the findings are robust to the use of additional geo-
graphical controls, such as the percentage of land near a waterway (Table B.44), inequality of land
suitability (Table B.45), and percentages of population living in various climate zones (Table B.46).
Furthermore, they are robust to the inclusion of additional measures of colonial history, such as
colonizer nation (Table B.47) and colonial duration (Table B.48). Moreover, the findings are robust
to the inclusion of arguably endogenous controls, such as income per capita (Table B.49), years of
schooling (Table B.50), population density in 1500 (Table B.51), and social infrastructure (Table
B.52). Finally, the use of ethnolinguistic fractionalization as an alternative measure of population




  30
    Unlike the significant positive interaction between population diversity and irrigation suitability reported in
Tables B.9, B.8, and B.10, the interaction here is insignificant, reflecting possibly the limited sample size.


                                                        35
     Table 13: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Constraint on the Executive (1994–2013) — Instrumental Variable Analysis


                                                                                 Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                       -6.305⇤⇤⇤     -6.586⇤⇤⇤     -5.376⇤⇤⇤     -5.401⇤⇤⇤    -7.169⇤⇤⇤     -6.964⇤⇤⇤     -7.059⇤⇤⇤
                                                        (1.209)       (1.196)       (1.427)        (1.320)     (2.396)       (2.208)       (2.153)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                            0.095⇤⇤⇤      0.057⇤          -0.057       0.042         0.036        0.044
                                                                      (0.029)       (0.030)        (0.041)     (0.043)       (0.037)       (0.037)
     Soil Fertility                                                                 0.419⇤           0.333      0.066          0.216         0.212
                                                                                    (0.249)        (0.238)     (0.227)       (0.219)       (0.221)
     Roughness                                                                        0.005         -0.093       0.480       0.519⇤        0.603⇤⇤
                                                                                    (0.308)        (0.318)     (0.333)       (0.305)       (0.298)
     Elevation                                                                       -0.036         -0.073      -0.026        -0.086        -0.082
                                                                                    (0.095)        (0.096)     (0.107)       (0.101)       (0.095)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                            -0.150       -0.228⇤⇤     -0.137⇤        -0.050        -0.029
36




                                                                                    (0.093)        (0.091)     (0.083)       (0.088)       (0.090)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                        0.003         0.002        0.003         0.003        0.003
                                                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                                 -0.020⇤⇤⇤      -0.007        -0.011       -0.016⇤
                                                                                                   (0.005)     (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.009)
     Colony                                                                                                                                0.277⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                           (0.133)
     Continental FE                                        No            No           No            No            Yes          Yes           Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                       No            No           No            No            No           Yes           Yes
     N                                                    145           145          145           145           145          145           145
     1st Stage F -statistic (K-P)                        64.417        63.948       53.813        53.402        62.574       57.369        56.612
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country, conditional on a range
     of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed
     e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the
     5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                Table 14: Predicted Population Diversity and Autocracy (1994–2013)


                                                                                          Log Autocracy
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                       8.745⇤⇤⇤    8.814⇤⇤⇤      6.173⇤⇤⇤     6.153⇤⇤⇤     6.844⇤⇤     6.979⇤⇤     7.112⇤⇤⇤
                                                       (1.826)      (1.862)       (2.039)      (2.016)     (3.035)     (2.693)      (2.699)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                         -0.149⇤⇤⇤       -0.061      0.160⇤⇤      -0.048      -0.036       -0.045
                                                                    (0.051)       (0.055)      (0.078)     (0.081)     (0.073)      (0.074)
     Soil Fertility                                                              -1.281⇤⇤⇤    -1.117⇤⇤      -0.422    -0.761⇤⇤     -0.756⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.482)      (0.461)     (0.382)     (0.379)      (0.380)
     Roughness                                                                     -0.244       -0.056      -0.844      -0.875       -0.968
                                                                                  (0.705)      (0.722)     (0.680)     (0.603)      (0.591)
     Elevation                                                                     0.306       0.380⇤        0.188     0.303⇤       0.299⇤
                                                                                  (0.195)      (0.198)     (0.201)     (0.182)      (0.174)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                          0.203       0.355⇤⇤       0.154      -0.051       -0.075
37




                                                                                  (0.185)      (0.177)     (0.149)     (0.162)      (0.164)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                     -0.001       0.001       -0.003      -0.003       -0.003
                                                                                  (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                              0.039⇤⇤⇤       0.013      0.021         0.027
                                                                                               (0.011)     (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.018)
     Colony                                                                                                                          -0.304
                                                                                                                                    (0.244)
     Continental FE                                       No           No           No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                      No           No           No           No          No          Yes         Yes
     N                                                   145          145           145          145         145         145         145
     Adjusted R2                                        0.074        0.095         0.208        0.269       0.440       0.507       0.509
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
     accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent
     level.
                 Table 15: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Autocracy (1994–2013) — Instrumental Variable Analysis


                                                                                              Log Autocracy
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                       14.510⇤⇤⇤      14.958⇤⇤⇤     12.215⇤⇤⇤     12.262⇤⇤⇤     11.767⇤⇤     11.258⇤⇤     11.368⇤⇤⇤
                                                        (2.614)        (2.609)        (3.206)      (3.036)       (5.087)      (4.382)       (4.334)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                            -0.151⇤⇤⇤        -0.066      0.154⇤⇤        -0.074       -0.057        -0.066
                                                                       (0.053)        (0.053)      (0.070)       (0.077)      (0.067)       (0.067)
     Soil Fertility                                                                  -1.090⇤⇤      -0.924⇤        -0.294      -0.649⇤       -0.645⇤
                                                                                      (0.494)      (0.476)       (0.396)      (0.388)       (0.390)
     Roughness                                                                         0.063        0.254         -1.021      -1.037⇤      -1.134⇤⇤
                                                                                      (0.706)      (0.723)       (0.655)      (0.580)       (0.569)
     Elevation                                                                          0.237       0.310          0.211      0.332⇤        0.327⇤
                                                                                      (0.198)      (0.202)       (0.192)      (0.175)       (0.167)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                              0.156        0.307⇤         0.124       -0.074        -0.099
38




                                                                                      (0.184)      (0.178)       (0.145)      (0.156)       (0.159)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                         -0.004       -0.002        -0.005       -0.005        -0.005
                                                                                      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.004)
     Temperature                                                                                   0.039⇤⇤⇤        0.013        0.022        0.029⇤
                                                                                                   (0.010)       (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.016)
     Colony                                                                                                                                  -0.319
                                                                                                                                            (0.224)
     Continental FE                                        No            No             No            No           Yes          Yes           Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                       No            No             No            No           No           Yes           Yes
     N                                                    145           145           145            145          145          145           145
     1st Stage F -statistic (K-P)                        64.417        63.948        53.813         53.402       62.574       57.369        56.612
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country, conditional on a range
     of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed
     e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the
     5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
diversity suggests that, while fractionalization has no e↵ect on executive constraints, the e↵ect of
genetic diversity remains nearly intact (Table B.53).31

4.3.4     Population Diversity and Autocracy: IV Analysis

The causal e↵ect of population diversity on autocracy is established in Table 15, which presents
the estimation results from 2SLS regression analyses instrumenting predicted genetic diversity by
the migratory distance from East Africa. Column 1 establishes that the level of predicted genetic
diversity has a highly significant e↵ect on autocracy in 1994–2013. Columns 2–4 establish that
the e↵ect remains highly significant once additional confounding geographical characteristics are
accounted for. In addition, column 5 indicates that the negative e↵ect of predicted population
diversity remains highly significant while accounting for continental fixed e↵ects, capturing unob-
served heterogeneity across continents. Reassuringly, as reported in columns 6 and 7, the e↵ect
of genetic diversity on contemporary autocracy is una↵ected by colonial history and legal origins
fixed e↵ects.
     Thus, the second layer of the empirical analysis of the determinants of contemporary institutions
suggests that the spatial distribution of population diversity across the globe has also contributed
to contemporary variation in the degree of autocracy across countries. This reduced-form e↵ect of
population diversity on the prevalence of contemporary autocratic institutions across nations may
reflect either persistence of institutions from the pre-colonial to the modern era, as established in
the first layer of the analysis, or a direct e↵ect of population diversity on contemporary autocratic
institutions, capturing the e↵ect of diversity on the demand for institutions as well as for the scope
for domination.


5        Conclusion
This research explores the origins of the variation in the prevalence and nature of political institu-
tions across the globe. It advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically that diversity across
human societies, as determined in the course of the exodus of Homo sapiens from Africa tens of
thousands of years ago, contributed to the formation of autocratic institutions across societies. The
study suggests that while population diversity has amplified the beneficial e↵ects of institutions
in mitigating the adverse e↵ects of non-cohesiveness on productivity, the contribution of diversity
to the range of cognitive and physical traits has fostered the scope for domination, leading to the
formation and persistence of institutions of the autocratic type.
     The analysis suggests that diversity contributed to the emergence of autocratic pre-colonial
institutions. Moreover, the findings indicate that the impact of diversity on these institutions has
plausibly operated through its dual e↵ect on the formation of institutions as well as class stratifica-
tion. Furthermore, reflecting the persistence of institutional, cultural, and human characteristics,
    31
      While the positive e↵ect of fractionalization on autocracy is significant in the absence of geographical con-
trols, consistent with Aghion et al. (2004), once geographical controls are introduced only genetic diversity remains
significant.


                                                         39
the study suggests that the spatial distribution of population diversity across the globe has also
contributed to contemporary variation in the degree of autocracy across countries.


References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
  Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91, 1369–1401.
Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2012): Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity
  and Poverty, New York: Crown, 1st ed.
Aghion, P., A. Alesina, and F. Trebbi (2004): “Endogenous Political Institutions,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 565–611.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2015): “Culture and institutions,” Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture, 53, 898–944.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
  the Plough,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469–530.
Allen, R. C. (1997): “Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient Egypt,” Explorations
  in Economic History, 34, 135–154.
Arnold, J. E. (1993): “Labor and the rise of complex hunter-gatherers,” Journal of Anthropolog-
  ical Archaeology, 12, 75–119.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013): “The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
  and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103, 1–46.
Ashraf, Q., O. Galor, and M. Klemp (2015): “Heterogeneity and Productivity,” Brown
  University, Department of Economics, Working Paper.
Atkinson, Q. D. (2011): “Phonemic diversity supports a serial founder e↵ect model of language
  expansion from Africa,” Science, 332, 346–349.
Belfer-Cohen, A. and O. Bar-Yosef (2002): “Early Sedentism in the Near East,” in Life in
  Neolithic Farming Communities, ed. by I. Kuijt, Springer US, Fundamental Issues in Archaeology,
  19–38.
Bentzen, J. S., N. Kaarsen, and A. M. Wingender (2017): “Irrigation and autocracy,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association.
Betti, L., N. von Cramon-Taubadel, A. Manica, and S. J. Lycett (2013): “Global geo-
  metric morphometric analyses of the human pelvis reveal substantial neutral population history
  e↵ects, even across sexes,” PloS one, 8, e55909.
Diamond, J. (1997): Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, W.W. Norton.
Engerman, S. L. and K. L. Sokoloff (1997): “Factor endowments, institutions, and di↵erential
  paths of growth among new world economies,” How Latin America Fell Behind, 260–304.
Fenske, J. (2013): “Does land abundance explain African institutions?” The Economic Journal,
  123, 1363–1390.
Fenske, J. (2014): “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-Colonial Africa,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 12, 612–640.
Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn (2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to the
  Nation-State,” The American Economic Review, 103, 86.
Gosden, C. (1989): “Debt, production, and prehistory,” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology,
  8, 355–387.
Hanihara, T. (2008): “Morphological variation of major human populations based on nonmetric
  dental traits,” American journal of physical anthropology, 136, 169–182.



                                               40
Harris, I., P. Jones, T. Osborn, and D. Lister (2014): “Updated high-resolution grids of
  monthly climatic observations–the CRU TS3. 10 Dataset,” International Journal of Climatology,
  34, 623–642.
Henn, B. M., L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, and M. W. Feldman (2012): “The great human expan-
  sion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 17758–17764.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1999): “The Quality
  of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 222–279.
Lipset, S. M. (1960): Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics, Doubleday & Garden, Inc.,
  Garden City, New York.
Litina, A. (2014): “The Geographical Origins of Early State Formation,” Center for Research in
  Economic Analysis, University of Luxembourg.
Manica, A., W. Amos, F. Balloux, and T. Hanihara (2007): “The e↵ect of ancient popu-
  lation bottlenecks on human phenotypic variation,” Nature, 448, 346–348.
Mann, M. (1986): The Sources of Social Power: Volume 1, A History of Power from the Beginning
  to AD 1760, Cambridge paperback Library, Cambridge University Press.
Marshall, M. G., T. R. Gurr, and K. Jaggers (2014): “Polity IV Project: Political Regime
  Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2013: Dataset User’s Manual,” Tech. rep., Center for
  Systemic Peace.
Mayshar, J., O. Moav, Z. Neeman, and L. Pascali (2015): “Cereals, Appropriability and
  Hierarchy,” CEPR Discussion Papers 10742, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The origins of ethnolinguistic diversity,” The American economic
  review, 102, 1508.
Murdock, G. P. (1967): “Ethnographic atlas: a summary,” Ethnology, 109–236.
Murdock, G. P. and D. R. White (1969): “Standard cross-cultural sample,” Ethnology, 329–
  369.
Nunn, N. (2008): “The long-term e↵ects of Africa’s slave trades,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123, 139–176.
Pemberton, T. J., M. DeGiorgio, and N. A. Rosenberg (2013): “Population structure in a
  comprehensive genomic data set on human microsatellite variation,” G3: Genes— Genomes—
  Genetics, g3–113.
Ramachandran, S., O. Deshpande, C. C. Roseman, N. A. Rosenberg, M. W. Feldman,
  and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza (2005): “Support from the Relationship of Genetic and Geographic
  Distance in Human Populations for a Serial Founder E↵ect Originating in Africa,” Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 102, 15942–15947.
Ramankutty, N., J. A. Foley, J. Norman, and K. McSweeney (2002): “The Global Dis-
  tribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change,”
  Global Ecology and Biogeography, 11, 377–392.
Siebert, S., V. Henrich, K. Frenken, and J. Burke (2013): “Global Map of Irrigation Areas
  version 5,” Tech. rep., Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, Germany / Food and
  Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.
von Cramon-Taubadel, N. and S. J. Lycett (2008): “Brief communication: human cranial
  variation fits iterative founder e↵ect model with African origin,” American Journal of Physical
  Anthropology, 136, 108–113.
Wang, S., C. M. Lewis Jr, M. Jakobsson, S. Ramachandran, N. Ray, G. Bedoya,
  W. Rojas, M. V. Parra, J. A. Molina, C. Gallo, et al. (2007): “Genetic variation and
  population structure in Native Americans,” PLoS Genetics, 3, e185.




                                               41
 Online Appendix
Not For Publication




        42
A    Additional Figures
                                           0.97                                                                                                                                                                                            RWA
                                                                                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                                          JPN                                                                                          ZAF



                                                                                                                                                     NGA

                                                                                                                                   PER                                                                                                         PER


                                                                                                                                                                                     ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NGA
                                                                                                                                                                             GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PAK

                                                                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                          MNG
            Log Jurisdictional Hierarchy


                                                                                                                                                      TCD                                          IND                                                                GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IND
                                                                                                                                                                 NGA               NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                                             ERI
                                                                                                                            KHM                                                    ZAR
                                                                                                                                                   KEN
                                                                                                                                                     KEN              KEN                                TCD
                                                                                                                           RUS                                         KEN
                                                                                                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                                                                                                        KEN
                                                                                                       NZL                                                             AGO                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                     YEM
                                                                                                                                                     CMR         CMR               CMR               TZA

                                                                                                                                                                            TZA            TZA
                                                                                                                                                     TZA                                 TZA GHA                   IND
                                                                                                                                               TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                           NGA                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                                               CIV                                                        PAK   SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PNG         PNG
                                                                                                                  BRA       BRACAN                                     CMR
                                                                                                                                                                       DZA                  KEN
                                                                                                                                  SSD
                                                                                                                                                         CMR                                              COL
                                                                                                                                KEN          COL                                  KEN
                                                                                                    SYR                                      SYR          IND                              PSE
                                                                                                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                   PNG                                                                                                       PNG
                                                    TWN                                                                                               CHN                                                  PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NGA                                                   PAK
                                                                                                                                      CHN                                          KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              CAN
                                                    COL                                                                                                                                                          COL
                                                                                                                                               ZAR                           GAB          CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                          GAB GAB

                                                                                                                                                CMR                                 TCD

                                                                                  MEX                                                         KEN                             KEN                  IND
                                                                                                                                                         SEN                  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                     CMR        CMR         ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TZA
                                                                            TZA                                                                                      CAF

                                                                                                                                                                TZA
                                                                                                                                                                PAN               TZA ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                  AFG
                                                                                        BRA                                                            TCD                                               RUS
                                                                                                                                                     SSD
                                                                                                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                                                                  TCD                        BRA
                                                                                                                                      TCD    CMR


                                                                                                                        NAM           SDN
                                                          TWN




                                           -1.03                                                                                                                             CHN



                                                   -0.04                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.03
                                                                                                                        Genetic Diversity
                                                                South America                 North America                                    Oceania                                      Asia                         Europe                              Africa

         Panel A: The conditional association between genetic diversity and jurisdictional hier-
         archy, corresponding to column 6 of Table 1.
                                           1.24                                                                                                                PER                USA CAN



                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN

                                                                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                                                                               GNQ                                                  THA
                                                                                                                                                                                    UGA                    HTIKHM
                                                                                                                                                                                 IDN         UGA                                                            PAK
                                                                                                                                       JPN                           BRA          USA    CHN                VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                  USA       SUR UGA             USA
                                                                                                                                                                      CHN             USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        MYS                                                       IND BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                  USA                                               IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UGA
                                                                                                                                                      IDN                RWA       IND                                                                     PAK
                                                                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                     IDN ZAR                            MEX LKA
                                                                                                                                                         CHN               ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAR               TZA        KHM KEN                                             YEM
                                                                                                                                                                       USA             BDI NGA
                                                                                                                                     IDN                     MNG                                                     TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                        ETHKEN TCD             MEX              MMR         IND
                                                                                                                       MRT                               MLI          BFA
                                                                                                                                                                     AUS      NGANGA                                     SDN                         IRN             IND
                                                                                                                                                                     BEN
                                                                                                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                                                                                                       NGANGA                      SDNNPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZAR                             AFG
                                                                                                                      MRT                                                                    CAN                   UGA                   TUR
                                                                                                                                        IDNIDN                       GHA USAZMB                ZMB            IND                               ARM
                                                                                                                                                                      USANGA                            ZARETH                  IND
                                                                                                                                   SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                         ZWE CAN     ZAR ETH  MDG
                                                                                                                                                                USA                         CAN
            Log Jurisdictional Hierarchy




                                                                                                                          ZAF             IDN        CHN              USA                                                            LBN
                                                                                                                          ZAF                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                                           COL                    USA USATZA     KEN ZAR
                                                                                                                                                 IDN
                                                                                                                                                                   USACAN  USAMARUSA ETH   SUR  CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                               CAN                        USA                    IND
                                                                                                                                     ZAF        BRA             USA      USA        USA       CANVNM USA SSD
                                                                                                                                                        BRA      USA
                                                                                                                                                                  BFA USAUSA USA USA
                                                                                                                                                                                  CAN MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZAR         IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KAZ                   PAK
                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                 CHN                                 USA     CMR USAUSACANETH
                                                                                                                                                                                  USA                ETH CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZAR TCD SSD                                                             ISR
                                                                                                                                                         GHA         NER
                                                                                                                                                                   USA               SLBSDN                                       IND
                                                                                                                                         SEN           SLE     TGOCHN BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN   ZARCHN   VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TCD  TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAR             PAN                  IRN HND
                                                                                                                                    MRT
                                                                                                                                      SEN              GHA
                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                          GHAMLITGO BEN
                                                                                                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                                                                                                    GHA  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                                                                        BFA
                                                                                                                                                                               AGO
                                                                                                                                                                             NGA  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                   USA
                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN    NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                      TZA  BEL TZAETH      GTM ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAN                        GEO
                                                                                                                                            GIN  MLI     MLIMLI
                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                                                              ESH    USA     CMR
                                                                                                                                                                               TUN MOZ ERI        TZA ETHLBY                  EGY PAK                        SYR PSE
                                                                                                                                                   ZAF NERUSA     VUT                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                                                                              CMR
                                                                                                                                                                ZAF USAUSA         MOZZMB TZA MEX
                                                                                                                                              SLE           USA
                                                                                                                                                              GHA
                                                                                                                                                            NAM
                                                                                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                               USA  AGO  USATZA
                                                                                                                                                                        FJI     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                TZA ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                              NCL                     ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLR            MEX
                                                                                                                                                             AGO   NZL       TZA                UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GTMETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                   KEN
                                                                                                                        ARG          PRY                                  MWIUSA
                                                                                                                                                                               ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                               TZATZA   MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                      ETH   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                              KEN                               MEX
                                                                                                                       ZAF          BRA           ZAF           NCL                ZMB                  TUN
                                                                                                                        IDN                          IDN                                                             KEN
                                                                                                                     IDN BRAZAF                                                           ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                          KEN
                                                                                                                                                                            DZA        MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                        ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                NPL                        ETHTUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAR
                                                                                                                          PNG
                                                                                                                               TLSRUS                               KEN TZA CMR      TZA ECU NLD ZAR ZAR                  UGA
                                                                                                                                                                 TZA                       ZARCZE UGA                 UGA RUS
                                                                                                                                                              ESP                            SRB               UGASSD
                                                                                                                   PNG                        IDN                                     TCDZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                          TCDKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                              DZA LTU ZAR        ZAR UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KEN         SSDSSD
                                                                                                                                                    IDN        PHL                       DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                           DZA             ZAR UGA     ZAR   IND                                SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                           DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                          ERI BRA ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                              ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                              COL     UGA           IND                               IND
                                                                                                                                           LBR       LBRTWN
                                                                                                                                                         LBR BRA
                                                                                                                                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                       CIV                 ZAR                COL      MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAR        ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KEN SSD               IND                          SAU
                                                                                                                                        GINLBR                                           ZAR   NGA ZAR                TCD
                                                                                                                             MRT       SEN GNB SEN ESP
                                                                                                                                                        LBR
                                                                                                                                                      GIN
                                                                                                                                                       CIV CIV
                                                                                                                                                            TGOCIV
                                                                                                                                                                 CIV CMR
                                                                                                                                                               TGO
                                                                                                                                                             NGA
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                           NGA
                                                                                                                                                                           NGANGA
                                                                                                                                                                               SDN
                                                                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                                                                                             CMR
                                                                                                                                                                              CMRNGA
                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                     CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                   NGA   ZARNGAETH
                                                                                                                                                                                           NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                          HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN       TZA MMR  THA          GEO         IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IND IRN
                                                                                                                                             MLI       CIV   GHA
                                                                                                                                                               GHA BFA
                                                                                                                                                                  MLI         NGA  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                    NGANGA    BGR TZA       SSD          IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SSD
                                                                                                                                     MLI ESP    GHA
                                                                                                                                           GIN CIV
                                                                                                                                                          GHA
                                                                                                                                                          CIV
                                                                                                                                                          TCDNGA
                                                                                                                                                                  MLI TGO
                                                                                                                                                                      AUS CMR
                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                                                                         AGO
                                                                                                                                                                         NGANGACMR
                                                                                                                                                                                TZA
                                                                                                                                                                               CMR
                                                                                                                                                                             AGO IND    NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                       TZAAUS
                                                                                                                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                           KENERI    GUYMMRSSD SDN        SDNIND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SDN   GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IND BGD
                                                                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                                                                          MLI                         MLINGA  ECUAGO   PNG                                             BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                            TWN        JPN
                                                                                                                                        MAR  LBR
                                                                                                                                               GIN       BRA
                                                                                                                                                          CMRCMR BRA             MOZ TZASDN   COL AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                              TZA                                                           SYR
                                                                                                                               PAK             SLE
                                                                                                                                             SLE          CIV     CHN BFANGA  NGA PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                   ZMB   MOZ  PER TCD       PNG     AUS
                                                                                                                                                 GIN          MAR BRA  AUS
                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                      CAN    CHN
                                                                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                                                                           AGO      SDN      MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                            ZMBBRA
                                                                                                                                                                                              VEN  ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUSETH                                                                MEX
                                                    ISL                                                                                                             CAN   NGA            GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                           SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN                            AFG
                                                                                                                      NAM                     MAR SEN         AGO
                                                                                                                                                               USA CAN
                                                                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                                                         MWI  TZA PNG
                                                                                                                                                                              NGA
                                                                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                                                                         TZACAN
                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                        VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                      ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                                                              PER   ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  COL
                                                                                                                                                        USAUSABRA             USAZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                   VENVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                      USA
                                                                                                                                                                                     BRA BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                         USA  USA
                                                                                                                                                                                             AUS      USA ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                USA USA                   USA
                                                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                                                KENUSACAN CAN       USA    MDGGUF                 CANUSAUSA                MEX         MEX
                                                                                                                                                               BRAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                    BRAUSAIRL USA
                                                                                                                                                                         USA      USAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                                     USAUSA USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SDNPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAN  SSD USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PAN        VEN                 USA                       MEX
                                                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                                                                                                USAUSA   TZA  USAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                AFG                              CAN
                                                                                                                                        AUS           USACOL BRA
                                                                                                                                                           BOLUSA
                                                                                                                                                                MDG
                                                                                                                                                                 USA  USA
                                                                                                                                                                        USA COL
                                                                                                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                               USAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                                                                                                BOL  SLBUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                          BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                         USA USA
                                                                                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                                                                              CAN CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 PNG SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN  USA USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAN          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     USACAN                        USA
                                                                                                                                                     PRY
                                                                                                                                                   ARG  USA
                                                                                                                                                      USA BRA
                                                                                                                                                            USAUSAUSA  USA            USA PNG  VEN     USA               USA
                                                                                                                                                  BRA     USA   USAUSA   USA
                                                                                                                                                                       USA                 USA
                                                                                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                                                                                            USA   USA USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ETH                  CAN
                                                                                         CHL                                                           COL VUT            USAUSAUSA                       USA
                                                                                                                                       PRYBRA                    USA SLB USA
                                                                                                                                                                        USA                                       CAN
                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                                                          USAUSA
                                                                                                                                                          USAUSA USA
                                                                                                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                                                                                         USA        CAN USAPNGUSACOL
                                                                                                                                                                                               PER  USA CAN             DMA           BLZ
                                                                                                                                                         USA    SLBUSA SLBZAR     USA
                                                                                                    ARG                              BRABRA                                                                           EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EGY               MEX
                                                                                                                                                         MAR USA   VEN                       IDNRUS             MEX MEX EGY
                                                                                              PNG                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                       COG                          CAN
                                                                                                                PNG ARG
                                                                                                                                         BRA                   USA         USA                ZAR HND            MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                DZA                  ZAR
                                                                                                                                  IDN IDNMAR MAR                         IDN GRLIDN IDN              ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MEX                      MEX
                                                                                                          PNG
                                                                                                           PNG             PNG           IDN                                              ZAR
                                                                                                            PNG              PNG                                                                    ZAR                 KEN
                                                                                                               PNG          PNG
                                                                                                                            PNG                                          UGAMYS                    ZAR                      RUS
                                                                                                PNG          PNGPNG                IDN                                              GAB
                                                                                                                 PNG
                                                                                               PNG     PNG
                                                                                                         PNG              PNG               PHL PHL
                                                                                                                                          IDN
                                                                                                                                            IDN                               KEN CAF            ZAR        ZAR
                                                                                                       PNG                        IDN                                    GAB            MYS ZAR ZAR         UGA
                                                                                                    PNG     PNG PNG                                            PHL GAB       RUS             THA
                                                                                                            PNG PNG    RUSRUS PNG RUS            RUS                          RUS TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MMR
                                                                                                                                                                  MYSCMR CMR                VNMKEN KEN ZAR      LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MMR          SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                                                              PHL                COG              ZAR
                                                                                          PNG                                                PHL
                                                                                                                                                          PHL                              CAFVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ERIIND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IND            IND
                                                                                                                                                             CIV
                                                                                                                                                            TWN
                                                                                                                                                              CIV    NERNGA
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                          NGA            CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                       NGARUS     ETHCAF                                  IND
                                                                                                                                            PHL            BFABFA TGOBFA
                                                                                                                                                                        CMR
                                                                                                                                                                        CMR
                                                                                                                                                                         CMRNGANGA   NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                  CMRCAF
                                                                                                                                                                                      NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                     TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                             TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                            NGA   TCDIND ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CMR
                                                                                                                                          SEN
                                                                                                                                           GNB
                                                                                                                                             GNB BWA    CIV    GHA NGA    BFA CMR        NGA    TZA                    SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ERI
                                                                                                                                                                   GHACMR
                                                                                                                                                                      BEN
                                                                                                                                                                    CMR                  TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                       TZA   TZA TZATZA SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MMR        IND       IND
                                                                                                                                                GHA
                                                                                                                                                  GHA                 NGA CHN NGA SDN                  MOZ
                                                                                                        PNG                                                                          NGARUS
                                                                                                                                                             BFANAMGHATGO NGATZA
                                                                                                                                                                              ZMB IND        NGA IND                  MMR
                                                                                                                              TWN                                                                       RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                TZA                      SSD
                                                                                                                                            NAM                           MOZTZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SDN SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ETH      SDNSSD
                                                                                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                                                                 TWN

                                                                                                                                                                                                         ETH



                                                                                                                                                                                            DZA

                                           -1.14                                                                                                                      RUS



                                                   -0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.04
                                                                                                                        Genetic Diversity
                                                                South America                 North America                                    Oceania                                      Asia                         Europe                              Africa

         Panel B: The conditional e↵ect of predicted genetic diversity on jurisdictional hierarchy,
         corresponding to column 6 of Table 3.
Figure A.1: Genetic diversity and jurisdictional hierarchy: Added variable plots.

                                                                                                                                   43
                          1.62                                                                                                                                                                             RWA




                                                                                                                                                       TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                             ZAF                                                    MEX

                                                                                                                                                                                TZATZA
                                                                                                                                                              PSE
                                                                                                                                                                                       SSD
                                                                                                                                                                         TZA

                                                                                                                                        AGOGHA
                                                                                                                                                ETH
                                                                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                                                                       NGA                                                                              ARG
                                                                                                                          CMR       CMR       CMR
                                                                                                JPN                                ZAF                                     COL
                                                                                                 KHM                            TCDNGA       NGA
                                                                                                                                                 ZAR                                        NGA
                                                                                 NZL                      PER                  SEN                                                                                PER
                                                                                                         KEN                                    KEN            KEN NGA
                                                                                                                                           KEN
  Social Stratification

                                                                                                                                                                         IND          IND
                                                                                                                          YEM
                                                                                                                                                                   IND
                                                                                 MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PAK
                                                                                                                                 IND                                             PAK       IND       IND                                     GTM
                                                                                                                                                 GAB   GAB GAB
                                                                                                                    CIV                              ETH TZA     PAK                                                                  PAK
                                                            PNG                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                                                                 CHN              CMR TCD
                                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                         TZA
                                                                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                   ERI                                        DZA
                                                                                                                          KEN
                                                                                        BRA       BRA                                         KENKEN                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                CHN
                                   COL                                                                                                                                                      COL

                                                                                                   RUS

                                                                                                                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                     CAN

                                                                                                                   CHNCOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PNG      PNG
                                                                                                                        KEN
                                                                                                                          KEN            KEN      AFG
                                                                                                                        ZAR
                                                                                                                                          KEN


                                                                           SYR                                    SYR
                                                                                                                           TCD                               CMR
                                                                                                                                                               CMR
                                                                                                           TCD     CMR                      TZA
                                                                                                                                          TZA                                   PAK
                                                                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                                            SSD                        TCD
                                                                                                                                         TCD
                                                                    BRA                                                                                        ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                  TZA                                                     TZA
                                                                  MEX
                                                      TZA
                                                                                                                                                 CMR                     NGA
                                                                                                                                 SSD CMR           CMR
                                                                                                                                      CAF




                                                                                                   NAM      SDN


                          -1.61    TWN
                                      TWN



                                  -0.04                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.03
                                                                                                   Genetic Diversity
                                            South America                 North America                                     Oceania                                  Asia                            Europe                               Africa

Panel A: The conditional association between genetic diversity and social stratification,
corresponding to column 3 of Table 4.
                          1.83                                                                                                                                       IDN             UGA
                                                                                                                                                             USA
                                                                                                                                                                            ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                            UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                   UGA
                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                                     ZAR
                                                                                                                                        PER                                            UGA
                                                                                                                                                             CAN               TZA                                                  BHS
                                                                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                                                                                       USA               IDN          USA
                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                                                                                       USA                            TZA
                                                                                                                           PRY
                                                                                                                          BRA                                                           UGA
                                                                                                                                                  RWA ZMB BDI
                                                                                                                                            USA NER                      TZA CANZAR                        MEX
                                                                                                                                                                   NGA                         ZAR
                                                                                                                          IDN BRA NAM                NGA                      TZA
                                                                                                                                                                              TZA        USA USA
                                                                                                                           IDN                CHNIDNNGA NGA      ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                   TCDTZA  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                             TCDTCD
                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAR SSD USA
                                                                                                                                                                                   HND
                                                                                                       MRT      SEN                    TCD BEN GHA         AGO          ZAR            USAMEX                                                IND
                                                                                            PNG                                SEN                        ZMBZMB       PNGTZA                                                    IND
                                                                                                                     SEN         IDN    NGA  BENMLINGA     TZANGA ZARZMB       SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                ZAR                                            IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IND
                                                                                                                         SLE                      NGA
                                                                                                                                             MLIBFA
                                                                                                                                           MNG                                   ZAR
                                                                                                 MRT        TLS
                                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                    MLI
                                                                                                                                     MLI          BFACMRTZA NGA    ZAR                          USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PAK
                                                                                             PNG                                                    CMRTZASLB    MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                  ZAR ZMB                 KHM                   AFG IND               PAK     ISR
                                                                                                                       IDN          USA        CMRMWI ZAR
                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                                                                      CMR              TZA    KEN
                                                                                                                                                                            TZAUSA           TZAUSAKAZ EGY
                                                                                                                                                                               VNM HTI ETH
                                                                                                                                                                               USA                        LKA
                                                                                                                                GHA           AGO     AGO              USA    GTM                                                        PSE
                                                                                                                       PHL ZAF
                                                                                                                                   GHA
                                                                                                                                    GHATGO
                                                                                                                                           ZAF NGANGA TZA
                                                                                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                                                                                             CMR ETH
                                                                                                                                                               DZAETH             TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IND
                                                                                                               ZAF GIN                 AGO                                                SSD
                                                                                                                   IDN             GHA CMRNZL TZA      NCL
                                                                                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                                                                                                      MDG USA VNM       THA                  IND             IRQ
                                                                                                                               GNQ         VUT                    USA CAN
                                                                                                                                                                      ETH  ETH     MMR                                 IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              GEO TUR IND
                                                                                                              SWZ                                                    ETH             ETHCAN
                                                                                                                           BRA CMR                               MDG
                                                                                                                                                                USA  CAN
                                                                                                                                                                       PER                             INDGEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MMR      MEX                     YEM
                                                                                                                                       CHN   CHN CANMAR
                                                                                                                                           PHL                TZA USA
                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                     ZAF                                                           CANUSA
                                                                                    PNG                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                          MDG       TZA KEN         USA                                        PAK
                                                                                                    ZAF
                                                                                                         JPN                           CHNUSA
                                                                                                                                            TZA CAN USA         MDG KENUSA        UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RUS
                                                                                                                     ESP                            USAUSA MDG             USA MMR  NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                            JPN
                                                                                                                                                            CAN UGA
  Social Stratification




                                                                                                                                                    USA USA USA     CHN  KEN                      GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                               PANRUSIRN
                                                                                            PNG                                   CHN        KEN          USA USA COL
                                                                              ARG                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                         PNG                                                     KEN RUS      TZAZARNLD    USAVNM PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                      GTM IND
                                                                                                                                                                                          SSD
                                                                                                                                              USA                    CAN   UKR
                                                                                                                                          ESP           CHNTUN ECU      CZE LTU
                                                                                                                                                                              ETH  USAUGAINDUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LBN
                                                                                         PNG                        LBR                TWN                USA   USA
                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                                                             USA                       BLR
                                                                                                                                                                        SRB
                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                         USA  USAUSA         SSDUSA
                                                                                                                                   IDN                      USA BEL USA                                           USA
                                                                                                                                    TWN                               SDN                      UGASSD
                                                                                                                                                 GAB        TZA ZAR
                                                                                                                                          BRA                   SLBUSA PNG             SDN
                                                                                                    IDN                                      GHA                                      ZAR
                                                                            PNG                                 MLI                 CIV                   NGA             USA                                            USA
                                                                                       PNG        MRT                 MLIMLIGHA LBR NERNGA         IRL AUS
                                                                                                                                                  AUS
                                                                                                                                                   AUS         INDSDN
                                                                                                                                                              USA       COL CAN
                                                                                                                                                                      PNG                          SDN
                                                                                 PNG                            MRT AUS
                                                                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                                                                          MLI AUS    NGAECU   USA HUN     USA                MEX                                      SYR
                                                                                                                                               USA NGA      NGA USA    BRA
                                                                                                                     IDN      MLI            MLI         MYS
                                                                                                                                                         NERZMB NGA   AUS
                                                                                                                                                                        COL DZAETH USATHA                                             PAK     SAU
                                                                                                      PNG                                   MYS  SLBCMR
                                                                                                                                               BFA                    DZADZA USA                                           IRN
                                                                                                 NAM       PAK                      USA ESH
                                                                                                                                             CMR    ZWE ZAR VEN           BGR AUS ETH
                                                                                                                                                                        DZA                        EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEX
                                                                                       PNG                                   ZAFCIV             USA  SLB               USA    GUY SSD AUS SDN
                                                                                                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                                                     NAM                            NGA
                                                                                                                                                  USA                 VNM
                                                                                                                                                                        SSDVNM
                                                                                                     ZAF                GNB          COL
                                                                                                                                     USAUSA                        ETH
                                                                                                                                                                   GUY     AUS           MMR
                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                              RUS BRA     USA
                                                                                                                                        USAUSA    USA   BRADZA         COL
                                                                                                                                                                        VEN
                                                                                                                                                                        GRC
                                                                                                                                                                            RUS
                                                                                                                                                                             VEN ETH
                                                                                    PNG                                                    USA USA
                                                                                                                                             BRA    USA VEN             PER                                               ARM
                                                                                                                              ARG BOL USAVUT
                                                                                                                                     USA         USA
                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                              CAN                 BRA  KEN
                                                                                                                                                                     SUR          SDN                    IND           IRN                  MEX
                                                                                                  RUS           AUS                USA
                                                                                                                                  BRA    MAR
                                                                                                                                         USABRA    USA       ITA VEN
                                                                                                                                                               BRA  SUR
                                                                                                                                                                  ERI    KEN
                                                                                                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                                                                                                         ERI
                                                                                                                                                                       VEN
                                                                                                                                                                     GUF         PER       LAO
                                                                                                                                   USA BRA  USA
                                                                                                                                          BRA       USABRA              RUS  CANSDN
                                                                                                                                                                            COL     MMR       IND
                                                                                                                                                                                               MMRAFG
                                                                                                                      MAR                 BRA
                                                                                                                                        BRA  USA USAUSAUSA          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                  VEN  AUS                                            MEX       MEX
                                                                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                             RUS PRY                    BRA
                                                                                                                                      BRA  USA
                                                                                                                                      USA USA
                                                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                                                                               USAUSA USA
                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                             USA
                                                                                                                                                             USA
                                                                                                                                                            ZAR
                                                                                                                                                          BOL
                                                                                                                                                               CANRUS
                                                                                                                                                                   USAZARVENCOL    RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    IND
                                                                                                                                              USACOG
                                                                                                                                                  USAUSAUSA        BOL
                                                                                                                                                                 TZA     CHN
                                                                                                                    IDN          PRYBRA USA USA
                                                                                                                                           USA USA USA       USA
                                                                                                                                                             PER KEN
                                                                                                                                                                    ZARPERKEN  ZAR           CAN
                                                                                                                                            PHL     USA
                                                                                                                                                    USA                            PAN IND
                                                                                     PNG                      BRABRA  BRA            USA
                                                                                                                                        USA   USA USAGRLCAN   USA ERI  CAN            CAN          IND
                                                                                                                                      PHL       USA
                                                                                                                                                RUS       CANUSA
                                                                                                                                                               USACAN  CAN ZAR  IND                           BLZ
                                                                                                 ZAF                  BRA MAR                            COL       IND
                                                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                                                    ZAR                       KEN  UGA
                                                                                     PNG                                 PHL       COL       USA
                                                                                                                                              USAUSACAN              IDN
                                                                                                                        PHL                 NPL                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                                USA USA            PNG                       CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                              ARG                 IDN                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                                                                              USA   USA
                                                                                                                                                  CAN    CHN                 ZARZAR UGA
                                                                                                                                                                             USA
                                                                                       PNG                                                                                                                               HND
                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                  USAUSA                      ETHUGAZAR
                                                                                                                                                                               ZAR              CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MEX
                                                                                          PNG       ARG                                     USA
                                                                                                                                              USA         USA              ZARKEN
                                                                                                                                                                              ZAR  ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                    ZAR       SSD
                                                                                                                 GIN                                       AGO  CAF        ZAR    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                   ZARCAN
                                                                                                                                                                                      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                       SSD ETHDMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                KEN
                                                                                                                                           USA                IND
                                                                                                       PNG
                                                                                                             IDN IDN                                 IDN USAIDN
                                                                                                                                                    UGA          TCD
                                                                                                                                                                 TCDTCD
                                                                                                                                                                  TZA CAN
                                                                                                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                                                                                                            TCD
                                                                                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                                                                                              TZAZAR
                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                      SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                    ZAR   SSD SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                USASSD
                                                                    CHL                      PNG                                           USA
                                                                                                                                         USA            USA     NGA MYS
                                                                                                                        LBR                TGOTGOAGO                      ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                        NGA                       SDN
                                                                                                              IDNSENIDN MAR           GHA
                                                                                                                                     RUS
                                                                                                                                       MLI
                                                                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                                                                         GHA GHABEN
                                                                                                                                                          CMR
                                                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                               CMRUSA
                                                                                                                                                                 PNG
                                                                                                                                                               NGA
                                                                                                                                                              NGAZAR     ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                            ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                                                                           NGA  CAF     UGA          MEX
                                                                      ARG                   PNG                                  GIN
                                                                                                                                  BWA   USANAM                ZMB                       KEN
                                                                                                                      IDN GIN CIV
                                                                                                                    SEN            LBR
                                                                                                                                    CIV         GHA
                                                                                                                                                TGO
                                                                                                                                               VEN  NGA
                                                                                                                                                     AGO   AFG NGACAF  TCD TZA
                                                                             PNG                       PNGPNG        GNB                       CMRCMR NGA CAF
                                                                                                                                                     NGA
                                                                                                                                                    BFA            NGA
                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                  ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                   NGA
                                                                                                                                                                    MYS
                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                                      PNG               IDN IDN RUSCIV BFA
                                                                                                                                        CIV  MLI
                                                                                                                                           CIV  CMR
                                                                                                                                               CMR
                                                                                                                                              BFA
                                                                                                                                            NGA         NGA
                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                                                                         CMR  PAKNGA NGA
                                                                                                                                                                   NGA
                                                                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                              KEN
                                                                                                                    LBR                                           NGA            ETH             SDN                                 SYR
                                                                                                      RUS
                                                                                                        ZAF IDN                          BFA USA  CMR TZACMR
                                                                                                                                                           TZA MWI      THA MOZ                                      IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IND
                                                                           PNG                                           GIN
                                                                                                                         GNB                     CMR     NGA       CMR
                                                                                                                                                                    MOZ                                          BGD
                                   ISL                                                                                     SEN          AGO
                                                                                                                                      BFA                ZMB                               MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                             ERI ERI LKA
                                                                                       PNG                                                       USANGA
                                                                                                                                                  NGA              SDN                                   IND
                                                                                                                  JPN                              MWI   TZA       ETH
                                                                                                                                                                     RUS                SSD
                                                                         PNG
                                                                                           PNG                  RUS             CIV TGO         NGAMOZ MOZ                                            IND
                                                                                                                                          SLB
                                                                                                                                         PHL FJI                                                     IND
                                                                                                                         PHLPHL                                                   SDN
                                                                                                                                                                  MOZ            MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                  SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                 ETH
                                                                                                                                  MAR                         TZA          CHN
                                                                                                                                                   TZA
                                                                                                                                                 NCL


                                                                                                                                                 DZA




                          -1.88                                                                                    TWN

                                                                                                                 TWN
                                                                                                                                       TWN

                                                                                                                                                                                     ALB



                                  -0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.04
                                                                                                   Genetic Diversity
                                            South America                 North America                                     Oceania                                  Asia                            Europe                               Africa

Panel B: The conditional e↵ect of predicted genetic diversity on social stratification,
corresponding to column 3 of Table 6.




                                                                                                             44
Figure A.2: Genetic diversity and social stratification: Added variable plots.




Panel A: Intensity of Autocracy




Panel B: Income per Capita




Figure A.3: The association between political institutions and economic development. Panel A:
Intensity of autocracy across the globe (1994–2013). Panel B: Income per capita across the globe
(1994–2011).




                                                45
                                                0.73                                                                         MNG




                                                                                                       THA



                                                                                                                     MLI
                                                                                                                                             BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TUR
                                                                                                                     NER
                                                                                                                                              DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SOM
            Log Constraint on Chief Executive




                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                    BEN
                                                                               PHL
                                                                                 IDN
                                                                                                                   SEN ZAF
                                                                                                                                                  IND          MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ISR    GEO
                                                                                                                   KHM                                                                                                    BRA
                                                                                                                                GNB        GHANICLVA       KGZ                     CAF                                 ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                 BDI
                                                                                                 PRY                         KOR
                                                        BOL                                                                                    LTU
                                                                                                                                                CIV        EST         CZE
                                                                                                                                                         POL                                                                   KEN    AUS
                                                                                                                         SLE          LSO                    COL
                                                                                                                                                                       CRI
                                                                                                                                                                       ZMB                  EGY
                                                                                                                                            NPL                                      SVN
                                                                                                                                                    NAM
                                                                                                                                                   PAN                                       BGR
                                                                                                                                                                               HUN
                                                                                                 LAO            MYS                               NLD MOZ                            MDA           IRN
                                                                                                                               LBR                        FIN       MWI   LKA
                                                                                                                                                        BEL          MKDTJK                                            KWT
                                                                                        VNM            PRT           CHN                                                                                              LBN
                                                                                                                                       NGA                         USA                                                                         URY
                                                                                                                                       PAK
                                                                                                                                     ESP                         SWE     ALB
                                                                 PER                     CHL            MRT                           MAR
                                                                                       ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                 HRV
                                                                                                                     IRL
                                                                                                                                                         NOR        NZL
                                                                                                                      BGD              BFA              CAN              VEN
                                                                                                                                                                 ITAAGO GRC                  ARE
                                                                                                                            MMR                                    DNK                                                             ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR
                                                                         GTM                           MEX                   GBR
                                                                                                                   HND                GIN                        KAZ                                                                        DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GUY
                                                                                                                                                                 UKR
                                                                                                                                                           TUN                        DEU      GAB
                                                                                                                                                   FRA                                                        YEM
                                                                                 PNG                                                                                                          COG                                    ETH
                                                                                                               SLV
                                                                                                                      RUS                                                              OMN               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                         TCD                                     UGA                                  HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                             CHE AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                           RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                     TKM
                                                                                                                                      TGO                               CMR                                   IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                       GNQ

                                                                                                                                                        UZB     ZWE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SYR

                                                                                                                                     BTN                                 LBY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAU



                                                                                                                                                         BLR                                                          QAT
                                                                                                             GMB
                                                                                                                                                                       AFG                        SDN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CUB


                                                -0.82                                          PRK
                                                                                                                                                    SWZ


                                                    -0.06                                                                                                                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                        Predicted Genetic Diversity
                                                              South America               North America                                            Oceania                                  Asia                            Europe           Africa




Figure A.4: The conditional e↵ect of predicted genetic diversity and constraint on the executive,
corresponding to column 3 of Table 12.




                                                                                                                                     46
                            1.83                                                                                                  SWZ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CUB




                                                                                                                                        BLR




                                                                           PRK
                                                                                           GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                   SDN
                                                                                                                                               ZWE                                              ERI


                                                                                                                                                                              ARE

                                                                                                                     BTN                                                                               QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                TZA
                                                                                                                                                        GNQ                         AZE
            Log Autocracy




                                                                                                                                                          CMR               RWA
                                                                                                                                                                           OMN                 IRQ
                                                                                                                                                        AFG                                       UGA
                                                                                                                                                                     HRV
                                                                                                                                        UZB       KAZ                         CHE
                                                                                                                      TGO
                                                                                                                      MAR                                                                              KWT
                                                                                                   CHN                                                                                    AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ETH
                                                                    VNM               MRT                                                           AGO
                                                                                                    RUSMMR                                                            TKM
                                                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                CIV
                                                                                                           GBR                                       GRC                          COG                               JOR
                                                                               LAO                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                                      CAN TUN ITANZL TCD
                                             PER
                                                                                                               LBR
                                                                                                                                                      VEN                         GAB                                           DOMURY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KEN
                                                     GTM                                           IRL                            FRA                    LBY
                                                                                             SLV                        BFA
                                                                                                                       GIN
                                                                                                                      PAK               NOR                                         IRN
                                                                               PRY                       SLE         ESP                                       ALB
                                                                                                                                                              TJK
                                                             PNG                     PRT                              NGA               BEL
                                                                     CHL                                                                                          BDI
                                                                                     MEX           BGD                                            SWE                        EGY                                        ARG
                                                                                                                            NPLNLD                              LKA
                                                                                                                                           KGZ                                                                                   GUY
                                                                                                 HND                                       FIN          CRI                                                               AUS
                                                                                                                                            EST         USA
                                                                   ECU                                                                                                MDA
                                                            IDN                                                                                                HUN
                                                                                                                                                                              BGR
                                                                                                                              NIC                 UKR                                                       TUR
                                                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                                                                         MWI          SVN                      YEM
                                    BOL                                                                                                                 ZMB
                                                                                                   NER                LSOGHA
                                                                                                           KOR                                COL                                              TTO
                                                                                                                                        POL               MKD
                                                                                                                               LTU
                                                                                              SEN                                                       CZE
                                                                                                                                  LVA                                 CAF                             LBN
                                                                                              MYS                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                GNB            DZA            MDG
                                                                                                     ZAF
                                                                         JPN                                                                                                        ISR                 ARM
                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                           GEO
                                                                                     THA         KHM                              NAM

                                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                                                      MOZ                                                SOM
                                                           PHL


                                                                                                                                     BEN



                                                                                                    MLI

                            -1.45                                                                          MNG


                                -0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                      Predicted Genetic Diversity
                                          South America                  North America                                          Oceania                                      Asia                           Europe               Africa




Figure A.5: The conditional e↵ect of predicted genetic diversity on autocracy, corresponding to
column 7 of Table 14.




                                                                                                                     47
B   Additional Tables
                                 Table B.1: Summary Statistics

                                                      Average    S.D.      Min.       Max.      N

              Summary Statistics for the Pre-Colonial Ethnic-Group Data

      Log Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy            0.51       0.51      0.00      1.61    1147
      Social Stratification                             0.79      0.86       0.00      2.00    1102
      Intensity of Slavery                              0.73       0.78      0.00      2.00    1113
      Degree of Absence of Checks on Leader’s Power      1.17     0.84       0.00       3.00     86
      Difficulty of Removal of Leaders                   1.29     0.98       0.00       3.00     77
      Leader’s Exercise of Authority                     0.85     0.83       0.00       2.00     87
      Degree of Lack of Community Decisions              0.87     0.80       0.00       2.00     90
      Perception of Leader’s Power                      0.86       0.82      0.00      2.00      90
      Log Intensity of Indigenous Autocracy             0.94      0.35       0.00      1.10     923
      Log Indigenous Autocracy (Ancestry Adjusted)      0.83      0.24       0.00      1.10    1177
      Indigenous Democracy                              0.33      0.34       0.00      1.00    1188
      Indigenous Democracy (Ancestry Adjusted)          0.32       0.31      0.00      1.00    1188
      Log Indigenous Autocracy                          0.94      0.18       0.00      1.10    1180
      Area                                              8.05      45.20      0.00    1327.70   1097
      Observed Genetic Diversity                         0.73     0.05       0.58       0.77    145
      Predicted Genetic Diversity                       0.71       0.04      0.59      0.77    1263
      Elevation                                        635.73    731.65   -2342.33   4527.95   1263
      River Length                                       2.90    17.24       0.00     490.54   1097
      River Density                                      0.81     5.04       0.00     108.87   1097
      Share Desert                                      0.11      0.26       0.00      1.00    1097
      Average Temperature                               19.88     8.40      -18.91    29.54    1253
      Temperature Range                                 11.67     2.83       4.57      19.38   1253
      Any diversity (FAO)                               0.91      0.29       0.00      1.00    1097
      Ecological diversity (FAO classes)                0.42       0.25      0.00      0.84    1097
      Year in Ethnographic Atlas                      1895.64    154.70    -800.00   2000.00   1275
      Terrain Ruggedness                              1.2e+05   1.3e+05      0.00    1.0e+06   1263

                    Summary Statistics for the Modern-Country Data

      Log Constraint on Chief Executive                1.68       0.40      0.69      2.08     147
      Log Autocracy                                    0.78       0.83     0.00       2.40     147
      Log Democracy                                    1.53       0.88      0.00      2.40     147
      Predicted Genetic Diversity                      0.73       0.03     0.63       0.77     150
      Log Absolute Latitude                            2.96       0.96      0.00      4.17     154
      Soil Fertility                                   0.57       0.20     0.00       0.96     154
      Roughness                                        0.18       0.14     0.01       0.60     154
      Elevation                                        0.56       0.49      0.02      2.67     154
      Average Distance to Nearest Waterway             0.34       0.45     0.01       2.39     154
      Percentage of Arable Land                        15.13     13.80     0.04       62.10    154
      Temperature                                      18.09      8.49     -7.93      28.64    154
      Africa dummy                                     0.31       0.46     0.00       1.00     154
      Asia dummy                                       0.27       0.45     0.00       1.00     154
      Europe dummy                                      0.23     0.42      0.00        1.00    154
      Oceania dummy                                     0.02     0.14      0.00        1.00    154
      Latin America and Caribbean region dummy         0.16       0.36     0.00       1.00     154
      Sub-Saharan Africa region dummy                  0.27       0.45     0.00       1.00     154
      British legal origin dummy                       0.26       0.44      0.00      1.00     154
      French legal origin dummy                        0.45       0.50      0.00      1.00     154
      Socialist legal origin dummy                      0.22      0.42     0.00       1.00     154
      German legal origin dummy                         0.03      0.18     0.00       1.00     154
      Scandinavian legal origin dummy                   0.03     0.18      0.00       1.00     154
      Colony                                            0.64     0.48      0.00       1.00     153


                                                  48
      Table B.2: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Omitted Variables and
                                Bootstrapped Standard Errors

                                                                                     Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity                                             5.121⇤⇤⇤      5.771⇤⇤⇤       5.838⇤⇤⇤       5.496⇤⇤⇤      5.732⇤⇤⇤      5.949⇤⇤⇤
                                                                         (0.293)       (0.320)        (0.317)        (1.010)       (1.097)        (1.106)
Log Absolute Latitude                                                                 0.068⇤⇤⇤       0.080⇤⇤⇤       0.110⇤⇤⇤      0.109⇤⇤⇤      0.130⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                       (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.018)       (0.019)        (0.021)
Elevation                                                                                                                           0.000        0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                   (0.000)        (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                                                -0.000⇤       -0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                   (0.000)        (0.000)
River Length                                                                                                                      0.003⇤⇤       0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                   (0.001)        (0.001)
River Density                                                                                                                       -0.003         -0.002
                                                                                                                                   (0.002)        (0.002)
Share Desert                                                                                                                        0.011           0.019
                                                                                                                                   (0.062)        (0.072)
Average Temperature                                                                                                                               0.007⇤
                                                                                                                                                  (0.004)
Temperature Range                                                                                                                                -0.020⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                  (0.008)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                                    No            No             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Continental FE                                                             No            No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes
Bootstrapped Standard Error                                            (0.656)***    (0.738)***     (0.735)***    (1.359)***     (1.439)***     (1.412)***
Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) / Bellows and Miguel (2009)                                                                        -20.897        -12.120
Oster (2014) bias-adjusted                                                                                                          6.877          7.565
Adjusted R2                                                              0.199          0.217          0.225         0.290          0.297         0.300
N                                                                        1,076          1,076          1,076         1,076          1,076         1,076
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy
(the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East
Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. The table includes
bootstrapped standard errors that account for the uncertainty in the first stage of the prediction of genetic diversity based on the migratory distance
from East Africa. Furthermore, the table includes omitted variable statistics. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan
Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1
percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                           49
          Table B.3: Predicted Diversity and Autocratic Institutions — Omitted Variables and Bootstrapped Standard Errors

                                                                               Degree of Absence              Difficulty of                                         Degree of Lack of
                                                                                                                                       Leader’s Exercise                                           Perception of
                                                                                 of Checks on                 Removal of                                              Community
                                                                                                                                         of Authority                                             Leader’s Power
                                                                                Leader’s Power                  Leaders                                                Decisions
                                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                                             6.317⇤⇤⇤       5.042⇤⇤      7.374⇤⇤⇤       5.858⇤⇤       6.048⇤⇤⇤      5.489⇤⇤⇤      6.589⇤⇤⇤      6.023⇤⇤⇤       5.529⇤⇤⇤       5.504⇤⇤
                                                                              (2.101)       (2.306)       (2.222)       (2.236)        (1.895)       (1.984)       (1.514)       (1.679)        (1.753)       (2.094)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                                     0.035         -0.080        0.143          0.111         -0.053        -0.030        -0.100        -0.044         0.026          0.090
                                                                              (0.099)       (0.189)       (0.092)       (0.148)        (0.091)       (0.173)       (0.069)       (0.120)        (0.087)       (0.144)
     Elevation                                                                               -0.000                      -0.000                       -0.000                       0.000                       0.000
                                                                                            (0.000)                     (0.000)                      (0.000)                     (0.000)                      (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                                                                     0.000⇤                      0.000⇤⇤                        0.000                       0.000                       -0.000
                                                                                            (0.000)                     (0.000)                      (0.000)                     (0.000)                      (0.000)
     River Length                                                                             0.013                      -0.000                        0.008                       0.001                      0.014⇤
                                                                                            (0.009)                     (0.010)                      (0.007)                     (0.007)                      (0.007)
50




     River Density                                                                           -0.061                      -0.031                       -0.044                      -0.016                       -0.043
                                                                                            (0.050)                     (0.040)                      (0.033)                     (0.041)                      (0.033)
     Share Desert                                                                            0.235                        0.157                       -0.561                       0.072                        0.125
                                                                                            (0.533)                     (0.613)                      (0.543)                     (0.479)                      (0.473)
     Average Temperature                                                                     -0.003                       0.014                       0.020                        0.015                       0.011
                                                                                            (0.020)                     (0.021)                      (0.019)                     (0.015)                      (0.017)
     Temperature Range                                                                        0.091                       0.087                        0.061                      -0.013                       -0.047
                                                                                            (0.068)                     (0.067)                      (0.063)                     (0.049)                      (0.054)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)                                                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Bootstrapped standard error                                            (2.423)***     (2.627)**    (2.548)***     (2.485)**    (2.244)***     (2.411)**    (1.672)***     (1.809)***     (2.065)***    (2.197)**
     Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) / Bellows and Miguel (2009)                             3.955                       3.863                       9.819                       10.638                      221.800
     Oster (2014) bias-adjusted                                                              4.013                       4.762                       4.734                        4.015                       5.426
     Adjusted R2                                                               0.067         0.111         0.079         0.168         0.121         0.109         0.198          0.146          0.164         0.108
     N                                                                          78             78           71             71           79            79            82              82             82           82
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East
     Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. The table includes bootstrapped standard errors that account for the
     uncertainty in the first stage of the prediction of genetic diversity based on the migratory distance from East Africa. Furthermore, the table includes omitted variable statistics. Heteroscedasticity-consistent
     standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
             Table B.4: Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Ordered Probit

                                         Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                               (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Genetic Diversity            5.195⇤⇤    10.143⇤⇤⇤        12.350⇤⇤⇤   29.074⇤⇤⇤   33.998⇤⇤⇤     31.789⇤⇤⇤
                             (2.436)     (3.139)          (3.022)     (8.399)     (10.047)       (9.652)
Log Absolute Latitude                   0.379⇤⇤⇤         0.443⇤⇤⇤    0.304⇤⇤⇤      0.268⇤⇤      0.333⇤⇤
                                         (0.089)          (0.101)     (0.099)      (0.114)       (0.130)
Elevation                                                                           -0.000        0.000
                                                                                   (0.000)       (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                  0.000          0.000
                                                                                   (0.000)       (0.000)
River Length                                                                      0.006⇤⇤⇤       0.022⇤
                                                                                   (0.003)       (0.013)
River Density                                                                       -0.170        -0.066
                                                                                   (0.109)       (0.106)
Share Desert                                                                        -0.711      -1.385⇤⇤
                                                                                   (0.659)       (0.661)
Average Temperature                                                                              0.081⇤
                                                                                                 (0.042)
Temperature Range                                                                                 0.031
                                                                                                 (0.063)
Soil Quality (Climatic)        No           No             Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Continental FE                 No           No             No          Yes          Yes           Yes
N                              131         131             131         131          131           131
This table presents the results of a series of ordered probit regression analyses, on the ethnic-group
level, of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-
group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant
at the 10 percent level.




                                                    51
       Table B.5: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Ordered Probit

                                                  Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                      (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤
Predicted Genetic Diversity       12.672           15.294          15.774         12.562        13.713         14.761⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.968)          (1.285)          (1.274)       (2.626)        (2.987)        (3.062)
Log Absolute Latitude                              0.208⇤⇤⇤         0.245⇤⇤⇤      0.278⇤⇤⇤      0.269⇤⇤⇤        0.341⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.039)          (0.041)       (0.049)        (0.052)        (0.062)
Elevation                                                                                           0.000        0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                  (0.000)        (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                 -0.000       -0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                  (0.000)        (0.000)
River Length                                                                                     0.017⇤⇤⇤       0.020⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                  (0.005)        (0.005)
River Density                                                                                    -0.013⇤         -0.013⇤
                                                                                                  (0.007)        (0.007)
Share Desert                                                                                       -0.003         -0.004
                                                                                                  (0.187)        (0.207)
Average Temperature                                                                                             0.024⇤⇤
                                                                                                                 (0.011)
Temperature Range                                                                                              -0.062⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                 (0.022)
Soil Quality (Climatic)               No               No             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Continental FE                        No               No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes
N                                   1,076            1,076           1,076         1,076          1,076         1,076
This table presents the results of a series of ordered probit regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level,
of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on
predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the
homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Specifications
marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent
level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                             52
                             Table B.6: Jurisdictional Hierarchy and Autocratic Institutions — Ordered Probit

                                                   Degree of Absence          Difficulty of                                Degree of Lack of
                                                                                                    Leader’s Exercise                                 Perception of
                                                     of Checks on             Removal of                                     Community
                                                                                                      of Authority                                   Leader’s Power
                                                    Leader’s Power              Leaders                                       Decisions
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
                                                       ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤
     Log Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy       1.417       1.307       1.315       1.279         1.755      1.793      1.820        1.927       1.653       1.612⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.268)     (0.295)     (0.309)     (0.324)       (0.307)    (0.325)    (0.308)      (0.347)     (0.301)     (0.313)
     Log Absolute Latitude                          -0.044      -0.205      0.061        0.068      -0.250⇤      -0.097   -0.369⇤⇤⇤      -0.262      -0.063      0.068
                                                   (0.125)     (0.239)     (0.119)     (0.200)       (0.138)    (0.227)    (0.127)      (0.215)     (0.137)     (0.193)
     Elevation                                                  -0.000                  -0.000                   -0.000                   0.000                  0.001
                                                               (0.001)                 (0.000)                  (0.001)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                                        0.000⇤                 0.000⇤⇤                     0.000                   0.000                  -0.000
                                                               (0.000)                 (0.000)                  (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
     River Length                                                0.011                  -0.011                   -0.001                  -0.015                   0.038
                                                               (0.011)                 (0.013)                  (0.009)                 (0.013)                 (0.033)
53




     River Density                                              -0.059                  -0.056                   -0.009                  0.074                   -0.058
                                                               (0.106)                 (0.110)                  (0.077)                 (0.065)                 (0.094)
     Share Desert                                               0.591                    0.588                   -1.274                  0.296                    0.574
                                                               (0.737)                 (0.791)                  (0.866)                 (0.767)                 (0.811)
     Average Temperature                                        -0.006                  0.021                    0.043                    0.024                  0.013
                                                               (0.027)                 (0.025)                  (0.029)                 (0.024)                 (0.026)
     Temperature Range                                           0.144                   0.109                    0.077                  -0.053                  -0.130
                                                               (0.096)                 (0.095)                  (0.110)                 (0.098)                 (0.084)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)                        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
     N                                               78          78          71          71            79         79          82          82          82          82
     This table presents the results of a series of ordered probit regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on a measure
     of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy), conditional on a range of control variables
     at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at
     the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                Table B.7: Predicted Diversity and Autocratic Institutions — Ordered Probit

                                        Degree of Absence           Difficulty of                                    Degree of Lack of
                                                                                           Leader’s Exercise                                          Perception of
                                          of Checks on              Removal of                                         Community
                                                                                             of Authority                                            Leader’s Power
                                         Leader’s Power               Leaders                                           Decisions
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                             ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity       9.682        8.573        9.660      8.775         10.106         9.975      12.557         11.804         10.392         10.319⇤⇤⇤
                                        (3.164)     (3.704)       (2.860)    (2.998)       (3.345)        (3.406)    (3.084)        (3.161)        (3.412)        (3.768)
     Log Absolute Latitude               0.062       -0.124        0.173       0.119        -0.085         -0.032    -0.218⇤         -0.128         0.049           0.117
                                        (0.141)     (0.268)       (0.116)    (0.194)       (0.139)        (0.253)    (0.127)        (0.208)        (0.137)        (0.202)
     Elevation                                       -0.000                   -0.001                       -0.000                     0.000                         0.000
                                                    (0.001)                  (0.000)                      (0.001)                   (0.000)                       (0.000)
     Terrain Ruggedness                             0.000⇤⇤                 0.000⇤⇤⇤                      0.000⇤                      0.000                        -0.000
                                                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                      (0.000)                   (0.000)                       (0.000)
     River Length                                   0.021⇤                    0.001                         0.015                    0.001                        0.066⇤
                                                    (0.012)                  (0.013)                      (0.010)                   (0.010)                       (0.035)
54




     River Density                                   -0.125                   -0.087                       -0.097                    -0.030                        -0.168
                                                    (0.103)                  (0.101)                      (0.073)                   (0.067)                       (0.106)
     Share Desert                                     0.464                   0.335                        -1.219                    0.202                          0.709
                                                    (0.769)                  (0.794)                      (0.898)                   (0.804)                       (0.842)
     Average Temperature                             -0.004                    0.021                        0.039                     0.023                         0.008
                                                    (0.030)                  (0.028)                      (0.030)                   (0.026)                       (0.027)
     Temperature Range                                0.152                  0.149⇤                         0.099                    -0.037                        -0.109
                                                    (0.102)                  (0.089)                      (0.103)                   (0.084)                       (0.089)
     Soil Quality (Climatic)              Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     N                                    78          78            71         71            79             79         82             82             82             82
     This table presents the results of a series of ordered probit regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on predicted
     genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of
     control variables at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent
     level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table B.8: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Irrigation Potential


                                                                    Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤
  Predicted Genetic Diversity                             5.348        5.632       5.723       3.352       3.315        3.284⇤⇤⇤
                                                           (0.292)      (0.319)     (0.317)     (0.994)     (1.083)      (1.089)
  Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation          0.142⇤⇤⇤     0.127⇤⇤⇤    0.123⇤⇤⇤    0.158⇤⇤⇤    0.163⇤⇤⇤     0.168⇤⇤⇤
                                                           (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)
  Log Absolute Latitude                                                0.032⇤⇤     0.040⇤⇤     0.085⇤⇤⇤    0.084⇤⇤⇤     0.101⇤⇤⇤
                                                                        (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.021)
  Elevation                                                                                                   0.000     0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                            (0.000)      (0.000)
  Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                         -0.000     -0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                            (0.000)      (0.000)
  River Length                                                                                             0.003⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                            (0.001)      (0.001)
  River Density                                                                                              -0.003       -0.002
                                                                                                            (0.002)      (0.002)
  Share Desert                                                                                               -0.058       -0.000
                                                                                                            (0.058)      (0.069)
  Average Temperature                                                                                                     0.004
                                                                                                                         (0.004)
  Temperature Range                                                                                                    -0.025⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                         (0.008)
  Soil Quality (Climatic)                                    No           No         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
  Continental FE                                             No           No         No          Yes          Yes         Yes
  N                                                         1,076        1,076      1,076       1,076        1,076       1,076
  Adjusted R2                                               0.248        0.251      0.253       0.326        0.334       0.339
  This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial
  jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic
  diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity,
  conditional on a range of control variables including a measure of irrigation potential at the ethnic-group level. The
  irrigation measure is based on the “area equipped for irrigation” data of the Global Map of Irrigation Areas, version 5.0
  (Siebert et al., 2013). Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and
  continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the
  1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                55
  Table B.9: Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Irrigation Potential

                                                                 Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                              ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤             ⇤           ⇤⇤
Genetic Diversity                                       3.285        4.024       4.239        5.065       6.375        7.021⇤⇤
                                                         (0.831)      (0.854)     (0.876)     (2.700)      (3.096)      (3.105)
Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation          0.271⇤⇤⇤     0.232⇤⇤⇤    0.240⇤⇤⇤    0.209⇤⇤      0.302⇤⇤⇤     0.244⇤⇤
                                                         (0.027)      (0.034)     (0.039)     (0.084)      (0.086)      (0.107)
Log Absolute Latitude                                                0.083⇤⇤     0.075⇤⇤     0.093⇤⇤⇤     0.084⇤⇤      0.095⇤⇤
                                                                      (0.033)     (0.037)     (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.041)
Elevation                                                                                                    0.000        0.000
                                                                                                           (0.000)      (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                           0.000        0.000
                                                                                                           (0.000)      (0.000)
River Length                                                                                              0.003⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                           (0.001)      (0.001)
River Density                                                                                                0.029        0.031
                                                                                                           (0.022)      (0.022)
Share Desert                                                                                                -0.257       -0.379
                                                                                                           (0.230)      (0.251)
Average Temperature                                                                                                       0.013
                                                                                                                        (0.013)
Temperature Range                                                                                                         0.002
                                                                                                                        (0.025)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                    No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Continental FE                                             No          No          No          Yes          Yes          Yes
N                                                          131         131         131         131          131          131
Adjusted R2                                               0.254       0.277       0.309       0.329        0.354        0.351
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial
jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic
diversity, conditional on a range of control variables including a measure of irrigation potential at the ethnic-group level.
The irrigation measure is based on the “area equipped for irrigation” data of the Global Map of Irrigation Areas, version
5.0 (Siebert et al., 2013). Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America,
and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at
the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                             56
   Table B.10: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Irrigation
                Potential and its Interaction with Predicted Genetic Diversity

                                                                                               Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                                                               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                                 4.221⇤⇤⇤      4.495⇤⇤⇤    4.581⇤⇤⇤      4.569⇤⇤⇤      4.567⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.308)       (0.326)     (0.326)       (0.334)       (0.321)
Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation                                              -1.861⇤⇤⇤    -1.856⇤⇤⇤    -1.888⇤⇤⇤     -1.951⇤⇤⇤    -1.456⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.280)       (0.280)     (0.281)       (0.284)       (0.298)
Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation ⇥ Predicted Genetic Diversity                2.835⇤⇤⇤      2.808⇤⇤⇤    2.844⇤⇤⇤      2.946⇤⇤⇤      2.251⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             (0.397)       (0.396)     (0.396)       (0.400)       (0.420)
Log Absolute Latitude                                                                                     0.030⇤⇤      0.039⇤⇤      0.045⇤⇤⇤      0.101⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                           (0.015)     (0.016)       (0.017)       (0.021)
Elevation                                                                                                                             0.000       0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                     (0.000)       (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                                                  -0.000⇤⇤⇤    -0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                     (0.000)       (0.000)
River Length                                                                                                                        0.003⇤⇤⇤      0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                     (0.001)       (0.001)
River Density                                                                                                                         -0.000        0.000
                                                                                                                                     (0.001)       (0.001)
Share Desert                                                                                                                          0.001         0.017
                                                                                                                                     (0.060)       (0.063)
Average Temperature                                                                                                                               0.011⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                   (0.003)
Temperature Range                                                                                                                                -0.033⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                                   (0.008)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                                                        No            No           Yes          Yes          Yes
N                                                                                             1,076        1,076         1,076        1,076        1,076
Adjusted R2                                                                                   0.273        0.275         0.278        0.294        0.310
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy
(the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East
Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including a measure of irrigation potential,
as well as an interaction term between this measure and predicted genetic diversity, at the ethnic-group level. The irrigation measure is based
on the “area equipped for irrigation” data of the Global Map of Irrigation Areas, version 5.0 (Siebert et al., 2013). Heteroscedasticity-consistent
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10
percent level.




                                                                           57
 Table B.11: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Ecological
                                        Diversity

                                                   Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity             4.908⇤⇤⇤     5.554⇤⇤⇤   5.648⇤⇤⇤     4.905⇤⇤⇤    5.434⇤⇤⇤    5.755⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.294)      (0.320)    (0.318)      (0.990)     (1.072)     (1.076)
Ecological diversity (FAO classes)      0.348⇤⇤⇤     0.354⇤⇤⇤   0.310⇤⇤⇤     0.298⇤⇤⇤    0.303⇤⇤⇤    0.311⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.068)      (0.068)    (0.072)      (0.068)     (0.069)     (0.069)
Any diversity (FAO)                       -0.014       -0.028     -0.020       0.053       0.042       0.047
                                         (0.052)      (0.052)    (0.054)      (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.052)
Log Absolute Latitude                                0.067⇤⇤⇤   0.076⇤⇤⇤     0.102⇤⇤⇤    0.098⇤⇤⇤    0.123⇤⇤⇤
                                                      (0.013)    (0.014)      (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.020)
Elevation                                                                                  -0.000      0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                         -0.000     -0.000⇤
                                                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
River Length                                                                             0.002⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)
River Density                                                                              -0.003      -0.002
                                                                                          (0.002)     (0.002)
Share Desert                                                                               0.068        0.049
                                                                                          (0.065)     (0.073)
Average Temperature                                                                                  0.009⇤⇤
                                                                                                      (0.004)
Temperature Range                                                                                    -0.019⇤⇤
                                                                                                      (0.008)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                    No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Continental FE                             No          No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                         1,076       1,076       1,076       1,076       1,076       1,076
Adjusted R2                               0.223       0.241       0.242       0.311       0.316       0.321
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a mea-
sure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior
centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including a measure
of ecological diversity at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts
for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent
level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                     58
 Table B.12: Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Ecological Diversity

                                                 Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                 ⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤
Genetic Diversity                        2.380        3.894       4.041      7.657       9.334        9.247⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.963)       (0.899)     (0.999)    (2.379)     (3.194)      (2.983)
Ecological diversity (FAO classes)        0.246         0.332       0.108      0.073       -0.006       0.119
                                         (0.279)       (0.264)     (0.294)    (0.269)     (0.291)      (0.292)
Any diversity (FAO)                      0.382⇤⇤      0.471⇤⇤     0.588⇤⇤      0.179       0.132        0.135
                                         (0.175)       (0.220)     (0.267)    (0.197)     (0.296)      (0.303)
Log Absolute Latitude                                 0.160⇤⇤⇤    0.156⇤⇤⇤   0.094⇤⇤      0.081⇤      0.099⇤⇤
                                                       (0.030)     (0.032)    (0.036)     (0.044)      (0.043)
Elevation                                                                                  -0.000       0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)      (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                          0.000       0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)      (0.000)
River Length                                                                             0.001⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.000)      (0.001)
River Density                                                                               0.016       0.028
                                                                                          (0.032)      (0.026)
Share Desert                                                                               -0.166     -0.481⇤
                                                                                          (0.306)      (0.253)
Average Temperature                                                                                   0.028⇤⇤
                                                                                                       (0.011)
Temperature Range                                                                                       0.019
                                                                                                       (0.026)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                     No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Continental FE                              No          No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                          131          131         131         131         131         131
Adjusted R2                               0.042        0.161       0.178       0.277       0.261       0.306
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure
of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional
hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables including a measure of
ecological diversity at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for
sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent
level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                       59
Table B.13: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Major
                                         Crop Type

                                               Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
 Predicted Genetic Diversity          3.846⇤⇤⇤     4.833⇤⇤⇤     4.910⇤⇤⇤     5.923⇤⇤⇤     6.125⇤⇤⇤     5.903⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.356)      (0.388)      (0.385)      (1.045)      (1.113)       (1.112)
 Non Food Crops Only                  0.694⇤⇤⇤     0.743⇤⇤⇤     0.705⇤⇤⇤     0.650⇤⇤⇤     0.647⇤⇤⇤     0.638⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.086)      (0.138)      (0.102)      (0.058)      (0.062)       (0.063)
 Vegetables                           0.302⇤⇤      0.359⇤⇤⇤     0.385⇤⇤⇤      0.220⇤       0.237⇤      0.269⇤⇤
                                      (0.152)      (0.107)      (0.111)      (0.122)      (0.135)       (0.132)
 Tree Fruits                          0.198⇤⇤⇤     0.390⇤⇤⇤     0.394⇤⇤⇤     0.264⇤⇤⇤     0.262⇤⇤⇤     0.252⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.069)      (0.073)      (0.073)      (0.079)      (0.080)       (0.081)
 Roots or Tubers                      0.186⇤⇤⇤     0.361⇤⇤⇤     0.361⇤⇤⇤     0.249⇤⇤⇤     0.249⇤⇤⇤     0.245⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.035)      (0.046)      (0.045)      (0.060)      (0.060)       (0.063)
 Cereal Grains                        0.345⇤⇤⇤     0.405⇤⇤⇤     0.396⇤⇤⇤     0.301⇤⇤⇤     0.300⇤⇤⇤     0.315⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.036)      (0.038)      (0.038)      (0.045)      (0.046)       (0.048)
 Log Absolute Latitude                             0.112⇤⇤⇤     0.117⇤⇤⇤     0.108⇤⇤⇤     0.105⇤⇤⇤     0.111⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.022)
 Elevation                                                                                  0.000         0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)       (0.000)
 Terrain Ruggedness                                                                        -0.000       -0.000⇤
                                                                                          (0.000)       (0.000)
 River Length                                                                             0.003⇤⇤      0.003⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.001)       (0.001)
 River Density                                                                             -0.003        -0.003
                                                                                          (0.002)       (0.002)
 Share Desert                                                                              -0.040         0.044
                                                                                          (0.059)       (0.071)
 Average Temperature                                                                                     -0.000
                                                                                                        (0.004)
 Temperature Range                                                                                     -0.021⇤⇤
                                                                                                        (0.008)
 Soil Quality (Climatic)                 No           No           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Continental FE                          No           No           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
 N                                      1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076
 Adjusted R2                            0.254        0.291        0.292        0.317        0.323        0.326
 This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure
 of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional
 hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior
 centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including major crop
 type fixed e↵ects at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for
 sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
 errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent
 level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.



                                                        60
Table B.14: Observed Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Major
                                        Crop Type

                                           Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
    Genetic Diversity             2.190⇤⇤      3.631⇤⇤⇤      3.734⇤⇤⇤   7.543⇤⇤⇤    8.834⇤⇤⇤     9.723⇤⇤⇤
                                  (0.972)      (1.027)       (1.002)    (2.448)     (3.263)      (2.983)
    Tree Fruits                    -0.117       -0.171        0.004      0.265        0.253        0.166
                                  (0.326)      (0.349)       (0.373)    (0.342)     (0.360)      (0.359)
    Roots or Tubers                -0.016       -0.028        0.128      0.115        0.092       -0.041
                                  (0.169)      (0.178)       (0.171)    (0.211)     (0.262)      (0.240)
    Cereal Grains                 0.301⇤⇤        0.181       0.316⇤⇤     0.139       0.133        -0.026
                                  (0.147)      (0.174)       (0.157)    (0.187)     (0.211)      (0.191)
    Log Absolute Latitude                      0.125⇤⇤⇤      0.116⇤⇤⇤    0.079⇤      0.069       0.103⇤⇤
                                               (0.033)       (0.039)    (0.045)     (0.048)      (0.051)
    Elevation                                                                        -0.000        0.000
                                                                                    (0.000)      (0.000)
    Terrain Ruggedness                                                               0.000        0.000
                                                                                    (0.000)      (0.000)
    River Length                                                                    0.001⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                    (0.000)      (0.001)
    River Density                                                                     0.015        0.029
                                                                                    (0.031)      (0.025)
    Share Desert                                                                     -0.167      -0.509⇤
                                                                                    (0.317)      (0.271)
    Average Temperature                                                                          0.028⇤⇤
                                                                                                 (0.012)
    Temperature Range                                                                              0.015
                                                                                                 (0.025)
    Soil Quality (Climatic)          No          No            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
    Continental FE                   No          No            No         Yes          Yes          Yes
    N                                131         131           131        131          131         131
    Adjusted R2                     0.092       0.154         0.190      0.274        0.260       0.300
    This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of
    a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of
    jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables
    including major crop type fixed e↵ects at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with
    “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects.
    Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1
    percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                        61
 Table B.15: Observed Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for SD of Soil
                                      Suitability

                                               Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity           5.062⇤⇤⇤     5.720⇤⇤⇤     5.719⇤⇤⇤     4.093⇤⇤⇤      4.694⇤⇤⇤     4.840⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.294)      (0.323)      (0.321)      (1.060)       (1.129)        (1.125)
Log Absolute Latitude                              0.070⇤⇤⇤     0.069⇤⇤⇤     0.097⇤⇤⇤      0.097⇤⇤⇤     0.123⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.019)        (0.021)
Elevation                                                                                   -0.000        0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                           (0.000)        (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                          -0.000       -0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                           (0.000)        (0.000)
River Length                                                                               0.002⇤⇤      0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                           (0.001)        (0.001)
River Density                                                                               -0.001         -0.001
                                                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)
Share Desert                                                                                -0.005         -0.003
                                                                                           (0.065)        (0.073)
Average Temperature                                                                                      0.009⇤⇤
                                                                                                          (0.004)
Temperature Range                                                                                       -0.026⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                          (0.008)
Soil Suitability SD FE                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Soil Quality (Climatic)                  No           No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Continental FE                           No           No           No           Yes           Yes          Yes
N                                      1,076         1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076         1,076
Adjusted R2                            0.214         0.232        0.237        0.309        0.313         0.319
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of
pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy)
on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid
of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including decile of standard
deviation of soil suitability fixed e↵ects at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental
FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-
consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                        62
Table B.16: Observed Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for SD of Soil
                                     Suitability

                                      Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
 Genetic Diversity              2.623⇤⇤⇤     4.282⇤⇤⇤      4.181⇤⇤⇤    6.313⇤⇤    7.673⇤⇤     7.655⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.929)      (0.953)       (1.016)     (2.416)    (2.975)      (2.905)
 Log Absolute Latitude                       0.158⇤⇤⇤      0.143⇤⇤⇤    0.084⇤⇤     0.053       0.082⇤
                                             (0.031)       (0.034)     (0.038)    (0.044)      (0.049)
 Elevation                                                                         -0.000       0.000
                                                                                  (0.000)      (0.000)
 Terrain Ruggedness                                                                0.000         0.000
                                                                                  (0.000)      (0.000)
 River Length                                                                       0.001     0.002⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.001)      (0.001)
 River Density                                                                     -0.006        0.005
                                                                                  (0.037)      (0.031)
 Share Desert                                                                      -0.396     -0.751⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.291)      (0.239)
 Average Temperature                                                                          0.030⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                               (0.011)
 Temperature Range                                                                              -0.001
                                                                                               (0.027)
 Soil Suitability SD FE            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Soil Quality (Climatic)           No           No           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Continental FE                    No           No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes
 N                                 131         131           131         131         131          131
 Adjusted R2                      0.095       0.205         0.230       0.321       0.311        0.359
 This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a
 measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of juris-
 dictional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables including
 decile of standard deviation of soil suitability fixed e↵ects at the ethnic-group level. Specifications
 marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed
 e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at
 the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                      63
Table B.17: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Scale

                                                                             Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity                                      4.215⇤⇤⇤      4.493⇤⇤⇤     4.566⇤⇤⇤      3.531⇤⇤⇤    3.061⇤⇤⇤     3.071⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.286)      (0.300)      (0.304)       (0.953)      (1.037)      (1.034)
Area                                                                 0.001       0.001         0.001        0.001     0.003⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Size of Local Community: Fewer than 50                           -0.180⇤⇤⇤     -0.183⇤⇤⇤    -0.171⇤⇤⇤    -0.145⇤⇤⇤    -0.161⇤⇤⇤    -0.162⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.038)       (0.038)      (0.039)      (0.039)
Size of Local Community: 50–99                                   -0.127⇤⇤⇤     -0.132⇤⇤⇤    -0.131⇤⇤⇤    -0.125⇤⇤⇤    -0.128⇤⇤⇤    -0.130⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.042)       (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.041)
Size of Local Community: 100–199                                    -0.007       -0.004        0.000         0.011       0.003        -0.002
                                                                   (0.044)      (0.044)      (0.045)       (0.044)      (0.044)      (0.044)
Size of Local Community: 200–399                                    -0.052       -0.054       -0.054        -0.040       -0.055       -0.054
                                                                   (0.053)      (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.052)      (0.052)      (0.052)
Size of Local Community: 400–1,000                                   0.069       0.064         0.052        0.047        0.043        0.041
                                                                   (0.057)      (0.056)      (0.057)       (0.058)      (0.060)      (0.060)
Size of Local Community: 1,000 w/o Towns over 5,000                 -0.110       -0.117       -0.107        -0.113       -0.125       -0.122
                                                                   (0.129)      (0.131)      (0.129)       (0.131)      (0.132)      (0.131)
Size of Local Community: Towns of 5,000–50,000                    0.597⇤⇤⇤     0.589⇤⇤⇤     0.591⇤⇤⇤      0.522⇤⇤⇤    0.519⇤⇤⇤     0.517⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.081)      (0.082)      (0.082)       (0.087)      (0.084)      (0.083)
Size of Local Community: Cities of 50,000 or more                0.837⇤⇤⇤      0.813⇤⇤⇤     0.805⇤⇤⇤      0.769⇤⇤⇤    0.772⇤⇤⇤     0.770⇤⇤⇤
                                                                   (0.033)      (0.035)      (0.037)       (0.047)      (0.049)      (0.048)
Log Absolute Latitude                                                           0.029⇤⇤      0.033⇤⇤      0.071⇤⇤⇤    0.074⇤⇤⇤     0.085⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.020)
Elevation                                                                                                               0.000⇤       0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                                        (0.000)      (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                                       -0.000     -0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                                                        (0.000)      (0.000)
River Length                                                                                                           -0.005⇤⇤     -0.005⇤⇤
                                                                                                                        (0.002)      (0.002)
River Density                                                                                                            0.002         0.002
                                                                                                                        (0.002)      (0.002)
Share Desert                                                                                                             0.019         0.064
                                                                                                                        (0.055)      (0.067)
Average Temperature                                                                                                                    0.002
                                                                                                                                     (0.003)
Temperature Range                                                                                                                   -0.016⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                     (0.008)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                              No           No           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Continental FE                                                       No           No           No           Yes          Yes           Yes
N                                                                  1,076         1,076        1,076        1,076        1,076         1,076
Adjusted R2                                                        0.403         0.405        0.406        0.425        0.429         0.430
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional
hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory
distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including
ethnicity-homeland area and mean size of local communities fixed e↵ects at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with
“Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10
percent level.




                                                                     64
Table B.18: Observed Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Scale

                                                                          Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                                 (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
Genetic Diversity                                              2.899⇤⇤⇤     3.845⇤⇤⇤     3.819⇤⇤⇤     3.778⇤      5.399⇤     5.689⇤⇤
                                                                (0.723)      (0.800)      (0.914)     (2.189)     (2.873)     (2.852)
Area                                                              0.000       0.000      0.000⇤⇤     0.000⇤⇤     0.005⇤⇤     0.004⇤⇤
                                                                (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Size of Local Community: Fewer than 50                           0.020         0.094       -0.002      -0.013       0.051       0.082
                                                                (0.155)      (0.163)      (0.155)     (0.151)     (0.138)     (0.140)
Size of Local Community: 50–99                                   -0.121       -0.114       0.001        0.039      0.039        0.077
                                                                (0.142)      (0.133)      (0.145)     (0.140)     (0.162)     (0.158)
Size of Local Community: 100–199                                  0.087        0.141       0.133       0.122        0.050      0.042
                                                                (0.120)      (0.119)      (0.129)     (0.150)     (0.145)     (0.152)
Size of Local Community: 200–399                                 -0.143       -0.133       -0.108      -0.114      -0.230      -0.237
                                                                (0.176)      (0.155)      (0.162)     (0.195)     (0.200)     (0.185)
Size of Local Community: 400–1,000                              0.218⇤         0.163      0.233⇤       0.195       0.223        0.233
                                                                (0.119)      (0.118)      (0.132)     (0.135)     (0.156)     (0.153)
Size of Local Community: 1,000 w/o Towns over 5,000           -0.559⇤⇤⇤     -0.557⇤⇤⇤   -0.576⇤⇤⇤   -0.572⇤⇤⇤   -0.645⇤⇤⇤   -0.695⇤⇤⇤
                                                                (0.075)      (0.073)      (0.106)     (0.110)     (0.108)     (0.124)
Size of Local Community: Towns of 5,000–50,000                 0.682⇤⇤⇤      0.661⇤⇤     0.628⇤⇤     0.857⇤⇤⇤   0.897⇤⇤⇤    0.922⇤⇤⇤
                                                                (0.238)      (0.256)      (0.255)     (0.133)     (0.131)     (0.134)
Size of Local Community: Cities of 50,000 or more              0.887⇤⇤⇤     0.825⇤⇤⇤     0.826⇤⇤⇤    0.760⇤⇤⇤   0.814⇤⇤⇤    0.779⇤⇤⇤
                                                                (0.084)      (0.088)      (0.102)     (0.109)     (0.119)     (0.128)
Log Absolute Latitude                                                        0.082⇤⇤       0.054       0.061      0.082⇤        0.071
                                                                             (0.034)      (0.038)     (0.043)     (0.042)     (0.046)
Elevation                                                                                                          0.000       -0.000
                                                                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                                                 0.000      0.000⇤
                                                                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)
River Length                                                                                                     -0.012⇤⇤    -0.010⇤⇤
                                                                                                                  (0.005)     (0.005)
River Density                                                                                                   0.065⇤⇤⇤    0.067⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                  (0.024)     (0.024)
Share Desert                                                                                                       -0.076      -0.254
                                                                                                                  (0.233)     (0.245)
Average Temperature                                                                                                             0.006
                                                                                                                              (0.010)
Temperature Range                                                                                                               0.033
                                                                                                                              (0.022)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                          No            No         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Continental FE                                                   No            No         No          Yes          Yes         Yes
N                                                                131           131        131         131          131         131
Adjusted R2                                                     0.387         0.411      0.427       0.503        0.522       0.526
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial
jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity,
conditional on a range of control variables including ethnicity-homeland area and mean size of local communities fixed e↵ects at
the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental
fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. **
Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                 65
Table B.19: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Excluding Africa

                                          Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity     6.525⇤⇤⇤     6.520⇤⇤⇤   6.538⇤⇤⇤    6.524⇤⇤⇤    7.791⇤⇤⇤     7.791⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.548)      (0.564)    (0.569)     (1.215)     (1.297)      (1.290)
Log Absolute Latitude                          0.001      0.024     0.104⇤⇤⇤    0.099⇤⇤⇤     0.156⇤⇤⇤
                                              (0.020)    (0.022)     (0.033)     (0.033)      (0.045)
Elevation                                                                         0.000       0.000⇤
                                                                                 (0.000)      (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                             -0.000⇤⇤⇤    -0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                 (0.000)      (0.000)
River Length                                                                    0.002⇤⇤      0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                 (0.001)      (0.001)
River Density                                                                     -0.003       -0.003
                                                                                 (0.002)      (0.002)
Share Desert                                                                      -0.037       -0.065
                                                                                 (0.074)      (0.084)
Average Temperature                                                                          0.012⇤⇤
                                                                                              (0.005)
Temperature Range                                                                            -0.022⇤⇤
                                                                                              (0.011)
Soil Quality (Climatic)            No           No        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Continental FE                     No           No        No          Yes         Yes          Yes
N                                  590         590         590        590         590          590
Adjusted R2                       0.219       0.217       0.256      0.331       0.353        0.361
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of
a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of
jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East
Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control
variables and excluding observations from Africa at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked
with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1
percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                  66
         Table B.20: Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Excluding Africa

                                            Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
    Genetic Diversity              8.694⇤⇤⇤     8.581⇤⇤⇤      10.082⇤⇤⇤    10.082⇤⇤⇤     8.511⇤⇤⇤     9.199⇤⇤⇤
                                   (1.186)      (1.477)        (1.352)      (1.352)       (2.539)     (2.286)
    Log Absolute Latitude                        0.013          -0.173       -0.173        -0.227      0.088
                                                (0.106)        (0.128)      (0.128)       (0.135)     (0.276)
    Elevation                                                                             0.000⇤       0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
    Terrain Ruggedness                                                                   -0.000⇤⇤      -0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
    River Length                                                                         0.002⇤⇤      0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)
    River Density                                                                          -0.008      0.017
                                                                                          (0.025)     (0.027)
    Share Desert                                                                           0.247       -0.424
                                                                                          (0.495)     (0.541)
    Average Temperature                                                                                 0.033
                                                                                                      (0.022)
    Temperature Range                                                                                   0.020
                                                                                                      (0.046)
    Soil Quality (Climatic)           No           No           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
    N                                 54           54           54            54           54            54
    Adjusted R2                     0.356        0.343         0.330         0.330        0.385        0.432
    This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a
    measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdic-
    tional hierarchy) on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables and excluding
    observations from Africa at the ethnic-group level. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
    reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. *
    Significant at the 10 percent level.

Given the low number of observations when excluding Africa and focusing on the sample of observed
genetic diversity, this robustness table is generated without inclusion of continental dummies. Table
B.19 establishes that the results are robust to accounting for continental fixed e↵ects when excluding
Africa in the larger sample of predicted genetic diversity.




                                                         67
Table B.21: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Year in
                                     Ethnographic Atlas

                                              Log Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                        (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
 Predicted Genetic Diversity          5.223⇤⇤⇤     5.810⇤⇤⇤    5.879⇤⇤⇤     5.300⇤⇤⇤    5.422⇤⇤⇤     5.644⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.288)       (0.316)     (0.313)      (1.009)     (1.100)       (1.105)
 Year in Ethnographic Atlas          -0.000⇤⇤⇤     -0.000⇤⇤    -0.000⇤⇤     -0.000⇤⇤    -0.000⇤⇤      -0.000⇤⇤
                                      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)
 Log Absolute Latitude                             0.064⇤⇤⇤    0.075⇤⇤⇤     0.107⇤⇤⇤    0.105⇤⇤⇤     0.127⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.014)     (0.015)      (0.018)     (0.019)       (0.021)
 Elevation                                                                                0.000       0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                         (0.000)       (0.000)
 Terrain Ruggedness                                                                      -0.000⇤     -0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                         (0.000)       (0.000)
 River Length                                                                           0.003⇤⇤⇤     0.003⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                         (0.001)       (0.001)
 River Density                                                                            -0.003        -0.002
                                                                                         (0.002)       (0.002)
 Share Desert                                                                             0.005          0.009
                                                                                         (0.062)       (0.072)
 Average Temperature                                                                                   0.007⇤
                                                                                                       (0.004)
 Temperature Range                                                                                    -0.020⇤⇤
                                                                                                       (0.008)
 Soil Quality (Climatic)                 No           No          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Continental FE                          No           No          No           Yes         Yes          Yes
 N                                     1,075        1,075        1,075       1,075        1,075        1,075
 Adjusted R2                           0.204        0.220        0.228       0.295        0.302        0.305
 This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a mea-
 sure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural logarithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional
 hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity, based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior
 centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables including the approx-
 imate year of description as reported in the Ethnographic Atlas at the ethnic-group level. Specifications
 marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects.
 Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent
 level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                       68
Table B.22: Genetic Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Year in
                                Ethnographic Atlas

                                             Log Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                               (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
       Genetic Diversity                    1.940⇤      7.620⇤⇤⇤     7.222⇤⇤      7.328⇤⇤
                                            (1.089)     (2.551)      (3.140)      (3.068)
       Year in Ethnographic Atlas            -0.001      -0.000       -0.001       -0.002
                                            (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
       Log Absolute Latitude                             -0.009       0.054       0.095⇤⇤⇤
                                                        (0.027)      (0.033)      (0.027)
       Elevation                                                     0.000⇤⇤⇤     0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                                     (0.000)      (0.000)
       Terrain Ruggedness                                             -0.000       -0.000
                                                                     (0.000)      (0.000)
       River Length                                                    0.000      0.002⇤⇤⇤
                                                                     (0.000)      (0.001)
       River Density                                                  -0.057       -0.065
                                                                     (0.083)      (0.075)
       Share Desert                                                   0.295⇤        0.337
                                                                     (0.172)      (0.226)
       Average Temperature                                                        0.023⇤⇤
                                                                                  (0.011)
       Temperature Range                                                           -0.040
                                                                                  (0.027)
       Soil Quality (Climatic)                 No          Yes          Yes          Yes
       Continental FE                          No          Yes          Yes          Yes
       N                                       94           94          94           94
       Adjusted R2                           0.029        0.085        0.150        0.202
       This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-
       group level, of a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the natural log-
       arithm of the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on observed genetic
       diversity, conditional on a range of control variables including the approximate
       year of description as reported in the Ethnographic Atlas at the ethnic-group
       level. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan
       Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent
       standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
       ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                 69
      Table B.23: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Levels Specification

                                                   Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
Predicted Genetic Diversity          9.357⇤⇤⇤     10.779⇤⇤⇤      10.879⇤⇤⇤      11.149⇤⇤⇤     11.390⇤⇤⇤      11.810⇤⇤⇤
                                     (0.600)       (0.684)        (0.673)        (2.144)       (2.369)         (2.417)
Log Absolute Latitude                              0.149⇤⇤⇤       0.175⇤⇤⇤       0.214⇤⇤⇤     0.209⇤⇤⇤       0.250⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.028)        (0.030)        (0.037)       (0.038)         (0.043)
Elevation                                                                                       0.000          0.000⇤
                                                                                               (0.000)         (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                             -0.000⇤        -0.000⇤⇤
                                                                                               (0.000)         (0.000)
River Length                                                                                   0.007⇤⇤⇤      0.008⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                               (0.003)         (0.003)
River Density                                                                                  -0.010⇤         -0.009⇤
                                                                                               (0.005)         (0.005)
Share desert                                                                                    0.012           0.027
                                                                                               (0.132)         (0.156)
Average Temperature                                                                                             0.013
                                                                                                               (0.008)
Temperature Range                                                                                             -0.039⇤⇤
                                                                                                               (0.017)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                  No           No             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Continental FE                           No           No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes
N                                      1,076         1,076         1,076          1,076         1,076          1,076
Adjusted R2                            0.158         0.179         0.185          0.269         0.285          0.287
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-
colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy) on predicted genetic diversity,
based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity,
conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level. Specifications marked with “Continental
FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent
level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                          70
        Table B.24: Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Levels Specification

                                         Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
Genetic Diversity             4.308⇤⇤    7.595⇤⇤⇤     8.109⇤⇤⇤    17.567⇤⇤⇤     19.777⇤⇤⇤     20.081⇤⇤⇤
                              (2.065)    (2.021)      (1.919)      (5.280)       (6.844)        (6.335)
Log Absolute Latitude                    0.329⇤⇤⇤     0.337⇤⇤⇤     0.181⇤⇤        0.140        0.191⇤⇤
                                         (0.069)      (0.080)      (0.076)       (0.089)        (0.093)
Elevation                                                                         -0.000         0.000
                                                                                 (0.000)        (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                                0.000          0.000
                                                                                 (0.000)        (0.000)
River Length                                                                     0.004⇤⇤⇤     0.007⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                 (0.001)        (0.002)
River Density                                                                      0.009         0.034
                                                                                 (0.071)        (0.055)
Share desert                                                                      -0.499       -1.284⇤⇤
                                                                                 (0.677)        (0.588)
Average Temperature                                                                             0.069⇤⇤
                                                                                                (0.026)
Temperature Range                                                                                0.026
                                                                                                (0.053)
Soil Quality (Climatic)          No         No           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Continental FE                   No         No           No           Yes           Yes           Yes
N                               131         131           131         131           131           131
Adjusted R2                    0.017       0.120         0.129       0.249         0.249         0.304
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of
a measure of pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy (the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy)
on observed genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group level.
Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and
continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10
percent level.




                                                    71
    Table B.25: Predicted Diversity and Jurisdictional Hierarchy — Accounting for Irrigation
                          Potential with Predicted Genetic Diversity

                                                        Degree of Absence           Difficulty of                               Degree of Lack of
                                                                                                        Leader’s Exercise                                 Perception of
                                                          of Checks on              Removal of                                    Community
                                                                                                          of Authority                                   Leader’s Power
                                                         Leader’s Power               Leaders                                      Decisions
                                                          (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
Predicted Genetic Diversity                            5.688⇤⇤⇤     4.914⇤⇤     5.413⇤⇤     4.813⇤⇤     5.413⇤⇤⇤    5.143⇤⇤    6.447⇤⇤⇤    5.988⇤⇤⇤     5.363⇤⇤⇤    5.418⇤⇤
                                                        (2.091)     (2.320)      (2.055)     (2.114)     (1.999)    (2.028)     (1.563)     (1.702)      (1.799)    (2.114)
Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation         0.237⇤⇤⇤     0.180⇤      0.480⇤⇤⇤    0.383⇤⇤⇤       0.151      0.121      0.041        0.017       0.048       0.042
                                                        (0.088)     (0.092)      (0.123)     (0.125)     (0.107)    (0.118)     (0.082)     (0.085)      (0.102)    (0.108)
Log Absolute Latitude                                    -0.032      -0.109       0.000        0.077      -0.098     -0.052      -0.113      -0.047       0.011       0.082
                                                        (0.098)     (0.184)      (0.099)     (0.145)     (0.095)    (0.175)     (0.072)     (0.124)      (0.088)    (0.146)
Elevation                                                            -0.000                   -0.000                 -0.000                   0.000                   0.000
                                                                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
Terrain Ruggedness                                                   0.000                     0.000                  0.000                   0.000                  -0.000
                                                                    (0.000)                  (0.000)                (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
Average Temperature                                                  -0.003                    0.020                 0.020                    0.015                   0.011
                                                                    (0.020)                  (0.020)                (0.019)                 (0.015)                 (0.016)
Temperature Range                                                     0.094                    0.060                  0.058                  -0.013                  -0.048
                                                                    (0.068)                  (0.068)                (0.062)                 (0.049)                 (0.054)
River Length                                                          0.011                   -0.004                  0.007                   0.001                 0.013⇤
                                                                    (0.008)                  (0.009)                (0.007)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)
River Density                                                        -0.064                   -0.028                 -0.044                  -0.017                  -0.044
                                                                    (0.050)                  (0.034)                (0.035)                 (0.041)                 (0.032)
Share Desert                                                         0.012                    -0.191                 -0.663                   0.057                   0.087
                                                                    (0.562)                  (0.597)                (0.545)                 (0.488)                 (0.483)
Soil Quality (Climatic)                                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                                          78          78         71          71            79        79          82          82          82           82
Adjusted R2                                              0.118       0.132       0.228       0.248        0.132      0.110       0.189       0.132       0.154       0.096
This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the ethnic-group level, of measures of pre-colonial autocracy on predicted genetic diversity,
based on the migratory distance from East Africa to the interior centroid of the homeland of the ethnicity, conditional on a range of control variables at the ethnic-group
level including a measure of irrigation potential at the ethnic-group level. The irrigation measure is based on the “area equipped for irrigation” data of the Global Map
of Irrigation Areas, version 5.0 (Siebert et al., 2013). Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                    72
Table B.26: Observed Genetic Diversity and Indigenous Autocracy

                                              Indigenous Autocracy
                                   (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)
 Genetic Diversity              1.866⇤         7.627⇤⇤⇤   7.338⇤⇤     7.591⇤⇤
                                (1.070)        (2.517)    (3.105)     (3.089)
 Log Absolute Latitude                          -0.008     0.055⇤     0.093⇤⇤⇤
                                               (0.027)    (0.033)     (0.027)
 Elevation                                                0.000⇤⇤⇤    0.000⇤⇤⇤
                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
 Terrain Ruggedness                                        -0.000      -0.000
                                                          (0.000)     (0.000)
 River Length                                               0.000     0.001⇤⇤
                                                          (0.000)     (0.001)
 River Density                                             -0.059      -0.067
                                                          (0.081)     (0.073)
 Share Desert                                               0.273       0.298
                                                          (0.169)     (0.224)
 Average Temperature                                                   0.019⇤
                                                                      (0.011)
 Temperature Range                                                     -0.038
                                                                      (0.027)
 Soil Quality (Climatic)           No            Yes        Yes          Yes
 Continental FE                    No            Yes        Yes          Yes
 N                                 94             94        94           94
 Adjusted R2                     0.032          0.097      0.159        0.197
 This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the
 ethnic-group level, of a measure of pre-colonial autocracy on observed genetic
 diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked
 with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and
 continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
 reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
 at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                         73
                                                       Table B.27: Persistence of Institutions — Old and New World


                                                                                      Executive Constraints                                                         Autocracy

                                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
     Degree of Absence of Checks on Leader’s Power           -0.186⇤⇤⇤    -0.093⇤       -0.084                                           0.519⇤⇤⇤    0.343⇤⇤    0.315⇤⇤
                                                              (0.052)     (0.050)      (0.052)                                           (0.108)     (0.131)    (0.138)
     Degree of Absence of Checks on Leader’s Power                                                 -0.191⇤⇤⇤     -0.105⇤     -0.111⇤                                        0.553⇤⇤⇤   0.372⇤⇤    0.386⇤⇤
         (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                        (0.054)      (0.057)     (0.056)                                         (0.118)   (0.150)    (0.147)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                       -1.981⇤⇤                                                                 6.069⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                        (0.902)                                                                  (2.164)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                                                             -3.705⇤                                                              9.729⇤⇤
         (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                                 (1.915)                                                              (4.609)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                                  -0.067       -0.074                  -0.076      -0.084⇤                   0.089     0.110                   0.121      0.141
                                                                           (0.045)      (0.045)                 (0.046)      (0.048)                 (0.122)    (0.107)                (0.125)    (0.115)
     Soil Fertility                                                          0.294        0.194                  0.270         0.124                  -1.016     -0.709                 -0.955     -0.571
74




                                                                           (0.376)      (0.385)                 (0.371)      (0.390)                 (0.945)    (0.910)                (0.957)    (0.927)
     Roughness                                                               0.264       -0.048                   0.173       -0.446                  -0.523      0.431                 -0.186      1.441
                                                                           (0.449)      (0.448)                 (0.451)      (0.565)                 (1.162)    (1.146)                (1.196)    (1.473)
     Elevation                                                            -0.206⇤⇤       -0.167                 -0.195⇤       -0.106                 0.558⇤       0.440                0.525⇤       0.292
                                                                           (0.096)      (0.103)                 (0.103)      (0.117)                 (0.285)    (0.313)                (0.305)    (0.360)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                -0.302⇤⇤⇤     -0.259⇤⇤                -0.322⇤⇤⇤    -0.312⇤⇤⇤                  0.323     0.190                   0.398      0.372
                                                                           (0.107)      (0.109)                 (0.107)      (0.105)                 (0.270)    (0.287)                (0.277)    (0.275)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                               0.004        0.005                  0.004         0.005                  -0.001     -0.006                 -0.001     -0.004
                                                                           (0.004)      (0.004)                 (0.004)      (0.004)                 (0.009)    (0.009)                (0.009)    (0.009)
     Temperature                                                         -0.024⇤⇤⇤    -0.020⇤⇤⇤                -0.026⇤⇤⇤    -0.025⇤⇤⇤                0.030⇤       0.018                0.036⇤⇤    0.032⇤
                                                                           (0.007)      (0.007)                 (0.007)      (0.007)                 (0.017)    (0.017)                (0.017)    (0.016)
     Colony                                                                 0.192         0.103                   0.198       0.139                  -0.421⇤     -0.148                -0.442⇤     -0.290
                                                                           (0.119)      (0.137)                 (0.119)      (0.132)                 (0.229)    (0.273)                (0.230)    (0.263)
     N                                                          47           47           47           47          47           47           47        47         47          47          47         47
     Adjusted R2                                               0.151       0.413        0.447        0.124        0.413       0.441        0.234      0.280      0.349       0.208       0.273     0.310
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of measures of contemporary autocracy on measures of pre-colonial autocracy on the sample
     of all countries with available data. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent
     standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                         Table B.28: Persistence of Institutions — Indigenous Autocracy


                                                                                            Executive
                                              Executive
                                                                       Autocracy              Con-           Autocracy
                                             Constraints
                                                                                             straints
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)
     Log Indigenous Autocracy          -0.237⇤⇤⇤                  0.466⇤⇤⇤                   -0.287⇤⇤⇤         0.549⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.070)                   (0.158)                     (0.076)          (0.169)
     Log Indigenous Autocracy                        -0.377⇤⇤⇤                 0.764⇤⇤⇤
75




         (Ancestry Adjusted)                          (0.077)                  (0.172)
     N                                    95             95          95           95            80               80
     Adjusted R2                         0.054         0.128        0.038        0.101         0.081            0.057
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of measures
     of contemporary autocracy on a measure of pre-colonial democracy. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
     accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
     errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. *
     Significant at the 10 percent level.
                  Table B.29: Persistence of Institutions — Alternative Aggregation Method


                                                                                              Executive
                                            Executive
                                                                       Autocracy                Con-          Autocracy
                                           Constraints
                                                                                               straints
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
     Indigenous Democracy             0.248⇤⇤⇤                   -0.466⇤⇤⇤                     0.305⇤⇤⇤        -0.553⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.081)                     (0.168)                      (0.085)          (0.176)
     Indigenous Democracy                           0.313⇤⇤⇤                   -0.565⇤⇤⇤
76




         (Ancestry Adjusted)                        (0.091)                     (0.191)
     N                                   144          144           144           144            127               127
     Adjusted R2                        0.056        0.069         0.045         0.050          0.085             0.065
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of
     measures of contemporary autocracy on a measure of pre-colonial democracy, conditional on sub-Saharan Africa,
     Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-
     Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are
     reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant
     at the 10 percent level.

     This table shows the robustness of the findings in Table 11 and B.28 to using a measure of indigenous
     democracy (rather than indigenous autocracy) that is derived from an alternative aggregation
     procedure from the ethnic group level to the country level, based on Giuliano and Nunn (2013) (see
     Alesina et al. (2013) for an explanation of the methodology used in the construction of the data).
     This procedure generates a larger sample of countries with aggregated institutional information.
                              Table B.30: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive (2013)

                                                                               Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                       -3.397⇤⇤⇤    -3.449⇤⇤⇤     -2.423⇤⇤     -2.495⇤⇤⇤    -3.081⇤⇤     -3.159⇤⇤    -3.277⇤⇤
                                                        (0.902)      (0.898)       (0.948)      (0.939)      (1.547)      (1.473)     (1.464)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                           0.082⇤⇤        0.051        -0.044       0.018        0.016       0.023
                                                                     (0.032)       (0.034)      (0.049)      (0.051)      (0.048)     (0.048)
     Soil Fertility                                                                 0.319        0.244         0.067       0.205       0.205
                                                                                   (0.227)      (0.217)      (0.193)      (0.191)     (0.192)
     Roughness                                                                      0.167        0.059         0.355       0.441      0.526⇤
                                                                                   (0.309)      (0.324)      (0.338)      (0.314)     (0.304)
     Elevation                                                                      0.039        0.013        0.109        0.048       0.047
                                                                                   (0.084)      (0.084)      (0.105)      (0.096)     (0.090)
77




     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                         -0.197⇤⇤     -0.265⇤⇤⇤     -0.171⇤       -0.080      -0.062
                                                                                   (0.096)      (0.092)      (0.087)      (0.092)     (0.092)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                      0.003        0.002        0.003        0.003        0.003
                                                                                   (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                               -0.017⇤⇤⇤      -0.003       -0.005      -0.011
                                                                                                (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
     Colony                                                                                                                           0.258⇤
                                                                                                                                      (0.154)
     Continental FE                                       No            No           No           No           Yes         Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                      No            No           No           No           No          Yes          Yes
     N                                                    140           140          140          140          140         140          140
     Adjusted R2                                         0.050         0.082        0.175        0.228        0.330       0.390        0.406
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
     accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
     in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
     Table B.31: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Irrigation Potential

                                                                                          Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                               (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                     ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                            -4.055         -4.305           -3.281         -3.176         -3.274       -3.332       -3.450⇤⇤
                                                             (0.811)         (0.828)          (0.893)       (0.828)        (1.436)      (1.344)      (1.337)
     Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation           -0.001          -0.042        -0.173⇤⇤⇤      -0.138⇤⇤⇤        -0.009       -0.037       -0.029
                                                             (0.039)         (0.039)          (0.047)       (0.051)        (0.054)      (0.056)      (0.054)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                                  0.108⇤⇤⇤         0.093⇤⇤⇤        -0.004         0.023         0.024        0.030
                                                                             (0.029)          (0.030)       (0.045)        (0.043)      (0.038)      (0.037)
     Soil Fertility                                                                          0.477⇤⇤        0.416⇤          0.174       0.353⇤       0.339⇤
                                                                                              (0.221)       (0.216)        (0.206)      (0.202)      (0.203)
     Roughness                                                                               0.727⇤⇤          0.529          0.359       0.460       0.522⇤
                                                                                              (0.332)       (0.352)        (0.342)      (0.303)      (0.297)
     Elevation                                                                                 -0.116        -0.135         -0.010       -0.072       -0.066
                                                                                              (0.088)       (0.090)        (0.108)      (0.100)      (0.094)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                                    -0.155⇤       -0.219⇤⇤⇤       -0.160⇤       -0.067       -0.047
                                                                                              (0.080)       (0.083)        (0.085)      (0.091)      (0.092)
78




     Percentage of Arable Land                                                               0.006⇤⇤          0.004          0.002       0.003         0.003
                                                                                              (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
     Temperature                                                                                           -0.016⇤⇤⇤        -0.007       -0.009       -0.014
                                                                                                            (0.006)        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)
     Colony                                                                                                                                          0.259⇤
                                                                                                                                                     (0.150)
     Continental FE                                            No             No               No             No            Yes          Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                           No             No               No             No            No           Yes          Yes
     N                                                         145           145               145           145            145          145          145
     Adjusted R2                                              0.061         0.109             0.296         0.334          0.400        0.454        0.469
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
     autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country, conditional on a range
     of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed
     e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
     at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


        This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for the irrigation
        potential.
     Table B.32: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Percentage of Land near a Waterway

                                                                                    Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                               (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)
              Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.116⇤⇤⇤    -3.251⇤⇤⇤     -2.773⇤⇤⇤   -2.812⇤⇤⇤   -3.278⇤⇤    -3.364⇤⇤    -3.488⇤⇤
                                                             (0.855)      (0.876)      (0.889)     (0.873)     (1.444)     (1.352)     (1.339)
              Percentage of Land Near a Waterway            0.344⇤⇤⇤     0.306⇤⇤⇤        0.086      -0.018       0.016      -0.026      -0.047
                                                             (0.089)      (0.093)      (0.151)     (0.144)     (0.136)     (0.133)     (0.134)
              Log Absolute Latitude                                      0.068⇤⇤         0.050      -0.059       0.022       0.018       0.025
                                                                          (0.030)      (0.031)     (0.042)     (0.043)     (0.038)     (0.038)
              Soil Fertility                                                           0.485⇤      0.418⇤        0.163       0.314       0.313
                                                                                       (0.246)     (0.236)     (0.211)     (0.208)     (0.210)
              Roughness                                                                  0.052      0.055        0.327       0.405       0.504
                                                                                       (0.357)     (0.359)     (0.353)     (0.323)     (0.320)
              Elevation                                                                 -0.028      -0.111      -0.001      -0.074      -0.080
                                                                                       (0.120)     (0.120)     (0.130)     (0.125)     (0.120)
              Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                      -0.144    -0.254⇤⇤⇤    -0.155⇤      -0.078      -0.064
79




                                                                                       (0.098)     (0.097)     (0.093)     (0.100)     (0.102)
              Percentage of Arable Land                                                  0.002       0.001      0.002        0.002       0.002
                                                                                       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)
              Temperature                                                                         -0.020⇤⇤⇤     -0.007      -0.010      -0.016
                                                                                                   (0.006)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
              Colony                                                                                                                   0.268⇤
                                                                                                                                       (0.147)
              Continental FE                                   No          No            No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes
              Legal Origin FE                                  No          No            No          No          No         Yes         Yes
              N                                               145          145           145         145         145        145         145
              Adjusted R2                                    0.156        0.174         0.218       0.287       0.400      0.452       0.468
              This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
              contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
              conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
              America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
              at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


                 This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for the percentage of
                 land near a waterway.
     Table B.33: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for the Inequality in Land Suitability

                                                                                       Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                                   ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤             ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤
            Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.863          -3.891         -2.746         -2.768         -3.549       -3.590         -3.703⇤⇤⇤
                                                          (0.829)         (0.845)        (0.890)        (0.869)        (1.455)      (1.364)        (1.346)
            Land Suitability Gini                          -0.233         -0.256⇤        0.460⇤⇤          0.304          0.263        0.162          0.110
                                                          (0.150)         (0.144)        (0.201)        (0.198)        (0.192)      (0.193)        (0.196)
            Log Absolute Latitude                                        0.100⇤⇤⇤          0.027         -0.065          0.009       0.008           0.015
                                                                          (0.029)        (0.031)        (0.042)        (0.042)      (0.038)        (0.038)
            Soil Fertility                                                              0.920⇤⇤⇤       0.752⇤⇤⇤        0.493⇤       0.550⇤⇤        0.523⇤⇤
                                                                                         (0.264)        (0.255)        (0.264)      (0.255)        (0.250)
            Roughness                                                                     -0.085         -0.164         0.148         0.200          0.273
                                                                                         (0.307)        (0.315)        (0.316)      (0.289)        (0.278)
            Elevation                                                                     -0.071         -0.092          0.002       -0.044         -0.035
                                                                                         (0.096)        (0.096)        (0.112)      (0.106)        (0.099)
            Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                        -0.244⇤⇤⇤      -0.290⇤⇤⇤      -0.195⇤⇤       -0.097         -0.069
                                                                                         (0.088)        (0.087)        (0.084)      (0.091)        (0.093)
80




            Percentage of Arable Land                                                      0.002          0.000         0.001         0.001          0.001
                                                                                         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)        (0.002)
            Temperature                                                                                -0.018⇤⇤⇤        -0.003       -0.007         -0.013
                                                                                                        (0.006)        (0.010)      (0.010)        (0.010)
            Colony                                                                                                                                 0.260⇤
                                                                                                                                                   (0.150)
            Continental FE                                   No            No              No             No            Yes          Yes            Yes
            Legal Origin FE                                  No            No              No             No            No           Yes            Yes
            N                                               144            144             144           144            144          144            144
            Adjusted R2                                    0.080          0.127           0.266         0.318          0.416        0.459          0.474
            This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
            contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
            conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
            America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
            at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


               This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for the inequality of
               land suitability (i.e., the Gini coefficient of land suitability).
     Table B.34: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Percentages of Population Living in Various
                                                            Climate Zones

                                                                                                                        Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                                                             (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                                                   ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
              Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                -3.926          -3.864           -3.369         -3.172        -3.066       -3.238       -3.405⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.888)          (0.908)         (0.985)        (0.985)       (1.497)      (1.413)      (1.406)
              Percentage of Population Living in Temperate Zones                         0.587⇤⇤⇤         0.578⇤⇤⇤        0.477⇤⇤⇤       0.377⇤⇤⇤         0.134        0.044        0.005
                                                                                          (0.090)          (0.103)         (0.105)        (0.139)       (0.176)      (0.182)      (0.183)
              Percentage of Population Living in Tropical Zones                            0.011            0.028            0.041         0.021         -0.082       -0.020        0.020
                                                                                          (0.165)          (0.186)         (0.200)        (0.202)       (0.184)      (0.169)      (0.166)
              Percentage of Population Living in Tropical and Subtropical Zones            0.198            0.198            0.107         0.115          0.119        0.047        0.009
                                                                                          (0.173)          (0.174)         (0.181)        (0.182)       (0.157)      (0.150)      (0.142)
              Log Absolute Latitude                                                                         0.013           -0.004         -0.025         0.023       0.022         0.033
                                                                                                           (0.051)         (0.053)        (0.058)       (0.057)      (0.050)      (0.050)
              Soil Fertility                                                                                                 0.278          0.290         0.126        0.294        0.301
                                                                                                                           (0.234)        (0.233)       (0.206)      (0.205)      (0.209)
              Roughness                                                                                                      0.028          0.024         0.333        0.373        0.451
                                                                                                                           (0.318)        (0.321)       (0.335)      (0.314)      (0.308)
81




              Elevation                                                                                                      0.027         -0.007         0.007       -0.053       -0.051
                                                                                                                           (0.097)        (0.108)       (0.114)      (0.107)      (0.099)
              Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                                                          -0.101         -0.141        -0.126       -0.060       -0.049
                                                                                                                           (0.079)        (0.087)       (0.081)      (0.088)      (0.090)
              Percentage of Arable Land                                                                                      0.000          0.000         0.002       0.002         0.002
                                                                                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.002)
              Temperature                                                                                                                  -0.007        -0.004       -0.008       -0.015
                                                                                                                                          (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.010)
              Colony                                                                                                                                                              0.265⇤
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.151)
              Continental FE                                                                 No             No               No            No            Yes          Yes          Yes
              Legal Origin FE                                                                No             No               No            No            No           Yes          Yes
              N                                                                             145            145               145           145           145          145          145
              Adjusted R2                                                                  0.311          0.306             0.309         0.309         0.395        0.443        0.459
              This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary autocracy on predicted
              genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked
              with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
              in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


                       This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for the percentages of
                       population living in various climate zones.
     Table B.35: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Colonizer Nation

                                                                             Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                              (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                    ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤            ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
            Predicted Genetic Diversity                    -3.442         -3.293         -2.869        -2.739       -4.115       -3.648⇤⇤
                                                             (1.159)        (1.102)       (1.131)       (1.140)      (1.606)      (1.604)
            British Colony                                    -0.072         -0.092         0.001        -0.006       0.163        0.051
                                                             (0.102)        (0.095)       (0.109)       (0.103)      (0.109)      (0.152)
            French Colony                                   -0.223⇤⇤       -0.223⇤⇤        -0.130        -0.077       0.078         0.109
                                                             (0.098)        (0.092)       (0.106)       (0.113)      (0.096)      (0.103)
            Other Colony                                      -0.052         -0.134        -0.107      -0.259⇤⇤       -0.105       -0.044
                                                             (0.114)        (0.107)       (0.118)       (0.114)      (0.111)      (0.119)
            Non-colony                                         0.122         0.032          0.068        -0.076       0.029        -0.095
                                                             (0.104)        (0.101)       (0.099)       (0.096)      (0.105)      (0.123)
            Log Absolute Latitude                                         0.092⇤⇤⇤       0.057⇤⇤         -0.052       0.014        0.014
                                                                            (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.041)      (0.040)      (0.039)
            Soil Fertility                                                                0.450⇤          0.331        0.187        0.310
                                                                                          (0.258)       (0.240)      (0.199)      (0.210)
            Roughness                                                                       0.166         0.150       0.421         0.330
82




                                                                                          (0.321)       (0.320)      (0.314)      (0.300)
            Elevation                                                                      -0.046        -0.074        0.014       0.005
                                                                                          (0.090)       (0.087)      (0.104)      (0.105)
            Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                           -0.123      -0.206⇤⇤       -0.118       -0.051
                                                                                          (0.091)       (0.087)      (0.087)      (0.091)
            Percentage of Arable Land                                                       0.003         0.003        0.003       0.002
                                                                                          (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
            Temperature                                                                               -0.025⇤⇤⇤       -0.011       -0.012
                                                                                                        (0.006)      (0.009)      (0.010)
            Continental FE                                    No             No            No            No           Yes          Yes
            Legal Origin FE                                   No             No            No            No           No           Yes
            N                                                 142           142            142          142           142          142
            Adjusted R2                                      0.108         0.140          0.235        0.329         0.439        0.470
            This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure
            of contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa
            to the country, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts
            for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors
            are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant
            at the 10 percent level.


       This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for colonizer nation.
       Table B.36: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Colonial Duration

                                                                                 Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                            ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤             ⇤⇤            ⇤           ⇤           ⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.565          -3.137           -2.079        -1.756      -2.840      -2.966       -3.134⇤⇤
                                                   (0.939)          (0.927)         (1.035)       (0.985)     (1.456)     (1.373)      (1.370)
     Colonial Duration                              0.022          0.044⇤⇤⇤        0.035⇤⇤       0.049⇤⇤⇤    0.062⇤⇤⇤    0.050⇤⇤⇤     0.040⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.017)          (0.014)         (0.017)       (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.013)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                        0.117⇤⇤⇤         0.075⇤⇤         -0.044       0.035      0.029         0.033
                                                                    (0.028)         (0.031)       (0.042)     (0.041)     (0.037)      (0.037)
     Soil Fertility                                                                  0.464⇤         0.354       0.114       0.245        0.255
                                                                                    (0.236)       (0.219)     (0.191)     (0.194)      (0.198)
     Roughness                                                                        0.179         0.089      0.445        0.459      0.507⇤
                                                                                    (0.308)       (0.311)     (0.305)     (0.287)      (0.284)
     Elevation                                                                       -0.056        -0.095      -0.016      -0.061       -0.058
                                                                                    (0.091)       (0.091)     (0.106)     (0.101)      (0.097)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                           -0.167⇤     -0.253⇤⇤⇤    -0.147⇤       -0.066       -0.051
83




                                                                                    (0.091)       (0.088)     (0.085)     (0.091)      (0.092)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                       0.002          0.001       0.001       0.001        0.002
                                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                                -0.022⇤⇤⇤      -0.010      -0.012       -0.016
                                                                                                  (0.005)     (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.010)
     Colony                                                                                                                              0.205
                                                                                                                                       (0.151)
     Continental FE                                   No             No              No            No          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No             No              No            No          No          Yes          Yes
     N                                               145            145              145          145          145         145          145
     Adjusted R2                                    0.068          0.128            0.232        0.320        0.434       0.473        0.480
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

          This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for colonial duration.
              Table B.37: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for GDP

                                                                           Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.348⇤⇤⇤    -3.460⇤⇤⇤    -2.467⇤⇤⇤    -2.629⇤⇤⇤   -3.677⇤⇤⇤    -3.440⇤⇤⇤    -3.608⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.857)      (0.914)      (0.905)      (0.964)    (1.361)      (1.294)      (1.313)
     Log Income Per Capita in 2000 CE              0.112⇤⇤⇤     0.099⇤⇤⇤     0.103⇤⇤⇤        0.060      0.060        0.013        0.015
                                                    (0.028)      (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.054)    (0.048)      (0.053)      (0.050)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                        0.034        -0.012       -0.066      0.022       0.018         0.027
                                                                 (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.044)    (0.044)      (0.038)      (0.038)
     Soil Fertility                                                          0.560⇤⇤      0.471⇤⇤      0.196        0.312         0.306
                                                                              (0.231)      (0.223)    (0.208)      (0.204)      (0.205)
     Roughness                                                                 -0.067       -0.049     0.355         0.388        0.477
                                                                              (0.309)      (0.324)    (0.323)      (0.299)      (0.292)
     Elevation                                                                  0.032       -0.036      0.024       -0.054       -0.046
                                                                              (0.094)      (0.109)    (0.109)      (0.104)      (0.099)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                      -0.139     -0.209⇤⇤     -0.129       -0.067       -0.046
                                                                              (0.092)      (0.099)    (0.088)      (0.093)      (0.093)
84




     Percentage of Arable Land                                                 0.003         0.001     0.003         0.002        0.002
                                                                              (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                           -0.014⇤     -0.004       -0.009       -0.014
                                                                                           (0.008)    (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.011)
     Colony                                                                                                                     0.276⇤
                                                                                                                                (0.151)
     Continental FE                                   No          No           No           No          Yes          Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No          No           No           No          No           Yes          Yes
     N                                               144          144          144          144         144          144          144
     Adjusted R2                                    0.171        0.170        0.278        0.303       0.411        0.448        0.465
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


         This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for mid-period income
         per capita (i.e., income per capita in year 2000).
              Table B.38: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Schooling

                                                                           Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.210⇤⇤⇤    -3.202⇤⇤⇤    -2.136⇤⇤    -2.299⇤⇤⇤   -3.170⇤⇤     -3.450⇤⇤⇤     -3.442⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.659)     (0.681)      (0.827)      (0.857)    (1.296)      (1.196)        (1.218)
     Years of Schooling                            0.064⇤⇤⇤    0.064⇤⇤⇤     0.061⇤⇤⇤     0.048⇤⇤⇤   0.048⇤⇤      0.053⇤⇤⇤       0.053⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.009)     (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.018)    (0.019)      (0.015)        (0.015)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                       -0.002       -0.016       -0.039     0.030         0.027          0.027
                                                                (0.038)      (0.037)      (0.044)    (0.045)      (0.044)        (0.044)
     Soil Fertility                                                           0.128         0.135     -0.090       0.004          0.003
                                                                             (0.190)      (0.190)    (0.166)      (0.161)        (0.162)
     Roughness                                                                0.233         0.213    0.436⇤         0.344          0.341
                                                                             (0.284)      (0.290)    (0.247)      (0.221)        (0.229)
     Elevation                                                                -0.027       -0.055     -0.004       -0.015         -0.016
                                                                             (0.093)      (0.092)    (0.086)      (0.080)        (0.080)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                   -0.193⇤⇤     -0.218⇤⇤   -0.172⇤⇤       -0.102         -0.103
85




                                                                             (0.095)      (0.099)    (0.079)      (0.085)        (0.085)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                 0.002       0.001      0.002         0.003          0.003
                                                                             (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.003)      (0.002)        (0.002)
     Temperature                                                                           -0.007     0.003         0.000          0.001
                                                                                          (0.007)    (0.009)      (0.009)        (0.009)
     Colony                                                                                                                       -0.012
                                                                                                                                 (0.132)
     Continental FE                                   No          No           No          No          Yes          Yes           Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No          No           No          No          No           Yes           Yes
     N                                               110          110         110          110         110          110           110
     Adjusted R2                                    0.343        0.336       0.397        0.397       0.465     0.504 0.498
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


           This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for years of schooling.
     Table B.39: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Population Density in 1500

                                                                                     Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                          (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
         Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -4.135          -4.173           -2.866         -2.873         -3.015       -3.446       -3.530⇤⇤
                                                        (0.846)         (0.852)         (0.879)        (0.863)        (1.432)      (1.349)      (1.349)
         Population Density in 1500 CE                 0.012⇤⇤⇤        0.010⇤⇤⇤          0.005⇤          0.003        0.007⇤⇤        0.002        0.002
                                                        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.005)
         Log Absolute Latitude                                        0.077⇤⇤⇤           0.055⇤         -0.055          0.032        0.024        0.029
                                                                        (0.029)         (0.030)        (0.042)        (0.043)      (0.037)      (0.037)
         Soil Fertility                                                                  0.465⇤          0.373          0.113       0.254        0.257
                                                                                        (0.248)        (0.233)        (0.202)      (0.194)      (0.197)
         Roughness                                                                        0.103         0.023           0.305        0.389        0.459
                                                                                        (0.318)        (0.327)        (0.316)      (0.292)      (0.287)
         Elevation                                                                       -0.029         -0.062          0.031       -0.017       -0.020
                                                                                        (0.096)        (0.094)        (0.105)      (0.099)      (0.093)
         Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                           -0.182⇤       -0.265⇤⇤⇤      -0.170⇤⇤       -0.097       -0.075
86




                                                                                        (0.094)        (0.088)        (0.082)      (0.087)      (0.089)
         Percentage of Arable Land                                                        0.000         -0.000         0.000         0.001        0.002
                                                                                        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
         Temperature                                                                                  -0.020⇤⇤⇤        -0.006       -0.010       -0.014
                                                                                                       (0.005)        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)
         Colony                                                                                                                                   0.230
                                                                                                                                                (0.151)
         Continental FE                                   No             No               No             No            Yes          Yes          Yes
         Legal Origin FE                                  No             No               No             No            No           Yes          Yes
         N                                               144            144               144           144            144          144          144
         Adjusted R2                                    0.130          0.155             0.227         0.295          0.419        0.465        0.476
         This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
         contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
         conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
         America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
         at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


            This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for population density
            in 1500.
      Table B.40: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Social Infrastructure

                                                                            Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                 (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                       ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity              -3.395         -3.582           -2.553         -2.974         -2.345       -3.030         -3.048⇤⇤
                                                (0.728)        (0.724)          (0.848)        (0.891)       (1.173)       (1.151)       (1.159)
     Social Infrastructure                     0.593⇤⇤⇤       0.463⇤⇤⇤         0.445⇤⇤⇤         0.139          0.222        0.070         0.087
                                                (0.088)        (0.114)          (0.104)        (0.173)       (0.192)       (0.240)       (0.251)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                    0.068⇤⇤             0.043         -0.013         0.030        0.029         0.030
                                                               (0.031)          (0.031)        (0.041)       (0.041)       (0.039)       (0.039)
     Soil Fertility                                                               0.387         0.326         0.091         0.084         0.084
                                                                                (0.244)        (0.219)       (0.180)       (0.172)       (0.173)
     Roughness                                                                    0.404         0.400        0.477⇤         0.538⇤       0.554⇤
                                                                                (0.298)        (0.300)       (0.279)       (0.275)       (0.289)
     Elevation                                                                   -0.119         -0.189        -0.158       -0.188⇤       -0.195⇤
                                                                                (0.098)        (0.115)       (0.106)       (0.106)       (0.112)
87




     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                         0.018         -0.022        -0.034        0.005         0.013
                                                                                (0.125)        (0.126)       (0.143)       (0.145)       (0.150)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                    0.001          0.001        0.004         0.003         0.003
                                                                                (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
     Temperature                                                                              -0.017⇤⇤      -0.015⇤⇤      -0.018⇤⇤      -0.019⇤⇤
                                                                                               (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.009)
     Colony                                                                                                                               0.072
                                                                                                                                         (0.202)
     Continental FE                              No             No               No             No            Yes          Yes            Yes
     Legal Origin FE                             No             No               No             No            No           Yes            Yes
     N                                          108            108              108            108            108          108            108
     Adjusted R2                               0.286          0.306            0.353          0.394          0.448        0.461          0.457


           This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for social infrastructure.
     Table B.41: Predicted Diversity and Constraint on the Executive — Accounting for Ethnic Fractionalization

                                                                                    Log Constraint on Chief Executive
                                                         (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                               ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤              ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤⇤           ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
        Predicted Genetic Diversity                  -3.271          -3.509           -2.766         -2.923         -3.233       -3.373       -3.470⇤⇤
                                                      (0.838)         (0.855)          (0.903)        (0.865)        (1.450)      (1.379)      (1.369)
        Ethnic Fractionalization                     -0.373⇤⇤⇤        -0.265⇤           -0.017          0.115         -0.010        0.076        0.087
                                                      (0.126)         (0.157)          (0.175)        (0.161)        (0.158)      (0.175)      (0.167)
        Log Absolute Latitude                                          0.056             0.053         -0.049         0.022         0.021        0.029
                                                                      (0.036)          (0.034)        (0.045)        (0.043)      (0.038)      (0.037)
        Soil Fertility                                                                  0.475⇤        0.410⇤           0.160        0.328        0.323
                                                                                       (0.246)        (0.231)        (0.208)      (0.202)      (0.201)
        Roughness                                                                        0.138         0.101           0.334        0.403        0.486
                                                                                       (0.342)        (0.349)        (0.331)      (0.304)      (0.294)
        Elevation                                                                       -0.061         -0.117         -0.004       -0.071       -0.066
                                                                                       (0.100)        (0.100)        (0.112)      (0.105)      (0.098)
        Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                           -0.174⇤       -0.259⇤⇤⇤       -0.161⇤       -0.074       -0.054
88




                                                                                       (0.095)        (0.091)        (0.085)      (0.090)      (0.091)
        Percentage of Arable Land                                                        0.002          0.001         0.002         0.002       0.002
                                                                                       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
        Temperature                                                                                  -0.021⇤⇤⇤        -0.006       -0.010      -0.016⇤
                                                                                                      (0.005)        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)
        Colony                                                                                                                                  0.270⇤
                                                                                                                                               (0.145)
        Continental FE                                   No             No               No             No            Yes          Yes          Yes
        Legal Origin FE                                  No             No               No             No            No           Yes          Yes
        N                                               144            144               144           144            144          144          144
        Adjusted R2                                    0.114          0.120             0.210         0.284          0.394        0.447        0.463
        This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
        contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
        conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
        America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
        at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


           This table establishes that the findings in Table 12 are robust to accounting for ethnic fractional-
           ization.
                                Table B.42: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Autocracy (2013)

                                                                                       Log Autocracy
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                     7.878⇤⇤⇤     7.938⇤⇤⇤    5.845⇤⇤⇤     5.983⇤⇤⇤    6.795⇤    6.992⇤⇤     6.963⇤⇤
                                                     (1.933)      (1.942)     (2.210)      (2.218)     (3.566)   (3.173)     (3.239)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                         -0.094      -0.023       0.158⇤       0.013     0.023       0.031
                                                                  (0.060)     (0.065)      (0.094)     (0.101)   (0.093)     (0.096)
     Soil Fertility                                                           -0.823⇤       -0.681      -0.254    -0.619      -0.507
                                                                              (0.494)      (0.479)     (0.407)   (0.398)     (0.524)
     Roughness                                                                 -0.433       -0.226      -0.834    -0.931      -0.496
                                                                              (0.672)      (0.710)     (0.716)   (0.636)     (0.663)
     Elevation                                                                  0.098       0.147       -0.064     0.072       0.094
89




                                                                              (0.192)      (0.197)     (0.224)   (0.199)     (0.187)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                      0.249       0.378⇤⇤       0.166    -0.054       0.050
                                                                              (0.184)      (0.177)     (0.160)   (0.174)     (0.157)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                 -0.005       -0.003      -0.005    -0.005      -0.006
                                                                              (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.005)     (0.007)
     Temperature                                                                           0.032⇤⇤⇤      0.002     0.010       0.020
                                                                                           (0.011)     (0.018)   (0.019)     (0.017)
     Colony                                                                                                                  -0.421⇤
                                                                                                                             (0.242)
     Continental FE                                     No           No          No          No         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                    No           No          No          No         No          Yes        Yes
     N                                                  140         140         140          140        140        140         126
     Adjusted R2                                       0.062       0.067       0.133        0.175      0.284      0.367       0.378
     This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with
     “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent
     standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. *
     Significant at the 10 percent level.
                 Table B.43: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Irrigation Potential

                                                                                              Log Autocracy
                                                              (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                 ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤           ⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                           9.071       9.527         7.273        7.088       6.830         6.921       7.054⇤⇤⇤
                                                            (1.801)     (1.831)       (1.946)      (1.849)    (3.040)       (2.684)      (2.690)
     Log Percentage of Area Equipped for Irrigation          0.067      0.143⇤       0.409⇤⇤⇤     0.345⇤⇤⇤      0.021         0.087        0.078
                                                            (0.079)     (0.081)       (0.095)      (0.102)    (0.108)       (0.106)      (0.106)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                             -0.196⇤⇤⇤    -0.151⇤⇤⇤        0.020     -0.051        -0.049       -0.056
                                                                        (0.052)       (0.055)      (0.083)    (0.081)       (0.072)      (0.072)
     Soil Fertility                                                                 -1.227⇤⇤⇤    -1.118⇤⇤⇤     -0.441      -0.861⇤⇤     -0.845⇤⇤
                                                                                      (0.425)      (0.420)    (0.383)       (0.382)      (0.383)
     Roughness                                                                       -1.640⇤⇤     -1.288⇤      -0.889        -1.057      -1.127⇤
                                                                                      (0.738)      (0.772)    (0.746)       (0.643)      (0.628)
     Elevation                                                                        0.428⇤⇤     0.461⇤⇤       0.193       0.326⇤       0.320⇤
                                                                                      (0.180)      (0.184)    (0.202)       (0.183)      (0.176)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                              0.167       0.281⇤       0.154        -0.059       -0.081
                                                                                      (0.157)      (0.164)    (0.150)       (0.163)      (0.166)
90




     Percentage of Arable Land                                                       -0.012⇤⇤       -0.008     -0.004        -0.005       -0.005
                                                                                      (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                                  0.028⇤⇤       0.012         0.019        0.025
                                                                                                   (0.011)    (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.017)
     Colony                                                                                                                               -0.290
                                                                                                                                         (0.249)
     Continental FE                                           No           No          No           No         Yes           Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                          No           No          No           No         No            Yes          Yes
     N                                                        145         145          145          145        145           145          145
     Adjusted R2                                             0.072       0.108        0.307        0.333      0.436         0.506        0.507
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


        This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for the irrigation
        potential.
     Table B.44: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Percentage of Land near a Waterway

                                                                                     Log Autocracy
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                   6.945⇤⇤⇤     7.139⇤⇤⇤    6.120⇤⇤⇤    6.197⇤⇤⇤    6.847⇤⇤    7.018⇤⇤     7.163⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (1.895)      (1.938)     (2.042)     (2.029)    (3.051)    (2.684)      (2.684)
     Percentage of Land Near a Waterway           -0.662⇤⇤⇤    -0.608⇤⇤⇤      -0.110      0.093       0.021      0.125        0.149
                                                    (0.177)      (0.186)     (0.323)     (0.304)    (0.272)    (0.259)      (0.264)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                      -0.099⇤       -0.055     0.159⇤⇤     -0.048     -0.035       -0.044
                                                                 (0.055)     (0.057)     (0.078)    (0.082)    (0.074)      (0.074)
     Soil Fertility                                                         -1.262⇤⇤    -1.131⇤⇤     -0.426   -0.780⇤⇤     -0.779⇤
                                                                             (0.489)     (0.472)    (0.385)    (0.391)      (0.394)
     Roughness                                                                -0.137      -0.144     -0.862     -0.981     -1.097⇤
                                                                             (0.799)     (0.800)    (0.740)    (0.656)      (0.654)
     Elevation                                                                0.258      0.422⇤       0.198      0.361      0.368⇤
                                                                             (0.248)     (0.245)    (0.236)    (0.218)      (0.214)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                     0.170      0.386⇤⇤      0.161     -0.012       -0.028
91




                                                                             (0.202)     (0.195)    (0.166)    (0.183)      (0.185)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                -0.001      0.001      -0.003     -0.003       -0.004
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                        0.039⇤⇤⇤      0.013      0.022        0.029
                                                                                         (0.011)    (0.017)    (0.018)      (0.018)
     Colony                                                                                                                  -0.315
                                                                                                                            (0.248)
     Continental FE                                   No          No           No          No         Yes        Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No          No           No          No         No         Yes          Yes
     N                                               145          145         145         145         145        145          145
     Adjusted R2                                    0.149        0.155       0.203       0.264       0.436      0.504        0.506
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


        This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for the percentage of
        land near a waterway.
      Table B.45: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for the Inequality in Land Suitability

                                                                                     Log Autocracy
                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                  8.363⇤⇤⇤     8.408⇤⇤⇤     6.026⇤⇤⇤    6.067⇤⇤⇤      7.300⇤⇤    7.393⇤⇤⇤    7.518⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (1.823)      (1.864)      (2.059)     (2.034)      (3.115)     (2.751)     (2.747)
     Land suitability Gini                          0.472       0.510⇤      -0.992⇤⇤     -0.696⇤       -0.574      -0.336      -0.278
                                                   (0.297)      (0.290)      (0.410)     (0.416)      (0.374)     (0.364)     (0.374)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                    -0.160⇤⇤⇤       -0.001     0.173⇤⇤       -0.024      -0.017      -0.026
                                                                (0.052)      (0.055)     (0.077)      (0.081)     (0.074)     (0.074)
     Soil Fertility                                                        -2.183⇤⇤⇤    -1.864⇤⇤⇤    -1.058⇤⇤   -1.206⇤⇤⇤    -1.176⇤⇤
                                                                             (0.488)     (0.483)      (0.468)     (0.455)     (0.453)
     Roughness                                                                0.226       0.375        -0.512      -0.559      -0.639
                                                                             (0.706)     (0.714)      (0.699)     (0.614)     (0.598)
     Elevation                                                                 0.319     0.359⇤         0.182       0.277      0.267
                                                                             (0.203)     (0.203)      (0.210)     (0.186)     (0.179)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                    0.362⇤⇤    0.450⇤⇤⇤        0.228       0.003      -0.027
                                                                             (0.174)     (0.170)      (0.147)     (0.164)     (0.168)
92




     Percentage of Arable Land                                                -0.001      0.002        -0.002      -0.002      -0.002
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                        0.034⇤⇤⇤        0.006       0.017      0.023
                                                                                         (0.011)      (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.018)
     Colony                                                                                                                    -0.288
                                                                                                                              (0.251)
     Continental FE                                  No           No          No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                 No           No          No           No          No          Yes         Yes
     N                                               144         144          144          144         144         144         144
     Adjusted R2                                    0.085       0.111        0.257        0.300       0.449       0.509       0.510
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


        This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for the inequality of
        land suitability (i.e., the Gini coefficient of land suitability).
     Table B.46: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Percentages of Population Living in Various Climate Zones

                                                                                                                            Log Autocracy
                                                                                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)
             Predicted Genetic Diversity                                                8.454⇤⇤⇤      8.432⇤⇤⇤    7.465⇤⇤⇤     7.105⇤⇤⇤     6.913⇤⇤    7.231⇤⇤     7.438⇤⇤
                                                                                         (1.950)       (2.007)     (2.205)      (2.209)     (3.189)    (2.868)     (2.870)
             Percentage of Population Living in Temperate Zones                         -1.131⇤⇤⇤    -1.128⇤⇤⇤    -0.900⇤⇤⇤    -0.716⇤⇤      -0.101     0.126        0.175
                                                                                         (0.175)       (0.193)     (0.220)      (0.308)     (0.378)    (0.391)     (0.385)
             Percentage of Population Living in Tropical Zones                            -0.355        -0.361      -0.247       -0.211       0.067     -0.068      -0.119
                                                                                         (0.465)       (0.496)     (0.520)      (0.519)     (0.438)    (0.368)     (0.366)
             Percentage of Population Living in Tropical and Subtropical Zones            -0.125        -0.125      -0.008       -0.021      -0.026     0.115        0.162
                                                                                         (0.485)       (0.487)     (0.487)      (0.487)     (0.392)    (0.332)     (0.329)
             Log Absolute Latitude                                                                      -0.004       0.059        0.097      -0.031     -0.032      -0.046
                                                                                                       (0.094)     (0.099)      (0.106)     (0.102)    (0.091)     (0.091)
             Soil Fertility                                                                                        -0.881⇤      -0.902⇤      -0.403   -0.802⇤⇤    -0.810⇤⇤
                                                                                                                   (0.482)      (0.478)     (0.386)    (0.387)     (0.393)
             Roughness                                                                                               0.034        0.042      -0.847     -0.893      -0.989
                                                                                                                   (0.718)      (0.727)     (0.724)    (0.655)     (0.644)
             Elevation                                                                                               0.102        0.165       0.184      0.323     0.321⇤
                                                                                                                   (0.208)      (0.227)     (0.218)    (0.201)     (0.193)
93




             Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                                                    0.085       0.159        0.130     -0.022      -0.035
                                                                                                                   (0.156)      (0.177)     (0.150)    (0.166)     (0.169)
             Percentage of Arable Land                                                                               0.002        0.002      -0.003     -0.003      -0.003
                                                                                                                   (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)
             Temperature                                                                                                          0.013       0.010      0.024       0.032
                                                                                                                                (0.015)     (0.017)    (0.019)     (0.020)
             Colony                                                                                                                                                 -0.329
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.247)
             Continental FE                                                                 No          No           No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes
             Legal Origin FE                                                                No          No           No          No          No         Yes         Yes
             N                                                                             145          145          145         145         145        145         145
             Adjusted R2                                                                  0.284        0.279        0.282       0.280       0.428      0.496       0.499
             This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary autocracy on predicted
             genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked
             with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
             in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


                      This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for the percentages of
                      population living in various climate zones.
            Table B.47: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Colonizer Nation

                                                                                       Log Autocracy
                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                  ⇤⇤            ⇤⇤           ⇤           ⇤           ⇤⇤
          Predicted Genetic Diversity                    5.762          5.521         4.916       4.671      8.101        6.799⇤⇤
                                                          (2.628)        (2.592)      (2.606)     (2.631)    (3.293)      (3.084)
          British Colony                                  0.412⇤        0.444⇤⇤         0.234       0.247     -0.143        0.168
                                                          (0.226)        (0.218)      (0.237)     (0.229)    (0.261)      (0.311)
          French Colony                                  0.670⇤⇤⇤       0.670⇤⇤⇤      0.504⇤        0.406     0.049        -0.030
                                                          (0.242)        (0.238)      (0.257)     (0.267)    (0.256)      (0.266)
          Other Colony                                     0.306        0.440⇤⇤         0.345    0.630⇤⇤       0.252        0.100
                                                          (0.229)        (0.222)      (0.243)     (0.245)    (0.261)      (0.274)
          Non-colony                                       0.039          0.185         0.054       0.323      0.050        0.391
                                                          (0.231)        (0.228)      (0.220)     (0.214)    (0.241)      (0.262)
          Log Absolute Latitude                                        -0.149⇤⇤⇤       -0.062     0.145⇤      -0.033       -0.034
                                                                         (0.055)      (0.056)     (0.077)    (0.080)      (0.075)
          Soil Fertility                                                             -1.093⇤⇤    -0.868⇤      -0.444      -0.755⇤
                                                                                      (0.511)     (0.484)    (0.387)      (0.412)
94




          Roughness                                                                    -0.263      -0.232     -1.003       -0.764
                                                                                      (0.740)     (0.737)    (0.684)      (0.617)
          Elevation                                                                     0.294     0.348⇤       0.193        0.217
                                                                                      (0.200)     (0.196)    (0.200)      (0.193)
          Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                          0.102       0.259      0.077       -0.100
                                                                                      (0.183)     (0.173)    (0.155)      (0.163)
          Percentage of Arable Land                                                    -0.004      -0.004     -0.005       -0.004
                                                                                      (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)
          Temperature                                                                            0.047⇤⇤⇤      0.020        0.022
                                                                                                  (0.011)    (0.016)      (0.017)
          Continental FE                                    No            No           No            No         Yes          Yes
          Legal Origin FE                                   No            No           No            No         No           Yes
          N                                                 142          142           142         142        142          142
          Adjusted R2                                      0.119        0.136         0.223       0.298      0.448        0.511
          This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure
          of contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa
          to the country, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts
          for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors
          are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant
          at the 10 percent level.


     This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for colonizer nation.
                  Table B.48: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Colonial Duration

                                                                                        Log Autocracy
                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                        ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤             ⇤                          ⇤            ⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                  7.149        6.389        4.330            3.691     5.794        6.029         6.137⇤⇤
                                                   (2.069)      (2.147)     (2.379)        (2.270)    (3.078)       (2.742)       (2.743)
     Colonial Duration                            -0.073⇤⇤    -0.112⇤⇤⇤    -0.087⇤⇤      -0.116⇤⇤⇤   -0.148⇤⇤⇤     -0.121⇤⇤⇤     -0.115⇤⇤⇤
                                                   (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.035)        (0.033)    (0.032)       (0.034)       (0.036)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                    -0.208⇤⇤⇤    -0.111⇤⇤          0.123     -0.080        -0.064        -0.066
                                                                (0.050)     (0.054)        (0.075)    (0.072)       (0.068)       (0.069)
     Soil Fertility                                                        -1.191⇤⇤       -0.974⇤⇤     -0.296       -0.602⇤       -0.609⇤
                                                                            (0.464)        (0.431)    (0.344)       (0.359)       (0.365)
     Roughness                                                               -0.352         -0.174    -1.094⇤       -1.062⇤       -1.092⇤
                                                                            (0.692)        (0.695)    (0.642)       (0.581)       (0.583)
     Elevation                                                                0.285        0.361⇤       0.207        0.302⇤        0.300⇤
                                                                            (0.188)        (0.190)    (0.195)       (0.179)       (0.177)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                     0.195       0.365⇤⇤       0.121        -0.060        -0.069
95




                                                                            (0.178)        (0.172)    (0.149)       (0.161)       (0.164)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                               -0.001         0.001      -0.002        -0.002        -0.002
                                                                            (0.005)        (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
     Temperature                                                                         0.044⇤⇤⇤       0.021         0.027         0.029
                                                                                           (0.010)    (0.016)       (0.017)       (0.018)
     Colony                                                                                                                        -0.132
                                                                                                                                  (0.265)
     Continental FE                                  No           No          No            No          Yes          Yes           Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                 No           No          No            No          No           Yes           Yes
     N                                               145         145          145           145          145         145           145
     Adjusted R2                                    0.086       0.129        0.226         0.306        0.481       0.533         0.530
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


          This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for colonial duration.
                        Table B.49: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for GDP

                                                                                     Log Autocracy
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                   7.605⇤⇤⇤     7.725⇤⇤⇤   5.671⇤⇤⇤      5.996⇤⇤⇤    7.595⇤⇤    6.897⇤⇤    6.300⇤⇤
                                                    (1.900)      (1.978)     (2.012)      (2.126)    (2.981)    (2.719)    (3.023)
     Log Income Per Capita in 2000                -0.201⇤⇤⇤    -0.187⇤⇤⇤    -0.183⇤⇤       -0.097     -0.092     0.027       0.078
                                                    (0.057)      (0.070)     (0.071)      (0.102)    (0.092)    (0.098)    (0.099)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                        -0.037      0.057       0.166⇤⇤     -0.050     -0.038     -0.050
                                                                 (0.067)     (0.067)      (0.079)    (0.082)    (0.073)    (0.078)
     Soil Fertility                                                        -1.375⇤⇤⇤     -1.196⇤⇤⇤    -0.472    -0.753⇤     -0.726
                                                                             (0.469)      (0.456)    (0.387)    (0.383)    (0.451)
     Roughness                                                                0.099        0.063      -0.873     -0.875     -0.736
                                                                             (0.697)      (0.725)    (0.675)    (0.606)    (0.568)
     Elevation                                                                0.134         0.271      0.137      0.315   0.364⇤⇤
                                                                             (0.205)      (0.232)    (0.204)    (0.194)    (0.174)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                     0.147        0.288       0.104     -0.042     0.006
96




                                                                             (0.185)      (0.195)    (0.155)    (0.166)    (0.151)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                -0.003       -0.000     -0.005     -0.003     -0.004
                                                                             (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)
     Temperature                                                                          0.029⇤       0.007     0.021     0.032⇤⇤
                                                                                          (0.016)    (0.018)    (0.019)    (0.016)
     Colony                                                                                                               -0.460⇤⇤
                                                                                                                           (0.198)
     Continental FE                                  No           No           No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                 No           No           No           No         No         Yes        Yes
     N                                               144          144         144           144        144        144        129
     Adjusted R2                                    0.154        0.150       0.252         0.276      0.441      0.496      0.528
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa,
     Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***
     Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


         This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for mid-period income
         per capita (i.e., income per capita in year 2000).
                       Table B.50: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Schooling

                                                                                      Log Autocracy
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                   7.913       7.710         5.727       6.132      8.162       8.646         8.578⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (1.656)     (1.678)       (1.960)     (2.074)    (2.917)     (2.470)       (2.465)
     Years of schooling                           -0.120⇤⇤⇤    -0.129⇤⇤⇤    -0.114⇤⇤⇤    -0.082⇤⇤   -0.081⇤⇤    -0.097⇤⇤⇤    -0.098⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.019)     (0.026)       (0.024)     (0.039)    (0.037)     (0.031)       (0.031)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                       0.050         0.081        0.137     -0.051      -0.040        -0.038
                                                                (0.067)       (0.064)     (0.086)    (0.087)     (0.082)       (0.083)
     Soil Fertility                                                            -0.630      -0.647     0.027       -0.249        -0.243
                                                                              (0.432)     (0.433)    (0.335)     (0.319)       (0.319)
     Roughness                                                                 -0.385      -0.336    -0.995⇤      -0.633        -0.604
                                                                              (0.651)     (0.676)    (0.581)     (0.485)       (0.498)
     Elevation                                                                  0.237       0.305     0.173        0.175        0.177
                                                                              (0.220)     (0.217)    (0.180)     (0.154)       (0.156)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                       0.221       0.281      0.146      -0.051        -0.046
97




                                                                              (0.230)     (0.237)    (0.165)     (0.170)       (0.172)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                 -0.001      -0.000     -0.005      -0.007        -0.007
                                                                              (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                           0.018      -0.005      -0.000        -0.002
                                                                                          (0.016)    (0.018)     (0.017)       (0.017)
     Colony                                                                                                                      0.104
                                                                                                                               (0.218)
     Continental FE                                   No          No           No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No          No           No          No          No          Yes          Yes
     N                                               110          110          110         110         110         110          110
     Adjusted R2                                    0.299        0.295        0.340       0.341       0.483       0.557        0.553
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

           This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for years of schooling.
          Table B.51: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Population Density in 1500

                                                                                     Log Autocracy
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                   8.928        8.988       6.247       6.260       6.253        7.275      7.366⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (1.883)      (1.904)     (2.037)     (2.018)     (3.047)      (2.720)    (2.734)
     Population Density in 1500 CE                -0.020⇤⇤⇤    -0.017⇤⇤⇤      -0.008      -0.004    -0.013⇤⇤        0.001     0.001
                                                    (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.009)    (0.009)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                      -0.121⇤⇤      -0.060     0.153⇤       -0.065       -0.040     -0.047
                                                                 (0.053)     (0.055)     (0.078)     (0.083)      (0.073)    (0.073)
     Soil Fertility                                                         -1.231⇤⇤    -1.052⇤⇤      -0.341     -0.682⇤    -0.685⇤
                                                                             (0.493)     (0.467)     (0.374)      (0.371)    (0.375)
     Roughness                                                                -0.195      -0.038      -0.775       -0.889     -0.965
                                                                             (0.710)     (0.725)     (0.670)      (0.597)    (0.590)
     Elevation                                                                0.254        0.318       0.134       0.235       0.237
                                                                             (0.205)     (0.203)     (0.195)      (0.176)    (0.169)
     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                     0.220      0.382⇤⇤       0.159       -0.011     -0.034
98




                                                                             (0.189)     (0.178)     (0.149)      (0.157)    (0.160)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                                 0.001       0.002      -0.000       -0.003     -0.004
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                        0.038⇤⇤⇤       0.012        0.022      0.027
                                                                                         (0.011)     (0.017)      (0.017)    (0.018)
     Colony                                                                                                                   -0.251
                                                                                                                             (0.246)
     Continental FE                                   No          No           No          No         Yes          Yes        Yes
     Legal Origin FE                                  No          No           No          No         No           Yes        Yes
     N                                               144          144         144         144         144          144        144
     Adjusted R2                                    0.113        0.125       0.201       0.261       0.446        0.506      0.506
     This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
     contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
     conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
     America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
     at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


        This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for population density
        in 1500.
                 Table B.52: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Social Infrastructure

                                                                                Log Autocracy
                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
     Predicted Genetic Diversity                8.062⇤⇤⇤    8.302⇤⇤⇤   5.944⇤⇤⇤     6.579⇤⇤⇤    4.972⇤    6.615⇤⇤⇤   6.654⇤⇤⇤
                                                 (1.649)     (1.639)     (1.899)     (2.082)    (2.616)    (2.481)    (2.476)
     Social Infrastructure                     -1.085⇤⇤⇤   -0.918⇤⇤⇤   -0.902⇤⇤⇤      -0.440     -0.568     -0.077     -0.113
                                                 (0.191)     (0.251)     (0.230)     (0.365)    (0.401)    (0.479)    (0.498)
     Log Absolute Latitude                                    -0.087      -0.026      0.058      -0.074     -0.069     -0.073
                                                             (0.059)     (0.060)     (0.076)    (0.073)    (0.071)    (0.071)
     Soil Fertility                                                     -1.134⇤⇤    -1.041⇤⇤     -0.349     -0.356     -0.356
                                                                         (0.497)     (0.472)    (0.328)    (0.320)    (0.323)
     Roughness                                                            -0.628      -0.622     -0.780     -0.803     -0.836
                                                                         (0.669)     (0.675)    (0.577)    (0.553)    (0.573)
     Elevation                                                           0.461⇤      0.566⇤⇤    0.436⇤    0.452⇤⇤    0.466⇤⇤
                                                                         (0.238)     (0.265)    (0.224)    (0.214)    (0.219)
99




     Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                 -0.146      -0.085     -0.023     -0.086     -0.102
                                                                         (0.244)     (0.259)    (0.277)    (0.276)    (0.281)
     Percentage of Arable Land                                             0.002      0.003      -0.004     -0.003     -0.003
                                                                         (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)
     Temperature                                                                     0.026⇤       0.016      0.019      0.021
                                                                                     (0.014)    (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.016)
     Colony                                                                                                            -0.155
                                                                                                                      (0.329)
     Continental FE                               No          No          No          No         Yes        Yes        Yes
     Legal Origin FE                              No          No          No          No         No         Yes        Yes
     N                                           108         108         108          108        108        108        108
     Adjusted R2                                0.254       0.257       0.314        0.331      0.468      0.491      0.487


           This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for social infrastructure.
             Table B.53: Predicted Diversity and Autocracy — Accounting for Ethnic Fractionalization

                                                                                       Log Autocracy
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)
                                                         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤         ⇤⇤⇤          ⇤⇤⇤            ⇤⇤        ⇤⇤⇤
      Predicted Genetic Diversity                  7.475       7.828       6.237         6.551      7.046         7.329      7.434⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (1.867)     (1.877)     (2.020)       (1.952)   (3.036)        (2.731)    (2.737)
      Ethnic Fractionalization                     0.627⇤⇤        0.467      -0.047        -0.311    -0.036         -0.239     -0.251
                                                    (0.249)     (0.302)     (0.340)       (0.311)   (0.294)        (0.319)    (0.316)
      Log Absolute Latitude                                      -0.083      -0.066       0.138⇤     -0.050         -0.047     -0.055
                                                                (0.065)     (0.059)       (0.081)   (0.082)        (0.072)    (0.072)
      Soil Fertility                                                       -1.293⇤⇤⇤     -1.163⇤⇤    -0.450       -0.852⇤⇤   -0.847⇤⇤
                                                                            (0.494)       (0.464)   (0.385)        (0.370)    (0.371)
      Roughness                                                              -0.266        -0.193    -0.872         -0.979    -1.069⇤
                                                                            (0.766)       (0.775)   (0.691)        (0.610)    (0.597)
      Elevation                                                              0.313       0.426⇤⇤      0.207        0.356⇤     0.351⇤
                                                                            (0.211)       (0.214)   (0.206)        (0.188)    (0.181)
      Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                    0.204      0.374⇤⇤      0.152         -0.051     -0.072
100




                                                                            (0.186)       (0.179)   (0.148)        (0.162)    (0.164)
      Percentage of Arable Land                                              -0.001        0.001     -0.003         -0.004     -0.004
                                                                            (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.005)
      Temperature                                                                        0.041⇤⇤⇤     0.014         0.025     0.031⇤
                                                                                          (0.011)   (0.017)        (0.017)    (0.017)
      Colony                                                                                                                   -0.292
                                                                                                                              (0.238)
      Continental FE                                  No          No          No           No          Yes          Yes        Yes
      Legal Origin FE                                 No          No          No           No          No           Yes        Yes
      N                                               144         144         144          144        144           144        144
      Adjusted R2                                    0.102       0.102       0.200        0.267      0.436         0.508      0.510
      This table presents the results of a series of 2SLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of
      contemporary autocracy on predicted genetic diversity, instrumented by the migratory distance from East Africa to the country,
      conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE” accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
      America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant
      at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.


         This table establishes that the findings in Table 14 are robust to accounting for ethnic fractional-
         ization.
                                 Table B.54: Predicted Genetic Diversity and Democracy (1994–2013)

                                                                                             Log Democracy
                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
      Predicted Genetic Diversity                       -8.566⇤⇤⇤    -8.658⇤⇤⇤     -6.003⇤⇤⇤     -5.980⇤⇤⇤    -6.553⇤     -6.866⇤⇤    -6.863⇤⇤
                                                         (1.946)      (1.955)       (2.175)        (2.116)    (3.333)      (2.894)     (3.099)
      Log Absolute Latitude                                           0.196⇤⇤⇤      0.112⇤          -0.137      0.059        0.043      0.048
                                                                      (0.062)       (0.066)        (0.098)    (0.108)      (0.100)     (0.104)
      Soil Fertility                                                                1.132⇤⇤        0.946⇤       0.309      0.704⇤        0.593
                                                                                    (0.504)        (0.482)    (0.446)      (0.425)     (0.507)
      Roughness                                                                       0.337          0.123     0.819         0.843       0.550
                                                                                    (0.715)        (0.737)    (0.733)      (0.641)     (0.639)
      Elevation                                                                      -0.243         -0.327     -0.138       -0.284      -0.269
101




                                                                                    (0.202)        (0.205)    (0.213)      (0.192)     (0.183)
      Average Distance to Nearest Waterway                                           -0.263       -0.435⇤⇤     -0.248       -0.012      -0.058
                                                                                    (0.191)        (0.181)    (0.160)      (0.175)     (0.169)
      Percentage of Arable Land                                                       0.002         -0.000     0.003         0.003       0.006
                                                                                    (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.006)
      Temperature                                                                                -0.044⇤⇤⇤     -0.017       -0.029    -0.038⇤⇤
                                                                                                   (0.012)    (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.017)
      Colony                                                                                                                             0.365
                                                                                                                                       (0.229)
      Continental FE                                       No            No            No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes
      Legal Origin FE                                      No            No            No           No          No          Yes          Yes
      N                                                    145           145          145           145         145         145          130
      Adjusted R2                                         0.063         0.100        0.195         0.267       0.397       0.484        0.511
      This table presents the results of a series of OLS regression analyses, on the contemporary country level, of a measure of contemporary
      democracy on predicted genetic diversity, conditional on a range of control variables. Specifications marked with “Continental FE”
      accounts for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and continental fixed e↵ects. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are reported
      in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
C     Definitions of main variables
This section describes the construction of the main variables.


Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
This variable is based on variable 33 in the Ethnographic Atlas, denoted “Jurisdictional
Hierarchy Beyond Local Community”. The Number of Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
variable takes on the value 1 when the original variable indicates “No levels (no political
authority beyond community)”, 2 when it indicates “One levels (e.g., petty chiefdoms)”,
3 when it indicates “Two levels (e.g., larger chiefdoms)”, 4 when it indicates “Three levels
(e.g., states)”, 5 when it indicates “Four levels (e.g., large states)”.


Genetic Diversity
The data on observed genetic diversity on the ethnic group level comes from the newly
assembled data on observed genetic diversity in 232 worldwide (predominantly indigenous)
ethnic groups from Pemberton et al. (2013). The data on predicted genetic diversity on
the modern country level comes from (Ashraf and Galor, 2013).


Social Stratification
This variable is based on variable 66 in the Ethnographic Atlas, denoted “Class Stratifi-
cation”. The Social Stratification variable takes on the value 0 when the original variable
indicates “Absence among freemen)”, 1 when it indicates “Wealth distinctions” or “Elite
(based on control of land or other resources”, and 2 when it indicates “Dual (hereditary
aristocracy)” or “Complex (social classes)”.


Intensity of Slavery
This variable is based on variable 66 in the Ethnographic Atlas, denoted “Type of Slavery”.
The Intensity of Slavery variable takes on the value 0 when the original variable indicates
“Absence or near absence”, 1 when it indicates “Incipient or nonhereditary” or “Reported
but type not identified”, and 2 when it indicates “Hereditary and socially significant”.


Indigenous Autocracy
This variable is based on variable 72 in the Ethnographic Atlas, denoted “Succession to
the Office of Local Headman”. The Indigenous Autocracy variable takes on the value 1
when the original variable indicates “Election or other formal consensus, nonhereditary”, 2
when it indicates “Informal consensus, nonhereditary”, and 3 when it indicates “Patrilineal
heir”, “Matrilineal heir”, “Appointment by higher authority, nonhereditary”, “Seniority or
age, nonhereditary”, “Influence, wealth or social status, nonhereditary”, or “Absence of
any such office”.




                                              102
Executive Constraints
This variable come from the Polity IV Project dataset (Marshall et al., 2014). The variable
takes on an integer values from 1 to 7, indicating increasing extends of “institutionalized
constraints on the decision-making powers of chief executives, whether individuals or col-
lectivities” (Marshall et al., 2014).


Autocracy
This variable come from the Polity IV Project dataset (Marshall et al., 2014). The variable
takes on the value 0 or an integer value from 1 to 10, indicating increasing extends of “the
presence of a distinctive set of political characteristics” characterizing autocracy. According
to the definition, in their mature form, “autocracies sharply restrict or suppress competitive
political participation” (Marshall et al., 2014).


Migratory Distance from East Africa
In estimating the migratory distance from Addis Ababa (East Africa) for each of the
ethnic groups in the data, the shortest traversable paths from Addis Ababa to the interior
centroid of each ethnic group was computed. Given the limited ability of humans to
travel across large bodies of water, the traversable area included bodies of water at a
distance of 100km from land mass (excluding migration from Africa into Europe via Italy
or Spain). Furthermore, for ethnicities that reside in a distance that exceed 100km from
the traversable area connected to Addis Ababa, the distance was computed in the following
way. A point set was created by clipping the extended traversable area to world boundaries
and aggregating it to a resolution of 2,096,707 pixels which was then converted into points.
For each ethnicity centroid, the nearest four distance points were identified and the great
circle distance from the ethnicity centroid to those points were calculated. These distances
was then added to the migratory distance from Addis Ababa at the distance point to obtain
the total migratory distance from the ethnicity centroid from Addis Ababa to each of these
four points. The point with the shortest total migratory distance from Addis Ababa was
selected to represent the total migratory distance for the ethnicity.


Control Variables
The control variables come from a range of sources. For the analysis of the pre-colonial
era, the developed geo-referenced dataset on within-ethnic-group genetic diversity and
ethnographic information contains a wide range of variables (see Ashraf et al., 2015, for
more information on the data). Since the data is partly based on Fenske (2013), it includes a
range of geographic variables derived by him, in addition to geographic variables derived by
the authors. These geographic variables include elevation, ruggedness, length and density
of rivers in the area, share of desert on the area, as well as the average climatic suitability
for agriculture (as constructed by Ramankutty et al. (2002) and also used by Michalopoulos
(2012)), average temperature, and average diurnal temperature range over the period 1901–
2012 as constructed by the Climate Research Unit (see Harris et al., 2014).


                                             103
