NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RICARDIAN EQUIVALENCE:
AN EVALUATION OF
THEORY AND EVIDENCE

B. Douglas Bernheim

Working Paper No. 2330

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1987

This paper was prepared for the second annual NBER Macro conference; a shorter
and less complete version will appear in the 1987 NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
I would like to thank Stanley Fischer for
providing the impetus for this project,
in addition to various helpful comments.
Aifredo Pereira and Lawrence Levin provided
invaluable research assistance. Support from the Sloan Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2330
July 1987

Ricardian Equivalence:
An Evaluation of Theory and Evidence

ABSTRACT

In evaluating the existing theory and evidence on Ricardian
equivalence, it is essential to distinguish between the short run
effects of government borrowing (primarily the potential for stimulating
aggregate demand) and the long run effects (primarily the potential for
depressing capital accumulation). I argue that the theoretical case for
long run neutrality is extremely weak, in that it depends upon
improbable assumptions that are either directly or indirectly falsified
through empirical observation. In contrast, the approximate validity of
short run neutrality depends primarily upon assumptions that have at

least an aura of plausibility.

behavioral

Nevertheless, even in this case

evidence weighs heavily against the Ricardian view.

Efforts to measure the economic effects of deficits directly

aggregate data confront a number of problems which, taken
together, may well be insuperable. It is therefore not at all
through

surprising that this evidence has, by itself, proven inconclusive.
Overall,

the existing body of theory and evidence establishes a

likelihood that deficits have large effects on current
consumption, and there is good reason to believe that this would drive
up interest rates. In addition, I find a complete lack of either
evidence
significant

or coherent theoretical argument to dispute the view that

sustained

long run.

deficits significantly depress capital accumulation in the
B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305

(415) 723—9678

1•

Introduction

In

recent years, skyrocketting federal deficits have generated

widespread concern and fevered debate. Economists' analyses of the
deficit problem have focused primarily upon two intellectual

benchmarks. One school of thought, typically associated with Keynes,
holds that deficit financed tax cuts raise disposable income, thereby

stimulating aggregate demand. As a result, deficits lead to high real
interest rates, and crowd out private capital formation. If
disequilibrium prevails, unemployment may also fall. The second school
of thought holds that taxpayers see through the intertemporal veil, and
realize that the present discounted value of taxes depends only upon

real government spending——not on the timing of taxes. This foresight
gives rise to a "Say's law" for deficits: the demand for bonds always
rises to match government borrowing. As a result, deficits fail to
stimulate aggregate demand, and in fact have no real effects. This
second view is typically associated with Ricardo, no doubt much to his
posthuminous dismay (see O'Driscoll [1977]).
The

notion of "Ricardian equivalence" has come to play an

important role in modern economic thought, due in large part to the work

of Earro [1974]. In evaluating the existing theory and evidence on
Ricardian equivalence, it
run

is

essential to distinguish between the short

effects of government borrowing (primarily the potential for

stimulating aggregate demand, and its

implications

for macroeconomic

stabilization policy) and the long run effects (primarily the potential
for

depressing capital accumulation). I argue (section 2) that the

—2--

theoretical

case for long run neutrality is extremely weak, in that

it

depends upon improbable assumptions that are either directly or

indirectly falsified through empirical observation. In contrast, the
approximate

validity of short run

assumptions

that

neutrality depends primarily upon

have at least an aura of plausibility. Nevertheless,

in both cases behavioral evidence weighs heavily against the Ricardian
view (section 3).

Efforts to measure the economic effects of deficits directly
through aggregate data confront a number of problems which, taken

together, may well be insuperable (section 4). It is therefore not at

all surprising that this evidence has proven inconclusive. Studies
using aggregate time series data almost uniformly support the view that
deficits significantly stimulate aggregate demand in the short run, yet
they often fail to identify systematic short run relationships between
deficits and either interest rates, prices, or other nominal

variables. Studies besed upon international comparisons (including some
new results) find a significant relationship between deficits and

aggregate demand (section 5). Few if any

measure long run
Taken

justify
economy.

studies have attempted to

effects directly.

together, the

existing

body of theory and evidence does not

claims that government borrowing has little

or no effect on the

Rather, I conclude that there is a significant likelihood that

deficits have large effects on current consumption, and there is good

reason to believe that this would drive up interest rates. In addition,
I find a complete lack of either evidence or coherent theoretical

—3—

argument to dispute the view that

sustained

depress capital accumulation in the
Theoretical

2.

long

deficits significantly

run.

considerations

The central Ricardian observation is that deficits merely postpone

taxes. A rational individual should be indifferent between paying $1 in
taxes today, and

timing

paying $1 plus interest in taxes tomorrow. Since the

of taxes does not affect an individual's lifetime budget

constraint, it cannot alter his consumption decisions.
The relevance of this observation depends upon the length of

consumers' planning horizons. If fiscal policy postpones tax
collections until after current taxpayers have died, then it may well
alter real economic decisions (see Diamond [1965] and Blanchard

[1985]). Barro's [1974] central insight was that intergenerational
altruism may act to extend planning horizons, thereby reinstating strong
versions of Ricardian equivalence.

Recent theoretical work Ins clarified the set of implicit and

explicit assumptions upon which the Ricardian proposition depends. To
establish the equivalence of taxes and deficits, one must assume that
i) successive generations are linked by altruistically motivated
transfers, ii) capital market either are perfect, or fail in specific
ways, iii) the postponement of taxes does not redistribute resources
within generations, iv) taxes are non—distortionary, v) the use of
deficits cannot create value (i.e. through bubbles), vi) consumers are
rational

and farsighted, and vii) the availability of deficit financing

—4—

as

a fiscal instrument does not alter the political process.JJ In this

section, I elaborate on each of these assumptions.
2.1. LInkages between generations
Under the Ricardian world view, intra—family transfers between

members of successive generations are ubiquitous, and motivated solely
by altruism. Both components of this hypothesis are

theoretically

suspect. I will take them in order.
With regard to the first component, one line of criticism argues
that,

under

growth,

plausible assumptions about preferences, productivity

and income

distribution, many parents will bequeath nothing to

their children (Andreoni [1986a], Feldstein [1986a], Laitner [1979]).

When this occurs, children nay well help to support their parents, in
which case Ricardian equivalence still prevails for policies that do not
alter the pattern of linkages (see Carmichael [1982], or Bernheim and

Bagwell [1986] for a more general treatment). The relevant issue
therefore concerns the likelihood that transfers flow neither from
parents to children, nor from children to parents.

A number of authors have studied models which allow for both gifts
(from child to parent) and bequests (from parent to child).

Typically,

there is a range of parametrizations for which transfers flow in neither
direction (Buiter [1979], Carmichael [1982], Weil [1984], Abel [1985a],

and Kimball [1986])./ In general, I find this subliterature
unenlightening. For one thing, I question the wisdom of rejecting
certain specifications of preferences, as is the

practice

of several

authors mentioned above, on the basis of criteria such as dynamic

—5—

inconsistency (between members of successive generations), or divergence

of utility streams. While consistency and convergence are

analytically

convenient properties, they are unjustifiable as primitive choice

axioms. Dynamic inconsistency is simply a manifestation of conflict
within families, and I see no reason to rule it out. Similarly,
divergence of utility streams simply limits the usefulness of utility
functions as representations of primitive preference orderings, and
cannot logically invalidate the possibility that altruism is strong.

Furthermore, this entire sub—literature considers a very special
subset of preferences, in that direct altruism is generally limited to

one's immediate successor and predecessor. If, for example, individuals
care directly both about their children and grandchildren

u(c,ui,u2)),

(u =

then positive bequests may prevail in

equilibrium even when capital accumulation is inefficiently high (i.e.,

on the wrong side of the golden rule——see Ray [1987]). One simply

rule out the

cannot
this

sort

possibility that generations are linked by applying

of a priori reasoning.

A second line of criticism spins off of Bernheim and Bagwell's
[1987] observation that representative agent models abstract from

interconnections between families. They argue that ubiquitous parent—

child linkages would embed all (or nearly all) individuals in a single
interconnected network. The consumption

of

each individual would then

depend only upon total wealth, and an increment to
divided

total

wealth would be

among the entire population. Consequently, in a large dynamic

economy, any incremental bequest would be divided between the

—6—

recipient's contemporaries, and the resulting increment to the

recipient's consumption would be negligable. Accordingly, the donor

would prefer to make no bequest at all. In equilibrium, many donors
would be driven to corners, so that no large interconnected network
would remain..V

A third line of criticism argues that optimal government policy
will generally entail driving successive generations to corners

(Bernheim [1986]). The reason is simple: when transfers are positive,
each donor is indifferent on the margin between his own consumption, and

of the corresponding recipient. If the planner cares directly
about the donor and the recipient, he must in general prefer larger
that

transfers——the initial configuration could not have been socially

optimal. I have noted in the above reference that one must qualify this
conclusion when the planner can

policies.

precommit

himself to particular

In addition, note that Ricardian equivalence may still hold

in economies where the government fails to act optimally.

I turn next to the second component of the linkage hypothesis——

that intergenerational transfers are altruistically motivated. It is
important to emphasize that Ricardian equivalence holds under all
specifications of altruism in which the utility of each individual is

determined as a function of consumption profiles: one need not require
that an altruist values only the utility of others, as in Barro [1974]

(see Bernheim and Bagwell [1986]). Various authors have suggested
alternative motivations, including uncertainty concerning length of life
(Davies

[1981]), intrafamily exchange (Sussman, Cates, and Smith [1970],

—7--

Becker [1974, 1981], Ben—Porath [1978], Adams [1980], Tomes [1981],
Kotlikoff and Spivak [1981], and Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers [1985]),

and tastes for generosity (Blinder [1974], Andreoni [1986b]). In
general, these alternatives do not give rise to neutrality results (see

Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers). Unfortunately, it is very difficult
to distinguish between different formulations of preferences on the
basis of theoretical reasoning alone. Nevertheless, Bernheirn, Shielfer,
and

Summers make an a priori case for the presence of exchange

motives. They argue that

dynastic specification, which portrays
families as perfectly harmonious units, is extremely restrictive, and
that more

generally the

Barro's

preferences

of distinct family members will

confliot4/
Bernheim and Bagwell [1986] offer an alternative criticism of the
Ricardian

linkage hypothesis. Building on the observation that

ubiquitous parent—child linkages would embed nearly everyone in a
single, interconnected network, they show that this hypothesis implies
the irrelevance of all redistributional policies, distortionary taxes,

and even prices. Indeed, this remains true even when some fraction of
the population makes no transfers, or is motivated by considerations

other than altruism. Since these results are untenable, they conclude
that, in some critical sense, the linkage hypothesis cannot even be
approximately valid, and that all policy prescriptions based upon the
dynastic framework are therefore suspect.

In defense of Ricardian equivalence, one might argue that the

linkage

hypothesis is a more appropriate approximation in some

—8—

circumstances than in others. Specifically, the Bernheim—Bagwell
results may depend on much longer chains of linkages than does the
neutrality of government borrowing, particularly if the debt will be

paid off within a few generations. If some sort of friction exists in
each link, this might dissipate the Bernheim—Bagwell effects, without

altering the approximate neutrality of certain deficit
policies. Yet formal analysis suggests that this line of defense is
substantially

flawed, and at best leads one to a different set of untenable
conclusions

(Abel and Bernheim [1986])ei

Recently, several authors have questioned the importance of
intergenerational issues in connection with the Ricardian debate

(Poterba and Summers [1986], Hubbard and Judd [1986b]).±/ Poterba and
Summers

argue that,

(including
tax

under a variety of plausible

deficit scenarios

some historical ones), a substantial fraction of the deferred

burden is not shifted to future generations..Z/ On the other hand, a

substantial fraction is shifted forward——is the glass half full or half
empty? Furthermore, the current deficit experience is very atypical,
and

consumers might well expect to escape liability for paying
off the lion's share of our current outstanding debt.
rational

Both Poterba—Summers and Hubbard—Judd also point out that, because

consumers have relatively long horizons, the nsrginal propensity to
consume out of increments to wealth is small, perhaps on the order of
.05.

They

conclude that factors such as liquidity constraints and

myopia have a much larger bearing on the Ricardian debate.

—9—

The validity of this conclusion depends upon the policy issue that
one has

in

issues, such as
of aggregate demand within a standard Keynesian setting,

stimulation

mind. If one is concerned with short run

then Poterba—Summers and Hubbard—Judd are undoubtably correct (although

note that 5% of a $200 billion deficit is $10 billion, which constitutes

a non—trivial rise in consumption).
concerned

If, on the

other hand, one is

with capital accumulation in the medium and long runs,

intergenerational issues play the dominant role./ Indeed, simulations
show that, under standard life cycle assumptions, plausible deficit
policies have enormous effects on medium and long run capital stocks,

even though the short run effects may be trivial or even perverse
(Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1986]).

2.2. Capital !brket Imperfections
When inefficiencies in private capital markets make it difficult
or

Impossible for households to

have real effects (Buiter
emphasize
run

borrowing may

and Tobin [1981]). Hubbard and Judd [1986a,b]

the quantitative

issues. Under

obtain loans, government

importance of liquidity constraints for short

the assumption that 20% of the population is

liquidity constrained, they show that a $1 deficit—for—taxes swap could

well increase current consumption by about 254. Clearly, this is far
larger than the roughly 54 rise in consumption that would follows from a

pure wealth effect. In a somewhat different vein, studies by Drazen
[1978] and Pogue and Sgontz [1977] establish that, when liquidity

constraints bind early in life, policies involving intergenerational
transfers alter human capital accumulation, even in the presence of

—10--

intergenerational aitruism.2/
Unfortunately, these studies are all somewhat unsatisfactory, in
that they take liquidity constraints to be given exogenously.

Certainly, the effect of government policy will in general depend upon
the nature of the capital market failures which give rise to inefficiencies.

Recent work explains credit rationing as the consequence of
asymmetric information (Stiglitz and Weiss [1981], Jaffee and Russell

[1976]). These approaches generate liquidity constraints as an
endogenous aspect of equilibrium. Using such models, Hayashi. [1985] and
Yotsuzuka [1986] argue that, in many situations, liquidity constraints
adjust in response to government policies, and that the nature of this
adjustment restores Ricardian equivalancer1.2/
It is, however, apparent that the I-Iayashi—Yotsuzuka results are

highly sensitive to assumptions about the distribution of the future tax

burden. While I discuss distributional issues at greater length in the
next subsection, it is important to emphasize the particular synergy

between liquidity constraints and distribution. Accordingly, I provide
a brief analysis of Hayashi's second model, which is based upon the

Jaffee—Russell framework. I modify Hayashi's model by dropping the
assumption that the government imposes a fixed lump sum tax, and assume
instead that taxes rise with earned income.2.i/ Work effort is fixed, so

the tax is non—distortionary. I show that as long as a separating
equilibrium prevails, deficits increase the consumption of all
consumers, including those who are not liquidity constrained.

—11—

Postponing taxes has real effects in this model because it allows the
government to undertake redistributions that

could

not be achieved

through current taxes (due to the existence of private information).
Strangely

enough, deficit policy is still irrelevant when a pooling

equilibrium prevails; indeed, endogenous adjustments neutralize
redistributions between individuals, despite the absence of altruistic
linkages.

Suppose in particular that there are two types of individuals, H

and L. Both have the same first period earned income, w1. However, in
the second period,

> w. Each individual knows his type, but this is

private information. Lenders know only that the fraction p of the

population is of type L, and (1 — p)

is of type H. Following

Hayashi, I assume that default results in the loss of all period 2
resources, and that the marginal utility of period 2 consumption at
= 0

is finite. These assumptions are for convenience only.

Suppose for the moment that lenders make no effort to distinguish

an individual's type on the basis of his desired loan. Lenders will

then be willing to loan up to w/(1 +

r)

to each individual at the

rate r (where r is the lenders' opportunity cost of funds). Beyond
+

r),

lenders will charge a rate r* on incremental loans, where

i-p
In figure 1, I have followed Hayashi by illustrating the decisions

of L and H consumers on the same

while

H's is at

diagram. L's origin is at

Each type's endowment point is given by E.

A
L
w2
A'

I

J

I

0'

L

N
s,.'

H
L
w2 - w2

I

0H

w

1

Figure 1

Endogenous Liquidity Constraints

C

1

—12—

Under the preceding assumptions, the opportunity locus for a type H
individual is ABC.

It is now possible to illustrate both separating and pooling

equilibria. In a separating equilibrium, lenders offer two contracts,

denoted I and S. Type L individuals would default on S (actual
consumption would then be given by J), but not on I. Given this
observation, they are indifferent between the two contracts——we resolve

indifference in favor of I. Type H consumers strictly prefer
S. With this pattern of self—selection, both contracts earn zero
this

profits. In a pooling equilibrium, lenders offer one contract, denoted

P. Type L individuals

default on the contract, and, as a result, it

yields zero profits. A pooling equilibrium prevails if and only if

type H individuals prefer P to S; otherwise, a separating
equilibrium prevails.

Hayashi argues as follows. Suppose that the government cuts taxes

on each individual by x, and raised them by x(1 +

r)

in period 2.

Then the endowment point merely shifts along the line AB. Since the
locus ABC is unchanged, both separating and pooling equilibria are
unaltered.

Now suppose that

taxes

are positively related

to earned income. A

in period 1 will affect after tax earned income equally for both
types. However, the attendant increase in taxes in period 2 will fall
more heavily on type H individuals.
tax cut

What is the effect of this tax cut on consumption? Note that we
can decompose the policy into two components: the deferral of a fixed,

—13—

lump—sum tax, and a period 2 redistribution from type H to type L

individuals. Hayashi's analysis demonstrates that the first component
has no real effects. I therefore focus on the second component.

Suppose that we reduce w by x, and raise w by x(1 —
so that total resources are unchanged. w2 —

w2

falls, so that

shifts downward to ML. They key analytic point is that ABC shifts

downward to A'B'C. To verify this, one shows that B' lies on BC.
Note that the point B' is given by the consumption vector

C1 = w1 + (w + x(1 —

C2

This

=

—

w2

x

—

(w2

p)/p)/(1

+ x(1 —

+ r)

p)/p)

can be rewritten as
C1

=

w1

H

+ w/(1 + r) + z/(1 + r*)
L

C2=w2—w2—z

where z

x/p, from which the desired conclusion is immediate.

Now suppose that a separating equilibrium prevails. Subsequent to

the redistribution, the new equilibrium is given by the contracts I'

and 5'. Since type L's endowment has risen, I' will ordinarily be to

the right of I (as long as C1 is normal), and 5' must be to the
right of S (since J' lies to the right of j). Thus, deficits raise
current consumption for both types of individuals. Intuitively, the

redistribution of second period resources to type L individuals
relaxes the incentive compatability constraint on type H individuals.

—14—

Type L individuals were not liquidity constrained to begin with, and

so consume more in both periods. Type H individuals were liquidity
constrained in period 1, and so increase first period consumption as

much as possible, despite the loss of lifetime resources. In fact, one

can show that when utility is time separable, type H individuals will
increase period 1 consumption by more than the present value of lost

resources in period 2. The quantitative significance of this effect may

therefore

be quite large.

Suppose finally that a pooling equilibrium prevails. Note that as
long as the redistribution is not too large, P remains a pooling

equilibrium. Thus, redistributions between different types of
individuals in period 2 are

completely

neutralized, despite the absence

of altruistic linkages. This result is reminiscent of Bernheim and
Bagwellts analysis (although it holds for much different reasons), and
should, consequently, generate some skepticism about neutrality results
based upon models of this type.

2.3.

RedistributIon

Even if individuals are infinite lived and capital markets are

perfect, the deferral of taxes through deficits may alter the pattern of
incidence. Simply put, different people may bear a larger share of the
tax

burden

at different points in time. In effect, all the real effects

of debt described so far arise from redistributions of this sort, either
between successive generations, or between separate incarnations of the

same individual in distinct periods.

A redistributlonal policy can significantly alter current

—15—

aggregate

the

consumption only when two conditions

are

satisfied. First,

relevant parties must not be linked through chains of altruistically

motivated transfers (I do not give to or receive from my children; I do

not save for or borrow against my future). Second, these parties must

different propensities to consume resources in the

have

period
(I consume today, but my children do not, and neither do my future
current

incarnations). For redistributions other than those considered in subsections 2.1 and 2.2 it is very easy to argue that the first condition
holds, but very difficult to establish the second in a convincing way.

As a result, there is a common presumption that, ignoring intergenerational issues and liquidity constraints, the distributional
consequences of postponing taxes are of second order importance.

Certain considerations suggest that debt (Abel [1986]) and social
security (Abel [1985b]) may
buting resources

to

stimulate

aggregate consumption by redistri-

towards individuals with higher marginal propensities

consume. These policies also tend to

favor families with few

children, and this may affect fertility, thereby altering consumption
indirectly (Becker and Barro [1985],

Wildasin

[1985]).

It

is, however,

difficult to guage the quantitative importance of these effects.
A separate set of issues arises when the distribution of future
taxes

is not known with certainty (Buiter and Tobin [1981]). To the

extent consumers save more as a precaution against uncertainty, deficits

actually

may
is

"crowd in" investment (Chan [1983]), although once again it

difficult to assess to quantitative significance of this factor. I

find

this

argument implausible. If the world was otherwise Ricardian,

—16—

then one would never expect to observe deficits since the electorate
would universally oppose the gratuitous introduction of uncertainty.

Rather, huge current surpluses would result from the public's desire to
resolve uncertainty as quickly as possible.
Future

taxes nay also be uncertain because they are related to

income, which is itself random. In this case, postponement of taxes may

result in a reduction of future net income risk, thereby inducing a rise
in

consumption (Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes [1986]). I find this

observation unsatisfactory, in that the absence of relevant insurance

markets is never explained. Hayashi's analysis of liquidity constraints
certainly drives home the point that

it

is dangerous to discuss the

effects of government policy in the presence of market failures without

modelling the failures explicitly. Indeed, in the Barsky et. al. world,
the government should intervene in insurance markets, and help to pool

risks associated with future income. Risk pooling should in no way

depend directly upon the timing of taxes. Note that a similar objection
also applies to the "crowding in" view, mentioned above.

2.4. Distortionary Taxation
The timing of taxes nay

be quite

important if taxes distort

behavior, and if marginal future taxes depend upon different decisions

than marginal current taxes.i.V This observation is especially relevant
to the

current

discussion when deficits are used to postpone capital

income taxes, since a reduction in marginal capital income tax rates may

cause individuals to save more, and consume less. Auerbach and Kotlikoff
[1986] argue that this effect could dominate the net wealth effect in

—17—

the short run,

even

in a life cycle world. The plausibility of this

outcome depends in large part on intertemporal substitution elasticities. Measurement of these elasticities is a dicey problem, and well
beyond the scope of this paper. However, in evaluating the macroeconomic evidence discussed in sections 3 and 4,

the reader should bear

in mind that deficits may substantially depress the long run capital

stock

even when the short run effect is to crowd—in investment.

A more general treatment of deficit financing in a world with

distortionary taxes gives rise to the theory of tax smoothing. This
theory suggests that tax rates should be kept relatively constant even
when

output fluctuates. Intuitively, since the deadweight loss of

taxation

rises (approximately) with the square of the tax rate, a

constant rate minimizes the average distortion (Barro [1979], Prescott

[1977], Lucas and Stokey [1983], Kingston [1984]).i/ While tax smoothing
is an important normative concept, this theory does not appear to
generate

any clear positive implications concerning the link between

deficits and
2.5.

aggregate consumption.

Peraanent Postponement

Feldstein [1976] criticized Barro's analysis of fiscal policy by
arguing

rate,

that, when

the

growth rate

of the economy exceeds the interest

the government can roll over deficits indefinitely. As a result,

no generation need ever actually pay any portion of the postponed

taxes. Barro [1976] responded that intergenerational linkages might
actually prevent the economy from accumulating an inefficiently large

amount of capital. This exchange spawned a separate sub—literature

—18—

which focused on the relationships between gifts, bequests, and capital

over—accumulation. I have already referred to many of these papers in
subsection 2.1. While I do not think one can draw any conclusions about
the form of intergenerational altruism or the pervasiveness of intergenerational linkages from this literature, I am convinced that two

points are now well—established. First, contrary to Barro's conjecture,
intergenerational altruism does not rule out dynamically inefficient

outcomes. Indeed, for certain specifications of preferences it
possible

is

to obtain inefficient equilibria with either positive gifts

(Weil [1984], Abel [1985]) or positive bequests (Ray [1987]). Second,
even when the economy over—accumulates capital, Ricardian equivalence

still holds as long as successive generations are operatively
(Carmichael
second

[1982], Bernheim and

linked

Bagwell [1986]). The key to this

result is that the government cannot, in the absence of other

market failures, alter the aggregate opportunity set of the private
sector through borrowing. If voluntary transfers are operative, then
individual families could mimic a policy of rolling over deficits

indefinitely by cutting the bequests (or increasing the gifts) of every
generation .141
Despite the fact that cases of dynamic inefficiency have recieved

a large amount of attention, it is not obvious that this work is of any
practical relevance. Few if any economists today believe that the U.S.

capital stock is inefficiently large. Permanent deferral of taxes may
simply be infeasible.

—19—

2.6 MyopIa

For Ricardian equivalence to hold, it is clearly essential for
consumers to be both highly rational and farsighted. While the rational
expectations hypothesis is much in vogue, one should be aware that

alternative

behavioral hypotheses have very different implications (see

e.g. Shefrin and Thaler [1985]). For example, consumers nay simply

consumption heuristically on the basis of current disposable

choose

income, and may

fail completely to appreciate the link between current

deficits and future taxes. If so, then the more traditional

Keynesian

view of deficits (see e.g. Blinder and Solow [1973]) is appropriate.
2.7

Political Processes

Government expenditures nay depend critically upon sources of

finance. Politicians may generally support various costly programs, but
oppose current tax increases. When it is possible to run deficits,
these two positions are at least logically consistent. Thus, the
availability of deficit financing may profoundly affect the size and
composition of government (Buchanan and Wagner [1977], Bohn [1985],
Alesina and Tabellini [1987]).

Of course, it is difficult to explain such behavior on the part of
politicians without attributing appropriate views to the electorate.
One is therefore naturally led back to the issues raised in the
preceding subsections (e.g. non—neutrality in Alesina and Tabellini

[1987] results from the absence of non—distortionary taxes). It is
nevertheless

government

important to bear in mind the potential endogeneity of

expenditures, and to acknowledge that the

political process

—20—

may amplify the effects of fiscal policies.

3.

Indirect

Evidence

In this section, I evaluate the available empirical evidence on

several of the assumptions discussed in section 2. Section 3.1 concerns
the intergenerational linkage hypothesis; section 3.2 focuses on
liquidity constraints and myopia.

3.1 Intergenerational

I

Transfers

will organize my discussion of the linkage hypothesis around

three questions: Are significant intergenerational transfers common?
If so, are

they

U) Are

intentional? Finally, are they motivated by altruism?

significant intergenerational transfers common?

To begin with it is important to clarify the meaning of an

intergenerational transfer. For our purposes, feeding one's child does

not qualify. The reasons are evident: children are not generally
regarded as rational economic planners, and even if they were, they

would typically face liquidity constraints. For concreteness, consider
an individual who plans to feed and cloth his ten year old child until
age 13, at which point he expects the child to achieve full independence.

Suppose the government raises taxes on this individual, and announces
that

it will decrease taxes commensurately on his child 30 years in the

future. If the child is a rational agent with access to perfect capital
markets, the parent could simply feed him less; the child would respond
by borrowing to cover the cost of his food, and Ricardian equivalence

—21—

would hold. However, if the child is unable to form sensible economic
plans or to borrow against his future earnings, the parent has few

options: if he feeds his

child

less, the child will eat less.

Consequently, the deficit policy will have real consequences. This
example establishes a general point; the Ricardian equivalence
proposition

requires the existence of operative intergenerational

linkages during a period of life in which children can form rational
economic plans, and are linked to their own futures

through borrowing or

saving.

Some recent evidence suggests that
play a

intergenerational

transfers

very important role in the U.S. economy. In a well—known paper,

Kotlikoff and Summers [1981] calculated historical patterns of

life

cycle saving, and concluded that standard models could account for only

one fifth of aggregate capital accumulation..!! They attributed the
residual stock to intergenerational transfers, and presented some direct
evidence on gifts and bequests to support this inference (see Darby

[1979] for similar findings). Modigliani [1985] has since disputed
these results. Unfortunately, studies of this sort can at best shed

light

on the aggregate size of gifts and bequests, and provide no clue

as to the fraction of the population engaged in such transfers.
Surprisingly, it is very difficult to obtain good microeconomic

evidence on gifts and bequests. Data on gifts seem particularly poor.
Analysis of many data sets, such as the Retirement History Survey,
suggest that intra
outside

vivos transfers to

the home are

quite

relatives and children living

small, ranging from $39

to

$60 on average,

—22—

depending upon the sample year (Hurd [1986a]).

This

suggests that

gifts

are highly concentrated among the very wealthy (who, no doubt,

significantly undereport the size of their transfers). In contrast,
Kurz [1984] reports that
survey

approximately

18% of a sample drawn from a

conducted by the President's Commission on Pension Policy

received gifts averaging more than $2000, while 16% made them (tie did

not report the degree of overlap between these groups). Since the PCPP
survey collected extremely detailed and dissaggregated information about

transfers, it any well provide more reliable data. Nevertheless, Kurz's
findings may exagerate the importance of intra vivos transfers, for two

reasons. First, an unknown fraction of the observed transfers were
intragenerational (e.g. between brothers).i&/ Second, the PCPP survey
classified all persons above the age of 18 as distinct family units,

even if they lived with their parents; unmarried children were

designated "single head families." Since Kurz reports that more than
75% of those receiving transfers were single head families, these

results any in fact be consistent with those based on other surveys. To
the extent one believes that children over 18 living at home tend to be
liquidity constrained, one is led to the conclusion that intra vivos
transfers generally play a small role in

fiscal

determining the effects of

policies.

Direct data on

transfers at death are available through estate tax

returns and probate records. Unfortunately, these data sources only
contain information on sufficiently wealthy testators, and therefore
cannot be used to draw inferences about the distribution of bequests for

—23—

the

entire population.

One can, however, in principle recover the distribution of
bequests by examining age—wealth profiles, and rates of resource

depletion after retirement. Early studies, including those using
interview surveys of saving (Lydall [1955], Projector [1968], Mulanaphy
[1974]), cross—section surveys of assets (Lydall [1955], Projector and

Weiss [1966], Smith [1975], Mirer [1979], and King and Dicks—Mireaux
[1982]), and estate

data

(Atkinson [1971], Atkinson and Harrison [1978],

Brittain [1978], Shorrocks [1975] and Menchik and David [1983]) have
with relatively few exceptions found that wealth does not decline
significantly, and perhaps even slightly increases, after retirement.

Elsewhere (Bernheim [1987a]), I have criticized these studies, and have
argued that one requires panel data to resolve these issues properly.
All recent studies employing panel data (Bernheim [1987a], Diamond and
Hausman [1984], and Hurd [1986a]) conclude that
significantly

asset

holdings decline

after retirement (by perhaps 30% over a ten year

period). While this pattern is suggestive of life cycle motives, the
avenge individual nevertheless still expects to neke a substantial
bequest.
The dispersion of bequests is also quite important. Diamond and
Hausman [1984] and King and Dicks—Mireaux [1982] both find that

substantial

a

fraction of individuals (roughly 20%) reach retirement with

essentially no property or financial resources. In evaluating these
findings, it is essential to bear in mind that survey responses to

questions about assets are notoriously unreliable. For example, Ferber

—24—

et.al.

[1969] described the results of a validation study, which

revealed that individuals undereport assets by as much as 50%.
Furthermore, one would naturally expect enormous variance in the

reliability of responses within any sample. Bernheim [1987b] reports
some evidence that corroborates this conjecture. Specifically, he finds
that if one follows the same individual through successive waves of the

Retirement History Survey, reported pension and/or social security
income varies by 50%

or more in consecutive years for a disturbingly

large fraction of the total population, and it is not uncommon to find
individuals who report no pension and/or social security income at all
between two survey years in which they reported positive benefits.

It

is therefore very difficult to distinguish low asset holdings at
retirement

(ii)

from measurement error.
Are bequests intentional?

A number of authors have attempted to distinguish between
intentional and accidental bequests (i.e. those caused by uncertainty

concerning length of life, coupled with failure of annuity nnrkets)

through detailed analysis of age—wealth profiles. Both Blinder, Gordon,
and Wise [1980] and Hurd [198Gb] estimate optimizing models of asset

accumulation using data drawn from the Retirement History Survey. Their
findings are extremely sensitive to functional specification. Blinder,
Gordon, and Wise's estimates of bequest motive parameters are

essentially uninformative. Hurd finds no evidence to

presence of a bequest

indicate the

motive, but this conclusion may be driven by his

—25-.

specification of utility, wtich is linear in bequests. Quasi—linearity
implies

that

the marginal

resources is zero

up

propensity to bequeath out of lifetime

to some threshold, beyond which it jumps

discontinuously to unity (this
values). As a result, if

zero

the

is

true

actual

regardless of parameter

marginal propensity is closer to

than to unity, one might well expect to fit a very high threshold

value, or equivalently, a very small bequest motive.

Bernheim [1987a] argued that

one must be very

careful about

interpretting age—wealth profiles when individuals hold a substantial

fraction

of their assets as annuities (social security,

Previous

authors had suggested that the inclusion of annuities would

pensions).

accentuate the hump—shaped age—wealth profile, since the actuarial value

of survival contingent claims falls with age (Mirer [19793). Indeed,
Dicks—Mireaux and King [1984] found evidence of "a clear life—cycle
pattern" when the actuarial value of annuity claims was included in
measures

of net worth. Bernhejm pointed out that

inappropriate

actuarial valuation is

if one wishes to judge the plausibility of life cycle

motives, and showed instead that

the simple

discounted value of future

benefits (ignoring the possibility of death) is ordinarily a good
approximation to the relevant notion of annuity value. His analysis
reversed

the findings of Dicks—Mireaux and King: the proper inclusion

of annuities generates wealth profiles that decline very little if at

all after retirement. Apparently, this point is not yet well
appreciated (see e.g. Modigliani [1986]).

Bernheim also examined the response of rates of asset decumulation

—26-.

to changes in levels of annuitization. Theory predicts that annuities
should accelerate decumulation under the life cycle hypothesis, and slow

it in the presence of bequest motives. The evidence supports the latter
pattern, but not overwhelmingly.

Hurd [1986a] examined differences between the age—wealth profiles
of individuals with and without children, and found that those with
children tend to dissave slightly more rapidly than those without
children (unfortunately, his test of the hypothesis of equality between
the dissaving rates for these groups is nonparametric and does not yield

a confidence interval on the

difference,

so that one cannot judge the

of his tests against interesting alternatives). He views this as
a contradiction of the bequest motive hypothesis. It is, however,
power

consistent

with two—way altruism. A parent ay dissave less rapidly

because he cares for his child. However, part of his saving is also

precautionary. He will reduce this component if he believes his
will provide for him an an emergency. The

net

Hammermesh and Menchik [1986] show that

child

effect is ambiguous.

bequests

are positively

related to expected longevity, and negatively related to unexpected

longevity. They view the first pattern as indicative of a bequest
motive: increased longivity raises lifetime resources, and bequests are
presumably normal. However, this conclusion does not follow if
increased longevity does not imply a proportionate rise in earnings

potential. The observed pattern could also be consistent with life
cycle motives if greater longevity is associated with greater
uncertainty.

—27—

A second strategy for distinguishing between intentional and
unintentional bequests is to examine the relationship between observed

bequests and the characteristics of recipients. In the absence of a
bequest

motive, recipient characteristics should have no discernable

effects. Using probate data, Tomes [1981] finds that bequests are
inversely related to the resources of children; he interprets this as

evidence in favor of a bequest motive. However, this pattern is also
consistent with the view that parents with wealthier children have less
of a precautionary motive for saving, since they can count on their
children

in

emergencies. Since emergencies might actually arise

infrequently, the typical family might still make no intergenerational

transfers. In addition, Menchik [1984] has raised

about

serious questions

the reliability of Tomes' data. One should also bear in mind the

unrepresentative nature of probate samples.

A third strategy is to evaluate evidence concerning attitudes

towards various forms of insurance. Life cycle consumers should be
anxious to annuitize their resources, even at relatively unfair rates

(Yaari [1965]). Nevertheless, there seems to be a general resistance to

annuitization (Bernheim, Shielfer, and Summers [1985]). Friedman and
Warshawsky [1985a, 1985b] document the availability of annuities on
private markets, and conclude that one must posit a bequest motive to

explain portfolio choices and patterns of accumulation. They do not,
however, consider precautionary motives arising from fear of large

unplanned expenses, such as medical costs. These can create a
reluctance to annuitize, and would explain higher levels of accumulation

—28—

(see Kotlikoff [1986b] for some simulation results).

One can, however, distinguish between precautionary and bequest
motives by examining behavioral responses to changes in the level of

annuity provision. If a bequest motive is present, consumers can undo
annuities by purchasing life insurance. This is not the case if
resistance

to annuities arises from the fear of large unplanned

expenses. Bernheim [1985] analyzes a cross—section of elderly

individuals

drawn from the Retirement History Survey, and concludes that

increased levels of annuitization do in fact stimulate life insurance

purchases. This provides strong support for the hypothesis that a large
fraction

of elderly individuals intend to leave bequests.

(iii)

Are bequests altruistically motivated?

Bernheim, Schleifer, and Summers [1985] (BSS) provide evidence
linking the behavior of children (parental visits) to the bequeathable

assets of parents. This relationship is particularly strong when
parents are in poor health, and holds in families with two

or

more

children, but not in single child families. This last observation is
particularly important, since the single/multiple child distinction is
predicted by the BSS model of strategic bequests, but not by Becker's

[1974, 1981] formulation of the altruistic motive. Furthermore, this
distinction deflects nany methodological criticisms: unless one
believes that there is a spurious behavioral difference between single
and multiple child families, it is difficult to offer another
explanation of this result.

—29—

Cox [1987] and Kurz [1984] both provide evidence on intra vjvos

transfers that reinforces the BSS conclusion. Cox finds that, while the
probability of receiving a transfer falls with the recipient's income,
the

magnitude of transfers conditional upon receipt rises. The first

finding is consistent both with exchange and altruistic motives.

However, the second is strictly inconsistent with altruism. The
exchange theory yields an ambiguous prediction, since a rise in the
recipients income increases the price of his services, and since
bequests

measure expenditures on services, rather than quantity. An

additional implication of the altruistic model is that the

consumption

of each family member should depend only upon the family's total wealth,

so that a redistribution of wealth between a donor and the corresponding

recipient will be completely offset by private transfers. Kurz tests
this proposition by looking separately at the effects of donors' and

recipients' wealth on transfers. His results are strongly inconsistent
with the prediction outlined above. Unfortunately, both studies are
based upon the PCPP survey, which does not contain information on the
characteristics of both donors and recipients for any single

observation. This creates an important omitted

variables problem, since

parental characteristics (such as wealth) are undoubtably correlated
with

those

of their children, and certainly influence the magnitude of

transfers. Cox makes some corrections

finds that his

for

this potential bias, and

results are essentially unaffected.

Independent corroboration

of

the

exchange—motive hypothesis is

provided by survey responses to direct questions about parental motives

—30—

(Sussman, Cates,
model

and

Smith [1970], Horioka

[1983]).

In addition, this

can better account for consumers' evident reluctance to give

gifts, despite significant tax advantages (Shoup [1966], Cooper [1979],
ESS; see also Adams [1978] for an opposing viewpoint, and BSS, p. 1071,

footnote 25 for a response).
Menchik, Irvine, and Jianakoplos [1986] find some evidence that
both

is

consistent with the altruistic motive, and inconsistent with one

important formulation of the exchange motive (Kotlikoff and Spivak's

[1981] "family as an annuity" hypothesis). Using data from the National
Longitudinal Survey, they show that parental expression of an

intent to

bequeath is almost completely uncorrelated with the perception that
children would provide aupport during periods of financial hardship.
Note in addition that Bernheim's [1985] finding concerning life
insurance purchases (discussed above) is also inconsistent with the
"family

as an

annuity" hypothesis: when forced to hold high levels of

annuities, a life cycle consumer would never undo this by purchasing
life

insurance, only to undo his life insurance purchase by entering

into an annuity agreement with his family members. However, the results
of these studies are compatible with the more general model of exchange
described by BSS.
Some support for the altruism model can L found in an important
paper by Tomes [1981], which I have already mentioned in another

connection. However, his central finding——that bequests are negatively
related

to recipients' resources——is easily reconciled with the exchange

hypothesis (recall Cox's observation that

the

exchange model

yields an

—31—

ambiguous prediction concerning the effect of recipients' resources on
transfers; it is, however, somewhat puzzling that Cox and Tomes obtain
coefficients of opposite signs in studies of, respectively, intra vivos

transfers and bequests). While Tomes does directly reject a link
between bequests and the behavior of one's children, he does not adjust
for many sources of potential bias, as do BSS.

Both models of intergenerational transfers are inconsistent with
Menchik's [1980, 1984] finding that testators tend to divide bequests

equally between their children. This observation is somewhat troubling,
since it suggests that we do not yet fully understand bequest motives.

However, its importance is generally exaggerated. Suppose for example
that equal division simply reflects an egalitarian constraint

superimposed upon other motives by social norms. If consumers are
otherwise altruistic, Ricardian equivalence will still hold (Abel and
Bernheiin [1986]). Furthermore, parents could still manipulate their
children subject to the constraint that they divide transfers equally in
equilibrium (since a sizable minority of testators do not follow the
equal division rule, it seems likely that social norms do not proscribe

penalizing a miscreant offspring). Accordingly, Menchik's finding is
not

particularly telling in the
I

of

the

have

current

context.

now discussed evidence concerning each of three components

intergenerational linkage hypothesis. Taken as a whole, this

hypothesis has an additional, directly testable implication: economic
activity should be independent of the distribution of resources across

generations. Boskin and Kotlikoff [1985] test this directly with

—32—

aggregate time series data, and find that

the

age distribution of

resources matters a great deal. However, their study suffers from many
of the problems encountered in other time series investigations (see

In

section 4).

addition, their procedure is unusually dependent upon

about preferences and uncertainty, in that they extrapolate

assumptions

consumption profiles, and then attempt to explain the difference between

actual

and predicted consumption. The behavioral assumptions underlying

their calculations are very strong, and of questionable validity (see

e.g. Starrett [1986] for a discussion of isoelastic, intertemporally
separable utility functions).

Overall, bequests seem to be significant for a large segment of

the population. In addition, much microeconomic evidence is
inconsistent with traditional life cycle models. One can explain some,
but not all of this evidence by appealing to risk aversion concerning
length

of life and unplanned expenses. Indeed, data on life insurance

holdings point directly to a bequest motive. However, much evidence

indicates

that bequests are not motivated solely by altruism. In

contrast, no existing evidence successfully isolates the altruistic

motive. I conclude that a substantial minority of individuals probably
make little or no intentional transfers,
are

motivated

and that

most other individuals

by a variety of factors.

LiguicLity constraints and tyopia

3.2
There

is now a large literature which tests various implications

of the joint hypotheses that consumers maximize intertemporal utility,
and capital markets function efuicently. Much of this literature builds

—33--

upon Halits [1978] stochastic permanent income hypothesis. Following
Hall, many investigators have estimated consumption Euler equations to
test orthogonality conditions (i.e. innovations in consumption should be

unrelated to lagged information). Others have supplemented Hall's model
with a process describing the evolution of income, and estimated
multiple equation systems to determine whether consumption is
excessively sensitive to income innovations (see Sargent [1978] and

Flavin [1981]). In the interests of conserving space, I refer the
reader to two excellent surveys of this literature by King [1983] and

Hayashi [1985]. Despite numerous problems with estimation and
interpretation, the evidence on talance supports the view that

a

sizable

minority (roughly 20%) of individuals fail to behave in a way that is

consistent with unconstrained intertemporal optimization. Unfortunately,
these studies do not identify the constrained group (does it consists of
one set of irrational individuals, or do liquidity constraints tend to
bind at some particular point in the life cycle?), nor do they allow us

to determine the persistence of liquidity constrained states. Both
issues are extremely important in the current context.

At this point, it is appropriate to mention a number of studies
which use microeconomic data to measure the relationship between asset
accumulation and the present value of anticipated social security
benefits (Feldstein and Pellechio [1979], Kotlikoff [1979], Blinder,
Gordon, and Wise [1980], Diamond and Hausman 11984], Kurz [1981, 1984],

Dicks—Mireaux and King [1984]). There seems to be a weak consensus
within the profession that social security partially displaces personal

—34—

by perhaps twenty to forty cents on the dollar. It is important
to understand that this isnota direct test of Ricardian equivalence,
saving,

since

us nothing about aggregate saving. Indeed, If capital
are perfect and successive generations are linked by

it tells

markets

altruistically

motivated transfers, then family members should be

entirely indifferent about who (parents or children) does the saving...1Z/

Accordingly, one cannot test the full Ricardian hypothesis without
information about the wealth of all relevant family members.

Nevertheless, If we reject the intergenerational linkage
hypothesis on the basis of other information, then these studies do
provide valid tests of life cycle planning models, in that

they

allow us

to determine whether the postponement of income affects current

consumption..iJ Viewed in this light, the evidence points to significant
liquidity constraints or myopia over long planning periods. There are,
of course, other explanations for these findings. Social security may
be an imperfect substitute for other assets. Heroic assumptions about
expected social security benefits may be quite wide of the mark
(although see Bernheirn [1987b]). Finally, mispecification of the social

security wealth variable may create large downward biases in estimates
of wealth displacement (Bernheim {1987c}).

4.

Direct Evidence: Aggregate Time Series

i now turn my attention to studies which attempt to
effects

measure the

of deficits directly from aggregate time series data. In

subsection 4.1, I discuss some general problems which, taken together,

—35—

may

well

be insuperable. Subsections 4.2 arid 4.3 concern studies of

real variables (especially consumption) and nominal variables

(especially interest rates), respectively. Subsection 4.4 summarizes.

4.1

• General

problems

It is useful to begin this discussion by summarizing eight common
problems shared by virtually all studies which use macro time series
data to measure the effects of deficits.

First, measurement of debts and deficits is problemmatic (see
Eisner and Pieper [1984, 1986], Eisner [1986], and Boskin [1982,

1986]). Measurement issues include: inflation adjustments, adjustments
from par

to

market values, properly accounting for government assets and

investments as well as for contingent liabilities, and valuing

liabilities from social insurance programs. Many of these issues pose
thorny conceptual problems, so that the "right" measure is not obvious

(Kotlikoff j1986b]). Furthermore, econometric estimates appear highly
sensitive to the set of corrections that one actually makes (Boskin
[1986]).

Second, completely aside from issues about the deficit, it is not
at all clear that economists have yet devised satisfactory models for
aggregate variables, including consumption and interest rates (see for
example Hayashi's [1985] discussion of aggregate consumption

relationships). To the extent one mispecifies the relationship of
interest,

estimates of fiscal effects may be

contaminated
that

highly unreliable, being

by biases of unknown direction and

magnitude. Evidence

appears to reject some hypothesis about deficits may in fact simply

—36—

reject the underlying model.

Third, it is important to distinguish between expected and

unexpected movements of explanatory variables. Indeed, under the
stochastic permanent income hypothesis, only unexpected changes matter.

Accordingly, if consumers anticipated historical movements in the
deficit perfectly, then we might well find no empirical relationship
between deficits and concurrent economic activity, even though real
activity would have been much different had the government followed some
alternative deficit policy.12/

One method cf distinghishing the effects of unexpected changes in
the deficit is to model the evolution of deficits statistically, and
relate deficit innovations to consumption innovations (i.e. run VAR's,
and employ cross—equation restrictions implied by rational expectations).

This procedure is valid only if consumers form expectations by the same

statistical model used by the econometrician. In practice, VAR models
are very parsimonious, and omit a tremendous amount of information, so

that a portion of the deficit "innovation" may be expected. This would
create serious biases in favor of Ricardian equivaience..?2'

I strongly suspect that VAR models omit important institutional
information, which individuals actually use to form their expectations.

Each year, a variety of organizations (including the Council of Economic
Advisors and the Congressional Budget Office) make well—publicized

forecasts of deficits and spending. These forecasts are presumably
based upon current knowledge of legislative plans and programs, in

addition to recent economic performance. I conjecture that such

—37-.

forecasts
VAR

are highly correlated with the prediction error from simple

models.
I investigated this hypothesis by estimating some simple VAR

processes for deficits, government expenditures (federal, state, and
local spending on goods and services), and net national product (all in
real per capita terms.) using annual data obtained from the Federal

Reserve data tank. In one specification, I included three lagged values
of each variable; in the other, I included five lags. I estimated both
models for the sample period 1956 to 1984, using data for years prior to

1956 to accomodate the lag structure. I then reestimated these models,
adding to each equation the forecast of deficits and government spending
published in the Economic Report of the President, beginning in 1956.

While

as

I suspect that these forecasts may in some cases have been shaped

much by politics as by the desire for accuracy, my purpose was merely

to determine whether institutionally based forecasts would enter
significantly.

While the forecast variables did not enter into the equations for
income and government spending with statistically significant
coefficients, the forecasted deficit showed up quite strongly in the

deficit equations. Specifically, the

coefficients

were 1.01

with

a t—

stat of 5.11, and 0.92 with a t—stat of 3.92 for the three and five lag

models, respectively. These coefficients suggest that the VAR

models

entirely ignore the marginal information incorporated in the

institutional forecasts. In addition, this information accounted for a
high fraction of the residual variation: the addition of the forecast

—38—

variables raised the R2's is the deficit equations from 0.900 to 0.959,
and from 0.940 to 0.974 for the three and five lag models, respectively.
The important point here is not simply that one can explain part
of the VAR forecast error through the addition of variables——certainly,

this is almost always the case. Rather, my results suggest that more
than half of the VAR error is explainable by information that

individuals almost certainly use when forming expectations. While these
calculations do not necessarily establish that more complicated VAR
models (using perhaps more variables, more lags, and quarterly, or
monthly data) face similar problems, I take them to be strongly
suggestive.

Fourth, the levels of explanatory variables, as well as the
innovations in these variables, convey an amalgum of information about

future events. Current deficits (or innovations in the deficit) may be
correlated with future income or government spending. Realizing this,

may change spending today in response to current deficit
policy, but not because of the deficit.fl'
consumers

Fifth, endogeneity is a severe
spending,

consumption, income, and interest rates

simultaneously. While some authors
variables,

problem. Deficits, government
may all

be determined

have employed instrumental

the exogeneity of their instruments is highly questionable.

Sixth, it is very difficult to distinguish between the effects
different

of

fiscal policy variables. Most obviously, until very recently

government spending and deficits moved together very closely. This
aside, there is a more subtle problem concerning identification. We are

—39—

generally

concerned with

five

fiscal policy variables: government

spending, transfers, taxes, deficits, and debt. Each has

an

independent

effect on economic activity. Yet the first four variables plus interest
on the debt sum to zero. Typically, one deals with this problem by
assuming that, since taxes decrease disposable income, the tax

coefficient equals the negative of the income coefficient. But this

assumption is valid only when taxes are non—distortionary. Recall that
a rise in deficits with spending constant may
current

well

imply a fall In

capital income taxes, so saving may rise even though deficits

themselves

properly,

actually stimulate consumption. To identify these
we therefore need data on effective marginal tax

especially
rates may

for capital income. Unfortunately,

models

rates,

movements in marginal tax

follow movements in revenue rather closely, making

identification difficult. Furthermore, measurement of effective tax

rates

on capital income is both complex and controversial (see e.g. King

and Fullerton [1984]). It would be extremely difficult to obtain a
reliable series.

Seventh, no existing study has attempted to measure the relationship between the effects of deficits and the

length

of the associated

payback period. Poterba and Summers [1986] argue that

actually

deficits have

been paid off rather quickly during the twentieth century. If

so, evidence from this century only bears on deficit policies where

rapid payback is envisioned. Since the current fiscal experience is
extremely atypical, it Is not at all clear that the historical pattern
will persist, and it is even less clear that the average taxpayer

—40—

expects it to persist. It is therefore extremely dangerous to draw
inferences from U.S. time series about the effects of current deficit
policy, or any other policy which involves the extended deferral of
taxes.

Eighth, it may be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to
distinguish between interesting hypotheses given the level of

macroeconomic noise. Recall the discussion of section 2: when the
intergenerational linkage hypothesis is violated, the marginal
propensity

to consume out of temporary deficits may be only five cents

on the dollar. Since this short run effect is so small, we may have

difficulty picking it up in the data, despite the existence of enormous
long run effects. Indeed, it may be hard to distinguish between zero,
five cents, and twenty five cents on the dollar (the latter being the
hypothesized effect in a world where some consumers are liquidity

constrained).

Studies of real variables
4.2.1. Consumption function studies
4.2.

Table

1 summarizes the methodologies and results of studies that

estimate aggregate consumption functions in order to assess the real

impact of deficits. A cursory reading of these papers suggests that

various

authors have reached markedly different conclusions through

essentially similar analyses of U.S. time series data. I begin this
subsection by arguing that these differences are largely illusory.

Interpreted properly, virtually all studies indicate that every dollar

Kormendi

[1983]

Seater [1982]

Feldatein [1982a]

Barro [1978]

Tanner [1979]

Tanner [1978]

Yawitz and
Meyer [1976]

Kochin [1974]

Tanner [1970]

Study

1929—76

U.S., A,

U.S., A,
1929—76

U.S., A,
1930—76

U.S., A,
1928—74

U.S., A,
1947—74

U.S., A,
1929—40, 47—71

1953—67

U.S., A,

U.S., A,
1952—71

Canadian,
Q, 1951—67

Data

Oiitted

MTR

MTR

MTR

DEBT, MTR

NTE

DEBT, MTR

DEF, CS,
MTR

GS, W, DEBT
MTR

MTR

DEF, GS, W,

Variables

Key

1:

L

OLS, D

OLS, L

2SLS,

OLS, L

L

OLS, L

OLS, L

OLS, L

OLS, L, D

OL.S,

NA

NA

T(—1), Y(—1)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Instruments

(0.10)

—0.15

NA

to

0.29
(0.10)

—0.083 to —1.73
(0.131)
(2.27)

0.05 to 0.22
(0.08)
(0.06)

0.291
(0.088)

0.279
(0.067)

0.220 to
(0.076)

NA

0.276
(0.120)

Deficit

0.096 to

NA

a2

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

p2

—0.01
to
(0.10)

NA

0.222 to
(0.247)

Effect

Function Studies

(0.048)

Summary of Consumption

Technique

Table

(0.08)

—0.07

0.276
(0.086)

NA

to

NA

—0.002

(0.018)

—0.055

0.11
(0.03)
to —0.032
(0.020)

to

0.175
(0.179)

—0.014
(0.38)

NA

0.023!J'to

(0.08)

0.040
(0.017)

0.05
(0.013)

(0.018)

0.034

Debt Effect

U.S., A,

Evans [1985]

text

lagged income

money growth

T(—1):
Y(—1):
MG:
STR

multiple year average

government deficits

government spending

government debt

GS:

DERT:

statutory

text

paper.

NA:

WCR:

but does

of his

of his paper.

coefficients,

significant,

tax rates

lagged taxes

tax rate

DEF:

marginal

MA:

MTR:

annual

privatel wealth

A:

W:

quarterly

Boskin reports that this coefficient is statistically

I

from the

was unable to determine Boskin's sample period from the

I was unable to determine Evans instruments

Q:

.91

Since this effect is calculated as the difference between two

0.176

0.403
(0.089)

0.441
(0.180)

0.273
(0.132)

(0.575)

not applicable

wartime casualty rates

not give its standard error.

NA

0.073 to
(0.024)

(0.033)

0.106

(0.061)

—0.028

0.03J

—0.041 to
(0.062)

0.026
(0.125)

Debt Effect

—0.012 to
(0.101)

not recover a standard error.

0.187
(0.069)

I could

(0.132)

—0.100 to

NA

NA

L

OLS,

MTR

1949—1984

U.S., A,

Mogigliani and
Sterling [1986]

(0.089)

0.327 to

—0.014 to 0.219
(0.102)
(0.072)

NA

OLS. L

MTR

U.S., AE/

Boskin [1985]

0.140 to

(0.763)

—0.307 to

(0.465)

—0.146 to

(0.080)

NA

NA

NA

2

DE8T, MTR

NA

.1

MG, STR,
WCR

a2

Deficit Effect

Function Studies

U.S., MA,
1890—1981

OLS, L

2SLS,L

1..

Instruenta

Summary of Consumption

Reid [1985]

W, MTR

MTR

1901—1929

Corporate

1929—75

2SLS,

O.itted Technique

Variables

Yey

U.S., A,

Date

Seater and
Mariano [1985]

Study

Table 1 (continued):

—41—

of

deficits stimulates between $0.20 and $0.50 of current consumer

spending.

Apparent differences in results can

null

different formulations of the

in

most cases be traced to

hypothesis. A number of authors set

out to estimate an equation such as the following:

Ct = a0 +

(1)

ai(Y

—

T)

+

a2(T

—

Gt

rD)

—

+

+ a4D ÷ a5W+
where

Xa

+

C is consumption, Y is national income, T is tax revenues, G

is government spending, D is debt, W is private wealth, r is the
interest rate, X is a vector of other exogenous variables, and

stochastic error term (so that Y — T
— rD

is a

is disposable income, and T —

G

is government surplus). The natural null hypothesis for this

specification is a2 = 0 ——the alternative is the so—called "tax
discounting hypothesis," which

holds

consumers at least partially

that

anticipate future taxes. A second group of authors estimate

(2) Ct =

(i.e.

o

+

1t

+

2(T

—

— rtDt)

+

p3Gt

+

4Dt

+

+X+

they use gross income, rather than net income). For equation (2),

the natural

null

hypothesis is 2 = 0, which corresponds to pure

Ricardian equivalence.
The

believe

polar

hypothesis that a2

that all

0 is certainly a straw man——few people

consumers are completely myopic. Rather than test

views, one should be ocncerned with quantifying the effects of

deficits on current consumption. In this spirit, It is useful to note

—42—

that (1)

and (2) are "almost" the same. Specifically, if the interest

rate is time invariant, then one obtain (2) from (1) through a linear

transformation of variables. The coefficients and error terms are then

related as follows: P0
=

a — ra1,

represents

p5

= a0, 1 =
=

= a5,

a, and

'l

2 =
=

e;

the pure Keynesian view, a2 = a1

Ricardian equivalence, and a1 — a2 (p3)

—
a2

a2 = 0

(2 = 0)

P3 = a3

—

a1,

=

represents perfect

measures the effect on current

consumption of a $1 tax—for—deficit swap.
Ricardian
a1 — a2

surplus

on

advocates have objected to this interpretation

of

two grounds. First, they claim that since government

is more variable than disposable income, one would expect to

find a2 < a (see e.g. Tanner [1978]). Yet this is plainly false.
Under the Ricardian view, variability of the surplus has no effect on

consumption, so in specification (2) one must estimate p2 =
(equivalently, a2 =

a1).

In terms of equation (1), a2 = a1

0
is required

to purge disposable income of the spurious tax component (a3

and

a4

will adjust accordingly). Indeed, under the Keynesian view, high

volatility biases P2

towards zero, so if anything this consideration

suggests that P2 (a2 — a1)

understates the effect of deficits.

Second, they argue that if one measures Yt as current income rather
than permanent income, one nay well find

government surplus

* 0 simply because

helps to predict permanent income. Indeed, if

consumption does depend upon permanent income and if current income and

taxes move procyclically, then one would expect to find p2 < 0
(a2 < a1). However, many authors include cyclical variables in

——it

—43—

is

then not at all clear that the partial correlation between permanent

income and taxes is negative. Other authors use cyclically adjusted
measures of deficits. In these cases, the direction and significance of
the resulting bias is not at all obvious.
With this observation in mind, I now turn to specific studies.

The collumn labelled "a" under the heading "Deficit Effects" contains
results based upon specifications that resemble equation (1). Although

we are ultimately interested in the magnitude of a2 — a1, I report
estimates

of a2

from these

infer
a1,

for two reasons. First, it is often difficult to

studies.' Second, even if

one

had an

estimate of

it would be impossible to calculate a standard error for the

difference

in the absence of information about correlations between

parameter estimates. I will simply note that in most cases, the
estimated coefficient of

current disposable

income is at least 0.6 or

0.7, even when one includes a lagged income variable. Since the long

run marginal propensity to consume is probably more on the order of 0.8

or 0.9, one should regard 0.6 or 0.7 as lower bounds for a1.

Inspection of the a2 collumn reveals that most estimates tend to
cluster around 0.25. The highest is 0.29, and there are a number of
estimates that are substantially lower. In addition, most of these
coefficients are estimated fairly precisely——standard errors tend to be

in the neighborhood of 0.1. Accordingly, the evidence uniformly
supports the view that a $1 deficit—for—taxes swap raises consumption by
at least $0.40 to 0.50, and one can be extremely confident that the
estimated effect exceeds $0.10 to

0.202/

—44—

Inspection of the —2 collumn

reveals a somewhat more

conservative picture. The median estimate is around 0.2, indicating
that a $1 deficit—for—taxes swap raises consumption by about $0.20. The

range of estimates is, however, quite large. The low estimates come
exclusively from three studies: Kormendi [1983], Seater and Mariano
[1985], and Evans [1985]. In the last two cases, the corresponding
standard errors are so large that any reasonable confidence interval
subsumes every hypothesis ranging from pure Keynesianism to pure

Ricardianismr! Kormendi's [1983] estimates are far more precise, but
even in this case reasonable confidence intervals do not rule out the
kind of small positive wealth effects that would be associated with

failure of the intergenerational linkage hypothesis. Note that the
other coefficients in this collumn consistently indicate that deficits
have

significant real effects, and in many cases the estimate is quite

precise. Two studies merit further comment. Since Reid [1985] employs
multi—year full cycle avenges, the transitory components of his
v'ric.ases are presumably smaller than in other studies. It is therefore
noteworthy that he obtains relatively large deficit coefficients.
Boskin's [1985] estimates, which are based upon improved measures of the
deficit (including cyclical corrections), also imply large real effects.

Table 1 also contains a collumn labelled "Debt Effect." To
evaluate these coefficients, one should compare them to marginal
propensities to consume out of other forms of private wealth..! Various

studies place this propensity around 0.03 to 0.05. Note that Tanner
[1970], Yawitz and Meyer [1976], Feldstein [1982a], Seater [1982],

—45—

Seater and Mariano [1985], Boskin [1985] and Modigliani and Sterling

quite

[1986] all produce estimates in this range, many of which are

precise. This supports the view that

government

bonds are net

wealth../ Several studies, including Tanner [1979], Seater [1982], and
Evans [1985] produce very small or even negative coefficients, but in
each

case the estimated standard error is very large, and any reasonable

confidence interval subsumes
pure

Ricardianism

every conceivable hypothesis ranging from

to pure Keynesianism. Only Kormendi's [1983] results

one to reject the hypothesis that a

allow

government

Since

substantial fraction of

bonds is net wealth.
Kormendi stands alone

in finding support for the Ricardian

view, his work deserves further comment. It is noteworthy that other
aspects of his
long run

results

marginal

are extremely peculiar (e.g. he finds that the

propensity

to consume

out of income is around 0.3),

indicative of potentially severe mispecification. Furthermore,
findings do not appear to be very robust either with respect to the
and

sample period, or with respect to

his

alternative specifications

plausible

(see Barth, Iden, and Russek [1984—85, 1986], Modigliani and Sterling
[1986], and Kormendi and Meguire [1986] for a response).

Note that

the

preponderance of

studies

in Table I

the colluinn labelled "Technique"). Failure to
endogeneity is a serious omission. Shocks to
correlated with shocks to
(lower

income,

treat

employ

OLS (see

potential

consumption

which in turn raise

may be

tax revenues

deficits). ThUS, there is a natural bias in favor of Ricardian

equivalence, even in a Keynesian world. Although Feldstein [1982a] and

—46—

Seater and Mariano [1985] employ instrumental variables, the validity of

instruments is highly questionable.1/
Table 1 also contains a partial listing of ?tkey omitted
variables.'t! A number of studies fail to include either a measure of
their

government

deficits or government debt. Such studies are naturally less

informative, and tend to confound the effects of debts and deficits,

which are correlated. Others omit a measure of government spending.
Since deficits are highly correlated with spending, and since government
consumption appears to be a substitute for private consumption
(Kormendi [1983], Aschauer [1985], Kormendi, L.aHaye, and Meguire

[1986]), this creates a bias in favor of Ricardian equivalence.

Several

other studies (Evans [1985], Boskin [1985], Modigliani and Sterling
[1986]) include government spending, but impose the potentially spurious
restriction that government spending is neither a substitute nor a

complement for private consumption. In some cases, private wealth is
omitted. Yawitz and Meyer [1976] show that this may bias estimates of
the deficit effect downwards. In addition, private wealth is also
almost certainly correlated with government debt. Finally, all studies
(with the exception of Seater and Mariano [1985]) exclude measures of

marginal tax rates. I emphasized the importance of controlling for tax
rates in subsection 4.1. Indeed, Seater and Mariano's finding that
personal tax rates enter significantly corroborates this view.
Unfortunately, they do not include corporate tax rates, which are
perhaps the most critical determinants of

income (see King and Fullerton [1984]).

effective levies on capital

—47—

Several

to

papers

have documented

the sensitivity of certain

results

the redefinition of certain variables (see e.g. Yawitz and Meyer

[1976], Buiter and Tobin [1979], Seater and Mariano [1985], Boskin

Barth,

[1985],

Iden, and Russek [1984—85, 1986], and Modigliani and

Sterling [1986]), as well as to the choice of sample period (see e.g.

Barth, Iden, and Russek [1984—85, 1986] or Tanner [1978]). The atypical
nature of war years is particularly evident, and calls into serious
question studies which focus on wartime periods (e.g. Evans [1985]).

In addition to the studies listed above, there is also a
literature which estimates the relationship between aggregate social
security wealth and consumption (see e.g. Feldstein [1974], Munnell

[1974], Barro [1978], and Darby [1979]). These studies are subject to
the general criticisms noted
limited

in

section 4.1. In addition, they are of

interest because the critical variable, aggregate social

security wealth, is nearly impossible
of estimates to the

papers

to measure. Extreme sensitivity

method of constructing this variable is evident in

by Barro [1978], Leimer and Lesnoy [1982], and Feldstein

[1982b]. Auerbach and Kotlikoff [1983] have also conducted simulations
which suggest that macro estimates of social security's impact on

consumption are likely to be highly unstable. Little weight should be

attached

to these studies.

4.2.2.
There

Consumption Euler equation studies

is a close relationship between the

proposition and the

stochastic

observation suggests that

it

Ricardian

equivalence

permanent income hypothesis. This

may be possible to design more powerful

—48—

tests of the Ricardian view by employing a consumption Euler equation

approach. Yet this approach has important limitations.
Tests of the Euler equation specification are generally
unfavorable

to

consumption

(see

the stochastic permanent income model of aggregate

Hayashi [1985]). Yet this finding may reflect factors

that have nothing to do with Ricardian equivalence (e.g. failure of

conditions for valid aggregation). Furthermore, even if these factors
were related to Ricardian assumptions, one would learn very little: as
long as the Euler equation is mispecified, one cannot use it to measure
the effects of deficits (a different specification, based upon some
alternative behavioral model, would be called for).
Failure to reject the Euler equation restrictions is, in the

current context, also uniformative. Ricardian equivalence may fail for
reasons that do not invalidate this specification (e.g. consumers plan
consumption and saving rationally, but are myopic about the link between

current deficits and future taxes). In addition, it is difficult to
gauge the power of such tests against interesting alternatives (failure

to reject may result from imprecision). Nevertheless, in this case one
could in principle measure the effects of government borrowing by
including a measure of the current deficit innovation.

Relatively few studies of deficits have adopted this approach.
Aschauer [1985] estimates a consumption Euler equation using quarterly
U.S. data (1948—81), and finds that lagged values of deficits are

correlated with the consumption innovation. Rather than reject either
Ricardian equivalence or the behavioral specification, he attributes

-49—

this

to two factors: first, deficits are correlated with government

spending, and second, government spending is substitutable for private

consumption. He then tests (and does not reject) the hypothesis that
lagged deficits matter only insofar as they are used to form

expectations about government spending. Aschauer claims that his
evidence jointly supports the stochastic permanent income hypothesis,

rational expectations, and Ricardian equivalence. I take this support
to be extremely weak at best, for three reasons. First, if consumers
are rational about consumption but myopic about the link between taxes
and deficits, or if the intergenerational linkage hypothesis is invalid,
one would find exactly this pattern, despite the failure of Ricardian

equivalance. Past deficits would be uncorrelated with Euler equation
errors

except insofar as they helped to predict government consumption

(a component of total consumption). Nevertheless, unanticipated changes

in the deficit would still have an independent effect on current
consumption. Aschauer does not test for this. Second, the Euler
equation
on

specification might still fail other tests

the validity of Ricardian equivalence. Third,

discuss

for reasons bearing

Aschauer does not

the power of his test against particular alternatives. It is

possible that one would also be unable to reject the hypothesis that
lagged deficits have very large effects on the current consumption
innovation,

independent of their role in predicting government spending.

Poterba and Summers [1986] also estimate a consumption Euler

equation using quarterly

U.S. data (1970—86). They include a tax

abatement variable, which

reflects the current

year impact of tax cuts

—50—

enacted into law during previous years. The coefficient of this
variable is very large, but estimated imprecisely. Furthermore, since
the abatement variable belongs to each consumer's lagged information
set, Poterba and Summers effectively reject their Euler equation

specification on the basis of an orthogonality test. This obscures the
interpretation
It

of the tax abatement

coefficient.

is also obvious from inspection of their tables that Poterba

and Summers' results are driven by recent experience——during the 8Ots

deficits

have been high and saving low. While this could be explained

by rising expectations, the authors argue that forecasts of income and

GNP growth during this period looked relatively bad. Yet econometric
forecasts need not reflect consumer expectations. In particular, much
evidence suggests that President Reagan has inspired public confidence.2/

4.2.3. Studies of Aggregate Demand and GNP
Eisner and Pieper [1984, 1986] and Boskiri [1986] estimate reduced

form macro models to measure the effects of deficits on the size and

composition of GNP. Unfortunately, there is no compelling a priori
reason for excluding variables in any reduced form equation, so it is

hard to distinguish cause and effect. In my view, this evidence simply
describes correlations without permitting a behavioral interpretation.

The results of such studies are at very best suggestive of the
possibility that deficits might have real effects.

—51—

4.3 Studies

4.3.1.

of

nominal variables

Interest rates

Common wisdom holds that deficits raise interest rates. Economic
theory suggests that this might occur for two reasons. First, if
deficits depress saving, then interest rates must rise to bring saving

and investment back into balance. Second, if deficits stimulate
aggregate demand, then the transactions demand for money may rise. With
a fixed stock of money, higher interest rates are necessary to choke off

the excess desire for liquidity. Since both effects can occur only if
individuals perceive government bonds to be net wealth, these
observations suggest a test of the Ricardian hypothesis.

The value of this test depends to a very large extent upon one's

view of international capital markets. If international capital flows
equalize interest rates across countries, then U.S. deficits cannot

sustain domestic interest rates in excess of world rates. Work by
Feldstein and Horioka [1980] and Harberger [1978] has spawned a
substantial literature which studies the issues of capital mobility and

interest rate equalization. A detailed discussion of this work would
carry me much too far afield. Instead, I simply note that one cannot
distinguish between the Ricardian equivalence and perfect capital
markets hypotheses on the basis of reduced form relationships between
government borrowing and interest rates.

There are nevertheless a very large number of studies that

estimate such relationships. The Congressional Budget Office [1987] has
recently summarized the methods and results of some two dozen studies.

—52—

The evidence is extremely mixed. Rather than

reiterate this summary, I

will organize my discussion around the major problems encountered by

analyses of interest rates, and I will focus primarily upon recent
papers that

make

Evans [1985,

some attempt to overcome these problems (Dwyer [1982],

1986a, 1986b, 1986c, 1987], Plosser [1982, 1986], and

Feldstein [1986b]).

It is important to emphasize that all of the issues raised in
subsection 4.1 are directly relevant in the
these

current

context. Two of

merit further elaboration.

First,

a number of papers employ very specific models of interest

rate determination. Studies by Plosser [1982, 1986] and Evans [1986a,
1986b, 1986c, 1987] invoke the efficient markets hypothesis, and employ
restrictive assumptions about the term structure, such as time and

maturity invariant risk premia. One must always bear in mind that these

test Ricardian equivalence jointly with these strong maintained

studies

hypotheses.

It is particularly interesting to note that most studies employing
highly restrictive models of interest rate determination find a

significant

negative relationship between

One explanation
investment.

is that,

and interest rates.

by introducing uncertainty, deficits crowd—in

For reasons mentioned in section 2, I regard this theory as

far—fetched. This leaves two
marginal

deficits

capital income tax

First, reductions in
nay stimulate saving in the short

possibilities.

rates

run. While this explanation may account for historical experience, it
renders

the evidence uniformative for policy purposes——deficits

—53—

resulting from cuts in labor income taxes or inframarginal capital

income taxes might well significantly stimulate current consumption.
Second,

restrictive interest rate models

may simply yield spurious

result../ In either case, the evidence is of little relevance.
Second, no study provides a fully satisfactory treatment of

information and expectations. Feldstein [1986b] has
that

interest

rates

are

emphasized

that

probably much more responsive to expected

deficits, than to either current deficits or outstanding debt. Yet it
is not at all clear that
deficits,

measures

current

deficits, or innovations in current

are more highly correlated with future deficits than are other
of

fiscal policy. Likewise,
current deficits may be highly correlated with the future values of
other variables. Suppose, for example, that current deficits are
generally followed by budget—balancing cuts in government spending.
current economic activity or

Since temporary spending tends to

[1986]),

raise interest rates (see e.g. Barro

current deficits might then be inversely correlated with long

term rates2i

Several

authors have

made some effort to cope with these

difficulties. Feldstein [1986b] and Plosser [1986] both include
measures of expected future budget deficits in various interest rate

specifications. The measurement of these expectations is, of course,
problematic, and undoubtably subject to serious error (see section

4.1). In addition, these authors fail to include measures of
expectations about other variables, including government spending,

output, and prices; the preceding remarks suggest that

omitted

and

—54-.

included

variables may be highly correlated.

Evans [1987] adopts a much different approach. He begins by
specifying a reduced form equation for current interest rates as a

function of lagged rates, current and lagged values of various other
variables (including policy instruments), and expected future values of

these other variables. His central assumption is that the coefficients
on all deficit variables (including expectations) should be positive.

He justifies this with reference to standard theory. He then supplements
this equation with a model of the term structure and a stochastic VAR

process describing the evolution of the other variables. Combining
these equations, he shows that a standard VAR should satisfy the

restriction that the deficit coefficients sum to a positive number. He
finds that this restriction is inconsistent with the data.

Unfortunately, Evans' derivation employs some unusually strong and

objectionable maintained hypotheses..V More fundamentally, i question
the validity of his central assumption. Evan's original reduced form
equation omits expected future interest rates. To the extent future
rates

affect current behavior, Evanst basic equation represents a quasi—

reduced form, from which expected interest rates 1ive already been

eliminated. This dramatically alters the interpretation of all
coefficients. Suppose, for example, that some current (period
policy variable raises future (period t +

i)

t)

interest rates. Then

individuals will typically tend to reduce consumption in the relative

short run (periods t and t +

1),

in order to save more for the long

run. Current saving (period t) will therefore rise. To bring current

—55—

saving and investment back

into

balance, current interest rates

(period t) must then fall. Evans has simply neglected such
intertempora 1
I

feedbacks.

now turn to some problems that

are

specific to the analysis of

interest rates. These problems have a common root, which is that
interest

rate equations have no direct behavioral interpretation.

Rather, they are quasi—reduced forms, reflecting
which

the interplay of forces

alter the supply and demand for funds. Interest rate effects

depend upon the kind of behavioral relationships
these are simply

discuss in section 4.2——

behind the scenes, shrouded by another layer of

economic noise (such as term structure relations, and international
capital flows). As a result, when studies of behavior and interest

rates
of

conflict, I am

inclined to

be very

skeptical about the conclusions

the latter. Along these lines, three specific points merit

discussion.

First, reduced form relationships may be highly unstable, and

unreliable as policy guides (Lucas [1976]). Ample evidence indicates
that this is the case in the current context..J
Second, it is virtually impossible to assess the power of tests

based

upon interest rate equations. When estimating consumption

functions, one has

both

a pure

Ricardian

and pure Keynesian benchmark.

But in the case of interest rate equations, we have

only

benchmark: deficits do not alter interest rates. Since

a Ricardian
the

empirical

model is intended to represent a reduced form rather than a behavioral

relationship, one cannot, in the absence of extensive information about

—56—

various elasticities, construct a natural Keynesian benchmark. Indeed,
given the small magnitude of plausible wealth effects and the tendency
for interest rates

to

equalize across countries, there is little reason

to believe that deficits should significantly raise interest rates in
the short run.

These observations lead me to conclude that interest rate studies

are intrinsically uninformative as tests of the Ricardian hypothesis./
What can we deduce from the coefficient of deficits in an empirical

relationship explaining interest rates? If it is significantly positive
(as in Feldstein [1986bJ), one might conclude that consumers perceive
some fraction of government bonds to be net wealth, but one cannot

estimate this fraction. If the coefficient is not significantly

different from zero (as in Dwyer [1982}! or most of Evans [1986a]
estimates), one cannot reject Ricardian equivalence, but one also cannot
determine whether the estimates are inconsistent with any other

conceivable hypothesis of interest. If the coefficient is significantly
negative, one has probably learned nothing at all (see above).
Third, estimated models of interest rate determination are

extremely parsimonious. It is difficult to believe that the lion's
share

of

movements

explanatory

variables

in

interest rates

are

variables. This raises the

simply proxy for a

variety of

driven by perhaps three to five

possibility that the included

omitted factors. In

most

studies, omissions of this sort undoubtably bias the coefficients of

interest..i

—57—

Not all of the evidence on interest rates is based upon

econometric estimation. Barro [1986] has argued that two episodes in
British history, during which the government ran deficits for apparently
exogenous reasons, provide natural experiments by which to judge the
Ricardian hypothesis.

The first episode occurred during the 1830's. Following the
emancipation of slaves in the West Indies, the British government made
large compensatory payments to slaveholders, and financed these payments

primarily with borrowing. Barro points out that interest rates did not
rise during this period. Yet it is not at all clear that this finding

is contrary to the Keynesian view. Temporary deficits were not
associated with tax cuts, so the consumption of a myopic British tax-

payer would have been unaffected by this policy. Supposing that West
Indies slave owners were fully compensated, they too would have
maintained previous levels of
perfect

consumption.

In fact, if

all

assets were

substitutes, slaveowners would have been willing to purchase the

newly issued bonds with the compensatory payments received from the

government. Finally, the slaves themselves were wealthier after the

adoption of the policy, in the

sense

that

they

become owners of humam

capital. However, there is no reason to believe that their level of
consumption significantly increased following emancipation (see Fogel
and Engerman's [1974] analysis of slavery in the u.s.), and even if it
did, it is not obvious that the emancipated slaves would have spent a

large fraction of the increase on British goods. In short, if taxpayers
were myopic, then the only short run effect of this policy was to

—58—

relabel certain

investment activities (spending on slaves' food,

clothing, housing) as consumption activities.

The second episode occurred in 1909, when a political deadlock
lead to a one year lapse in the government's authority to collect

certain revenues. This created a deficit equal to 1.5% of trend GNP,
most of which was paid off in the following year. Barro finds no
evidence of abnormally high interest rates over the relevant period.

Yet this is hardly surprising, for two reasons. First, it was evidently
well understood that the revenue shortfall was extremely temporary in

nature. Certainly, no taxpayer could have anticipated significant
intergenerational transfers. Most economists would concede the
plausibility of approximate Ricardian equivalence under such extremely

special circumstances. Second, it is not at all clear that

the

effects

of this policy should have been detectable. Supposing that 20% of the
population was liquidity constrained, one would have expected aggregate

consumption in 1909 to have risen by 0.3% of GNP. Given reasonable
levels of aggregate noise, it would be difficult to distinguish between
the presence or absence of this effect using data on consumption, let
alone from interest rates.

4.3.2. Other variables
A small number of studies have examined the link between deficits
and exchange rates (Hooper [1985], Hutchinson and Throop [1985], Evans

[1986d], Feldstein [1986c]). Conventional reasoning holds that, by
raising domestic interest rates, deficits lead to inflows of foreign

capital. International account belance requires offsetting inflows of

—59—

goods.

Accordingly, the value of the domestic currency must rise in

order to stimulate imports and discourage exports.

Empirical evidence on this point is mixed, with Feldstein and

Evans bracketting the available estimates. This is hardly surprising:
since

the link between interest rates and exchange rates has nothing to

do with Ricardian equivalence, analysis of exchange rates merely adds a

layer of noise to the interest rate relationship. Accordingly, when
Feldstein

uses the same methodology as in his interest rate study, he

reaches the same conclusions (similarly for Evans). If anything,
estimation of exchange rate relationships is more problemmatic, in that
one must work with relatively little data (the U.S. floated the dollar
in 1973), and worry about a larger number of explanatory variables
(those describing the economic environment of each trading partner).

Papers by Dwyer [1982], King and Plosser [1985], and Protopapadakis
and Siegel [1984] study the relationship between deficits and inflation.
According to standard theory, deficits should accelerate inflation by

stimulating aggregate demand. Prior to the 1980's, there was indeed a
high correlation between deficits and inflation in the U.S. However,
this correlation was largely spurious, since constant real deficits
imply higher nominal deficits during inflationary periods (see Dwyer).

While studies tend to find little or no effect of real deficits on
inflation, most of the criticisms raised in the context of interest
rates are applicable.

Finally, Evans [1985] and Barth, Iden, and Russek [1984—85]

estimate money demand equations. Evans focuses on World War II, during

-60—

which Treasury bill rates were pegged, and finds no evidence to support
the

traditional view; Barth Iden, and Russek modify a money demand

equation originally estimated by Hafer and Hem [1984] by including a

measure of deficits, and find that
stimulates
above,

borrowing significantly
most of the problems discussed

government

money demand. In addition to

these studies may also confound supply and demand effects.

Furthermore, since the real stock of money depends upon the price level,

estimates also reflect the link between deficits and inflation.

4.4.

Snry

While attempts to measure the effects of deficits directly may
well face insuperable difficulties, they do supply one more piece of the

overall picture. A succession of studies have established the existence
of a robust short run relationship between deficits and aggregate

consumption. While there are many potential explanations for this

it is at very least consistent with the traditional Keynesian
Results for interest rates are mixed, and considerably more

pattern,
view.

difficult to interpret. Thus, while time series evidence weighs against
Ricardian equivalence, it does not by itself tip the scales. However,
in

the context of theoretical reasoning and behavioral analyses, a

coherent picture emerges in which the Ricardian outcome appears

relatively unlikely.
Recent experience confirms this evaluation: during the 80's,

deficits and interest rates rose dramatically, while savings rates
plumetted (see Poterba and Summers [1986] or Feldstein [1986b] for

discussions). This period was relatively unique in U.S.

history,

in

—61—

that large
temporary

deficits resulted from declines in net revenue, rather than

increases in government spending, so that

it presents us with

a fairly clean experiment. This interpretation of the 80's is, of
course,

controversial, and formal statistical analyses have produced

conflicting
{

1986b]).

results (compare Evans [1985, 1986b] with Feldstein

One key issue in this controversy concerns timing: when

exactly

did taxpayers begin to anticipate large deficits? I

believe

that changes in expectations were approximately coincident with

tend to

movements in interest rates and savings (indeed, more recently real

interest rates and deficit projections have fallen together, although
the

direction of causality is perhaps not clear). Since this issue is

extremely difficult to resolve, we are likely to learn more from longer

term movements in deficits, than from very short term movements. I am
therefore particularly struck by the comparison of the 80's with earlier

periods. There is no question whatsoever that expected deficits,
interest rates, and consumption have all on average been significantly

since 1982 than

higher

conceivably
comparison

5.

in, for example, the 70's. While this is

attributable to spurious factors

(see subsection 4.2), the

is highly suggestive.

Direct Evidence:

International Comparisons

As an alternative to

analyzing time

series

data for individual

countries, one could also measure the effects of government borrowing

through international comparisons. This approach offers certain natural
advantages.

First, there is much more independent movement of deficits

—62—

arid government

spending across countries, than there is within

countries. Second, by averaging over substantial periods of time, one
can hope to measure the more permanent components of each variable, and
thereby minimize problems arising from the informational and

expectational issues discussed in section 4.1. In addition, results
based on multiperiod averages may provide some clue as to the long run

effects of sustained deficits. Finally, if one is willing to forego
multi—year averages and pool time—series cross—section data, one can
greatly expand the number of available observations.

On the other hand, cross—country comparisons hardly provide a

panacea. Many of the issues described in section 4
to

apply

equally well

international data. In addition, several problems become much more

serious. First, the relevant variables may
mismeasured

differently) in

be measured differently (or

different countries.Z/ Second, countries

differ structurally in terms of institutions, and the population of each

country may behave somewhat idiosynchratically. Third, deficits may
move for reasons unrelated to the Ricardian hypothesis (e.g. shocks to

oil prices)...! Finally, practical considerations may seriously limit the
number of observations available for analysis.

It is difficult to weigh the relative importance of these

advantages and disadvantages a priori. Evidence from cross—country
comparisons is therefore neither definitive nor irrelevant——it simply
adds one more piece to the overall picture.

—63—

5.1. SocIal

Security

To date, relatively few studies have used data from international
cross—sections to address issues raised in the Ricardian debate. Almost
all of the existing work, including papers by Feldstein [1977, 1980],
Barro and MacDonald [1979], Kopitz and Gotur [1979], and Modigliani and

Sterling [1983], analyzes the effect of social security on private

saving or consumption. Generally, these studies describe regressions of
saving or expenditure on age distribution variables, retirement

variables, income growth, and a measure of social security benefits or
entitlements

In attempting to reconcile the mixed findings that emerge from
these studies, Modigliani and Sterling point out that social security
has an indirect effect on saving through its impact on retirement.
Furthermore, this works to offset the direct effect.

and

Since Feldstein

Modigliafli--Sterling control for retirement, they tend to

find a

relationship between social security and spending, while Barro—
MacDonald and Kopitz—Gotur, who fail to control for retirement, find

positive

no relationship. Under this view, social security has little
effect on aggregate capital accumulation, but for reasons entirely

little

or

unrelated
only

to Ricardian equivalence. However, this explanation provides

a partial reconciliation of the existing results,

in that neither

Given
Barro—MacDoflald'S nor Modigliani—Sterlifl&s findings are robust.

the

difficulty of measuring social security wealth, particularly in a

way that is comparable across countries, and given the degree of

uncertainty involved in selecting a specification that adequately allows

—64—

for various socio—economic and demographic differences between
countries, sensitivity to variable definitions and changes in functional

specification is

extremely disturbing. The evidence simply does not

justify any strong inferences.

5.2. Deficits
In

this section, I present new evidence on the relationship

between government borrowing and private consumption. The novel aspect
of my analysis is that it is

rather

based upon international comparisons,

than aggregate time series. Work in progress by Modigliani,

Mason, and Sterling [1986] also tests the Ricardian hypothesis with

cross—country data. Their preliminary results, based upon an
alternative specification and substantially different sample,
corroborate my findings.

The specifications estimated below are based upon equation (2),

which I modify in the following ways. First, I drop the intercept term
(i.e. assume that utility is homethetic), and divide both sides of the

equation by Y to adjust for heteroskedasticity. This obviates the
need to convert quantities to per capita figures, or to a common

currency through exchange rates. Second, due to the lack of data, I

omit W from the equation entirelyi9! Third, I add measures of real
income growth (YG) and population growth (PG). These variables may
capture at least some of the socio—economic factors that create

international variation in propensities to consume. My final empirical
specification is therefore:

—65—

dY =

(3)

+

+ 3G/Y

+

+

+ 7PG

+

(where DEF is the deficit).
I estimate equation (3) using data obtained from the IMF's

International Financial Statistics. I measure the

variable

Y as gross

domestic product, C as private consumption expenditure, D as total

outstanding

government debt41i and G as current government consumption,

which is calculated in the manner prescribed by the United Nation's
system

of Standard National Accounts4/ I use two different measures

of

One is the current net deficit (surplus) of the consolidated
central government. For the other measure, I adjust the current deficit

DEF.

for

inflationary erosion of the real value of outstanding government

debt. I label this second measure ADEF. I measure YG as the log of the
ratio of current to lagged real GDP; similarly, PG is the log of the
ratio

of current to lagged population.

Data quality is a

severe problem. Many

of the governmental

variables for International Financial Statistics are evidently
constructed internally by the IMF, and are considered highly

unreliable.

Accordingly, one should think of this exercise as a

suggestive exploration. However, one should also bear in mind that
errors in measuring of the fiscal variables should bias my findings in
favor of the Ricardian hypothesis.

For many countries, one or more critical variables are

simply

unavailable. In other cases, data are missing in particular years. The

most

troublesome variable is outstanding government debt; the

availability of this variable largely dictates sample selection. I

—66—

found that by

focusing on the twelve year period from 1972 to 1983, I

could assemble a relatively

complete data set

large

The sizes of the

sample of countries.

upon whether or not I insist on including

D

based on a reasonably

sample used

information on

depend

in the empirical specifi-

cation. While the total sample consists of 39
adequate

below

countries4/

only 26 have

government debt.

an effort to identify robust empirical relationships, I have
analyzed these data in a number of different ways. The first approach
In

is to take twelve year averages for each country, and run simple cross—

regressions. The primary advantage of this approach is that

sectional
it

allows me to relate

long

run

levels

of the explanatory variables to

consumption. Transitory movements,

long run

private

spurious

information or alter expectations in unknown ways, become

significantly

less important. As mentioned above, data on certain

countries is not quite complete. In such
years

which may carry

cases, I base averages

on the

for which all relevant variables are available. This may

introduce a small amount of heteroskedasticity.
Table 2 contains the results of simple cross—sectional

regressions. Equation 2.1 corresponds to the basic empirical
specification,

deficits.

where DEF (unadjusted)

is used

as a measure of government

Note that the coefficient of deficits is extremely large, and

in fact exceeds the marginal propensity to consume. Although this
coefficient is not estimated very precisely, it does differ from zero at

the 10% level of confidence. Note also that the coefficient of debt is
negative. However, all interesting hypotheses essentially lie within

Table 2: Regression Results for Twelve Year Averages

Equation Number
Variable

2.1

Intercept

DEF

0.802
(0.055)

1.27
(0.69)

2.2
0.737
(0.040)

—1.28
(0.26)

YG

—0.047
(0.675)

pG

—0.686

(1.10)
D

(0.059)

1.16
(0.64)

1.50
(0.55)

—0.906
(0.198)

—1.41
(0.29)

—1.44

—0.318
(0.514)

—0.464

—0.553

(0.750)

(0.746)

0.783
(0.934)

—0.112

—0.04

0.847

0.700
(0.244)

(1.14)

(0.29)

(1.14)

0.080

—0.074

(0.127)
Number of
Countries

2.4

0.822
(0.064)

ADEF

CR

2.3

(0.078)

26

39

0.634

0.464

26

0.609

26

0.589

—67—

one standard deviation of the point estimate. The marginal propensity
to consume from income is both reasonable (0.8) and precisely

estimated. The estimates also suggest that government spending is a
substitute for private consumption, in that a one dollar increase in

tax—financed spending causes consumption to fall by $1.28. The
coefficients of both YG and PG are insignificant.

The large standard error on the coefficient of debt suggests that
the data may not be able to distinguish between interesting hypotheses

on the basis of wealth effects. I therefore reestimate the basic
specification, omitting D (note that this does not bias the remaining

coefficients under the Ricardian view). This allows me to use the full
sample of 39

countries.

Results are given in equation 2.2. There are

two noteworthy changes. First, the deficit coefficient is essentially

the same as the marginal propensity to consume from income. In
addition, it is estimated much more precisely, and differs from zero at

extremely high levels of confidence. Second, the coefficient of G moves
towards the marginal propensity to consume, so that one cannot rule out
the possibility that utility is separable in public and private
consumption.

Equations 2.3 and 2.4 provide similar estimates based upon

inflation—adjusted deficits (ADEF). Estimates of the basic specification look essentially unchanged, except that the coefficient of D now

has the expected sign (it is still insignificant). The omission of D

raises the coefficient of ADEF, as well its precision. While the
estimated coefficient is unreasonably large, sensible values lie within

—68--

two

standard deviations of the point estimate.
Results based upon simple cross—sectional estimates are clearly

suspect. A parsimonious regression cannot possibly capture the richness
of socio—economic factors that create variation in saving rates across

countries. Unobserved factors that are correlated with private
extravagence

(high levels of consumption) may also be associated with

public extravagence (large deficits); this nay in part explain the very

large deficit coefficients in Table 2. Differences in accounting
practices nay also nake international comparisons of deficit levels
problematic.

-

To address these considerations, I divide the 12 year sample into
two distinct six year subperiods (1972 to 1977 and 1978 to 1983), and
analyze the relationship between changes in consumption and changes in

deficits. Since this amounts to allowing for country—specific
differences in the propensity to consume out of income (i.e. fixed
effects), it should minimize biases arising from unobserved socio-

economic differences. In addition, fixed effects estimation eliminates
many problems arising from systematic differences between accounting
techniques,

their

since results depend upon changes in variables, rather than

absolute levels.

To implement this second approach, it is necessary to apply a
somewhat more demanding sample selection criterion, in that one needs

enough data to calculate a reliable average for each six year

subperiod. Accordingly, I was forced to drop three countries. All of
the remaining estimates are based upon a sample of 23 countries.

—69—

It

is possible to get a feel for general patterns by looking at

the data in a relatively unprocessed form. I refer the reader to Table
3.

For

each country, I list the change

in

private consumption, the

change in deficits, and the change in adjusted deficits between the two

six year subperiods. All values are expressed relative to concurrent

GDP. My discussion of this table will focus on adjusted deficits, but
similar conclusions follow for the unadjusted deficit variable.

Note first that for roughly two—thirds of the sample (15 of 23
countries), deficits and consumption moved in the same direction between

the two six year subperiods. This correlation is stronger in cases

where the change in deficits was large. 16 countries experienced a
change in excess of 1% of GNP; in 11 cases, deficits and consumption

moved in the same direction. Confining attention to cases in which the
change in consumption was also large (greater than 1% of GDP), we see

deficits

that
focus

and consumption moved together in 9

of

11 cases. If we

on countries experiencing a change in average deficits exceeding

2% of GDP, the comparable numbers are 9 of 13, and 7 of 9 countries,

respectively.

By restricting attention to those countries experiencing

very large changes (more than 3% of GDP), we find that consumption and

deficits moved together in 6 of 7 cases. Finally, deficits and
consumption moved in the same direction for every country (4

experiencing

of

4)

both a very large change in deficits (greater than 3%) and

a significant change in consumption (greater than 1%). Note that while
the

U.S.

experience is consistent with this pattern, it is by no means

egregious. In fact, given my choice of subperiods, the change in U.S.

Table 3: Changes Between Six Year Subperiods

Country

tC

DEF

Belgium

0.037

0.053

0.057

Canada

—0.002

0.018

0.016

Costa Rica

—0.058

0.015

—0.020

0.031

0.043

0.034

—0.005

0.023

0.020

France

0.025

0.015

0.008

Germany

0.014

0.008

0.006

Guatama].a

0.025

0.022

0.025

Iceland

—0.024

—0.021

—0.071

India

—0.026

0.023

0.021

Italy

—0.004

—0.002

—0.030

Korea

—0.049

0.002

0.007

Morocco

—0.017

0.020

0.005

New Zealand

—0.015

0.020

0.006

Norway

—0.037

—0.014

—0.025

South Africa

—0.031

—0.009

—0.012

Spain

0.010

0.036

0.032

Sri Lanka

0.008

0.078

0.059

—0.007

0.065

0.059

0.024

0.003

0.001

—0.011

0.016

0.020

United States

0.009

0.011

0.008

Venezuela

0.093

0.023

0.010

El Salvador
Finland

Sweden
Switzerland

Thailand

ADEF

—70—

deficits was not even particularly large.

While the relationship between deficits and consumption is

apparent

in the raw

numbers,

nor be certain that

data, one cannot measure it by inspection of the
it

does not reflect spurious correlations.

Accordingly, I regress the change in private consumption on the changes
in each

of the dependent variables. Table 4 contains results.

Equations 4.1 to 4.4 correspond

emerge.

exactly to 2.1 to 2.4. Several patterns

First, the deficit coefficients are much

indicating

smaller, generally

that a $1 deficit—for—taxes swap would raise consumption by

$0.30 to $0.50. This confirms the view that unobserved factors are
correlated with public and private extravagence, and that this biases

simple cross—sectional regressions. However, the estimated effect is

still quite sizable. Unfortunately, the coefficients are not
statistically significant at conventional levels when debt is included

in the specification. While the coefficient of debt is now positive
regardless of whether uses adjusted or unadjusted deficits, it is still

not significantly different from zero. Exclusion of the debt variable

causes

the deficit coefficient to become significant at high levels of

confidence. Note also that the coefficients of government consumption
are now consistent with the view that utility is separable, or perhaps
even exhibits some complementarity between government and private
consumption.

As a next step, I modified equations 4.1 through 4.4 by moving
consumption in the first subperiod (lagged consumption, LC) from the
left to the right hand sides (i.e., I regressed consumption on changes

0.075
(0.050)
0.077
(0.052)

C

C

4.7

4.8

0.674
(0.266)

0.082

C

4.6

(0.052)

C

4.5
(0.053)

—0.509
(0.389)

0.542
(0.211)

—0.605
(0.294)

(0.289)

—0.792
(1.50)

—1.03
(1.46)

—0.530
(0.415)

(1.50)

—0.87

(1.51)

0.143
(0.097)

0.859
(0.083)

0.853
(0.080)

0.844
(0.085)

0.907

0.918

0.906

0.912

0.848
(0.085)

0.418

0.341

0.381

—1.12

0.116
(0.112)

LC

0.361

0.134
(0.104)

(0.119)

0.126

AD

—1.74
(1.46)

(0.293)

—0.577

—0.506
(0.300)

—0.444
(0.293)

—0.768

(0.388)

—0.637

—0.823
(0.427)

—0.492
(0.409)

—1.99
(1.45)

—0.367

—0.733
(0.443)
(0.293)

—1.89
(1.48)

—0.403
(0.294)

—0.593
(0.412)

—2.24
(1.49)

(0.301)

—0.331

PG

(0.453)

—0.796

AYG

0.426
(0.218)

—0.010
(0.010)

4.4

0.500
(0.316)

0.442
(0.213)

—0.015
(0.011)

4.3

0.077

0.329
(0.226)

0.505
(0.265)

—0.013
(0.011)

AC

4.2

4.1
(0.319)

AADEF

(0.011)

ADEF

0.316

Variable

Number

Intercept

Regression Results for Movements in Six Year Averages

—0.015

Dependent

Equation

Table 4:

—71—

in the explanatory variables, and lagged consumption). I interpret the

resulting specifications as Euler equations. While changes in
explanatory variables between consecutive years certainly do not reflect
innovations, it is more reasonable to expect that changes in six year

avenges might approximate innovations to long—run levels. The
regression results are quite encouraging. The size of the deficit
coefficient increases in all specifications, and is generally

statistically significant at high levels of confidence. In addition,
when I use adjusted deficits, the t—statistic for debt rises to 1.5,

which is marginally significant. It is also noteworthy that a
regression of current consumption on lagged consumption and all lagged

explanatory

variables suggested that the

hypothesis'

orthogonality

stochastic permanent income

condition is satisfied——the F—statistic for

the hypothesis that all coefficients for lagged explanatory variables
equal zero was 1.0.

By avenging over six year subperiods, one can examine the
relationships between movements in different variables without

sacrificing the advantages of using "long run" measures. As a final
step, I also estimated regressions based on pooled, single year, time

series cross—section data. Results are presented in Table 5. I will
begin with equation 5.1 through 5.4, which do not contain country

specific intercepts. While these estimates bear a strong resemblance to
those obtained

from 12 year averages, there are also some important

differences. The coefficients of deficits are large, but unlike those
in

Table 2, not "too" large. In fact, the marginal propensities to

0.794
(0.017)

0.794
(0.016)

0.805
(0.017)

0.833
(0.016)

country
specific

country
specific

country
specific

country
specific

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.8

Number

Intercept

Equation

—0.512
(0.240)
—0.427
(0.229)

—0.102
(0.047)
—0.202
(0.047)
—0.229

—0.329
(0.115)

(0.114)

—0.395
(0.114)
—0.317
(0.111)

0.431
(0.086)

(0.055)

0.382

(0.056)

—0.566
(0.234)

—0.415
(0.238)

—0.085
(0.046)

—1.30
(0.084)

0.756
(0.104)

(0.048)

(0.328)

—0.426
(0.093)

—1.28
(0.082)

(0.109)

(0.094)

0.370

—0.230

—0.367
(0.092)

(0.082)

—0.309

0.141
(0.320)

—0.216
(0.091)

—1.23

0.743

0.445
(0.075)

—0.153
(0.324)

(0.092)

(0.083)

(0.159)

PG

—0.145
(0.326)

YG

Results for Panel Data

—0218

G

Regression

—1.23

0.586

ADEF

5:

0.721

PEP

Table

0.059
(0.024)

(0.028)

0.029

0.084
(0.020)

(0.032)

0.005

D

0.919

0.924

0.915

0.919

0.532

0.560

0.546

0.546

—72—

consume from deficits and income are
of four

cases.

Standard

errors

almost

indestinguishable in three

in Table 5 are also much lower, owing to

the relative size of the data sample. As before, government spending

appears to be substitutable for private consumption. The debt
coefficient is positive in both 5.1 and 5.3; note
statistically

significant and

that it

is

of a reasonable magnitude in 5.3.

The inclusion of country specific intercepts somewhat alters this

picture.
those

Not surprisingly, these estimates bear a strong resemblance to

based on changes between six year subperiods. Deficits now appear

to stimulate consumption by about $0.40 On the dollar, rather than

$0.70. Once again, this effect is estimated very presicely.
coefficient

The

of government spending now suggests significant complemen—

tarity with private consumption. Finally, the debt coefficient is
positive in both 5.5 and 5.7; it is statistically significant and of a
reasonable magnitude in 5.7.
Two

remarks are in order. First, these results are very strongly

pro—Keynesian and anti—Ricardian. Equation 5.7 is, in some sense, the

preferred specification, in that it

includes

country—specific

intercepts, employs a superior measure of deficits, and retains the debt
variable. This equation suggests that a $1 deficit—for—taxes swap will
increase consumption by about $0.57, and that $1 of debt raises
consumption
Second,

by $0.06. Both effects are estimated quite precisely.

the robustness of these results across specifications and

estimation techniques is striking. It is particularly interesting to
note the similarity of results based upon yearly data, and multi—year

—73—

averages.

This suggests that one does not significantly contaminate the

estimates with transitory effects by making use of yearly variation.
However, one does obtain an enormous increase in the precision of the
estimates.

One additional puzzle merits some discussion. Throughout this
analysis, I have with few exceptions estimated the coefficient of income
growth to be negative, whereas standard life cycle theory suggests that

it should be positive. While the effect is not generally significant,
it

requires

confusion

some explanation. It is possible that

this

pattern reflects

of cause and effect: extravagent countries may sacrifice

growth for current consumption.

My findings are generally consistent with those of Modigliani,
Mason, and Sterling [1986]. This is particularly striking in light of
the fact that

these

authors use a different sample and empirical

specification. Although they also employ data from the IMF's
International Financial Statistics, they focus on the period from 1960

to 1980, and use a somewhat different set of countries. Since data on
outstanding debt has only recently become available for many countries,
they

lack a direct measure of debt, and their attempts to construct a

substitute measure are generally unsuccessful. However, by sacrificing
the debt variable, they are able to make use of a much large sample.
Overall,

analysis of cross—country data supports the view that

government deficits stimulate private consumption. The robustness of
this conclusion with respect to alternative specifications, estimation
techniques, and samples is quite striking.

—74—

References
Abel, Andrew B. [1985a], "Gifts and Bequests: Comment and Extension,"
mimeo, Harvard University.

Abel, Andrew B. [1985b], "Precautionary Saving and Accidental Bequests,"
American Economic Review 75, 777—791.
Abel, Andrew B. [1986], "The Failure of Ricardian Equivalence Under
Progressive Wealth Taxation," NBER Working Paper No. 1983.

Abel, Andrew and B. Douglas Bernheim [1986], "Fiscal Policy with Impure
Intergenerational Altruism," minieo, Stanford University.

Adams, James D. [1978], "Equalization of True Gift and Estate Tax
Rates," Journal of Public Economics 9, 59—71.

Adams, James D. [1980], "Personal Wealth Transfers," Quarterly Journal
of Economics 95, 159—79.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini [1987], "A Positive Theory of
Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt in a Democracy," mimeo,
Carnegie—Mellon University.

Andreoni, James FL [1986a], "Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large

Economy: The Limits of Altruism," mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
Andreoni, James R. [1986b], "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public
Goods: A Theory of 'Warm—Glow' Giving," mirneo, University of
Wisconsin.
Aschauer, David A. [1985], "Fiscal Policy and Aggregate Demand,"
American Economic Review 75, 117—127.

Atkinson, Anthony B. [1971], "The Distribution of Wealth and The
Individual Life Cycle," Oxford Economic Papers 23, 239—54.

—75—

Atkinson,

A. B. and A. J. Harrison [1976], Distribution of Personal

Wealth in Brittain, Cambridge.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff [1983], "An Examination of
Empirical Tests of Social Security and Savings," in Social Policy

Evaluation: An Economic Perspective, ed. by Elhanan Helpman and
others, New York and London: Academic Press, 161—179.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff [1986], Dynamic Fiscal
Policy, manuscript.

Barsky, Robert B., N. Gregory Mankiw, and Stephen P. Zeldes [1986],
"Ricardian Consumers with Keynesian Propensities," American
Economic Review 76, 676—691.

Barro, Robert J. [1974], "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of
Political Economy 81, 1095—1117.
Barro, Robert J. [1976], "Reply to Feldsteiri and Buchanan," Journal of
Political Economy 84, 343—350.

Barro, Robert J. [1978], The Impact of Social Security on Private

Saving, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.
Barro, Robert J. [19791, "On the Determination of the Public Debt,"
Journal of Political Economy 87, 940—71.
Barro,

Robert J.
niimeo,

University of Rochester.

Barro, Robert J.
and

[1985], "On Patterns of Interpersonal Transfers,"

[1986],

"Government Spending, Interest

Rates,

Prices,

Budget Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1701—1918," mimeo,

University of Rochester.

I

—76—

Barro, Robert J. and

Glenn M. MacDonald [1979], "Social Security and

Consumer Spending in an International Cross Section," Journal of
Public Economics 11, 275—89.

Barth, James R., George Iden, and Frank S. Russek [1984—85], "Do Federal
Devisits Really Matter?"

Contemporary

Barth, James R., George Iden, and Frank
Debt,

Russek [1986], "Government

Government Spending, and Private Sector Behavior: Comment,"

American Economic

Becker,

S.

Policy Issues 3, 79—95.

Gary [1974],

Political

Review 76, 1158—1167.

"A Theory of Social Interactions," Journal of

Economy 82, 1063—1094.

Becker, Gary [1981], A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press.

Becker, Gary and Robert Barro [1985], "A Reformulation of the Economic
Theory of Fertility," mimeo, University of Chicago.
Ben—Porath, Yoram

[1978],

"The F—Connection: Families, Friends, and

Firms, and the Organization of Exchange," Report No. 29/78,

Jerusalem: Hebrew University, Institute for Advanced Studies.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. [1986], "A Fresh Look

at the Rotten Kid Theorem——

arid Other Household Mysteries," mimeo, University of Michigan.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., Lawrence E. Blume, and Hal Varian [1986], "On
the Private Provision of Public Goods," Journal of Public
Economics 29, 25—49.

Bernheim, B. Douglas [1985], "Life Insurance, Annuities, and Bequests,"
mimeo, Stanford University.

—77—

Bernheim, B. Douglas [1986], "Intergenerational Altruism and Social
Welfare," mimeo, Stanford University.

Bernheim, B. Douglas [1987a], "Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the
Pure

Life

Cycle Hypothesis," in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven and D. Wise,

eds., Issues in Pension Economics, Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.

Bernheim, B. Douglas {1987b], "Social Security Benefits: An Empirical
Study of Expectations and Realizations," in E. Lazear and R.
Ricardo—Campbell, eds., Issues in Contemporary Retirement, Hoover
Institution (forthcoming).

Bernheim, B. Douglas [1987c], "The Economic Effects of Social

Security: Towards a Reconciliation of Theory and Measurement,"
Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Kyle Bagwell [1986], "Is Everything Neutral?"
Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrel Shleifer, and Lawrence Summers [1985], "The
Strategic Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy 93,
1045—1 076.

Blanchard, Olivier J. [1985], "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,"
Journal of Political Economy 93, 223—247.

Blinder, Allan S. [1974], Toward an Economic Theory of Income
Distribution, Cambridge, Mass:

MIT Press.

Blinder, Allan S. and Robert M. Solow [1973], "Does Fiscal Policy
Matter?" Journal of Public Economics 2, 319—37.

—78—

Blinder, A., R. Gordon, and D. Wise [1981], "Social Security, Bequests

and The Life Cycle Theory of Saving: Cross—Sectional Tests," NBER
Working Paper No. 619.

Bohn, Henning [1985], "Debt Policy and Endogenous Government
Expenditure," mimeo, Stanford University.

Boskin, Michael J. [1982], "Federal Government Deficits: Some Myths and
Realities," American Economic Review 72, 296—303.

Boskin, Michael J. [1986], "Concepts and Measures of Federal Deficits
and Debt and Their Impact on Economic Activity," mimeo, Stanford
University.

Boskin, Michael J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff [1985], "Public Debt and

United States

Saving:

A New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis,"

Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 23, 55—86.

Brittain, John [1978], Inheritance and the Inequality of Material

Wealth, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Buchanan, J. M. and R. Wagner [1977], Democracy in Deficit: The
Political Legacy of Lord Keynes, Academic Press: New York.
Buiter, Willem H. [1979], "Government Finance in an Overlapping—
Generations Model with with Gifts and Bequests," in George M. von
Furstenberg, ed., Social Security versus Private Saving,

Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 395—429.
Buiter, Willem and Jeffrey Carmichael [1984], "Government Debt:
Comment," American Economic Review 74, 762—765.

-79—

Buiter,

Willem H. and James Tobin [1979], "Debt Neutrality: A Brief

Review of Doctrine and Evidence," in George M. von Furstenberg,
ed., Social Security versus Private Saving, Cambridge, Mass.:
Ballinger.

Burbidge, John B. [1983], "Government Debt in an Overlapping—Generations
Model with Bequests and Gifts," American Economic Review 73, 222—
227.

Burbidge, John B. [1984], "Government Debt: Reply," American Economic
Review 74, 766—767.

Carmichael,

Jeffrey [1982], "On Barro's Theorem of Debt Neutrality: The

Irrelevance of Net Wealth," American Economic Review 72, 202—213.

Chan, Louis K. C. [1983], "Uncertainty and the Neutrality of Government
Financing Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 11, 351—372.
Congressional Budget Office [1987], The Economic and Budget Outlook:

Fiscal Years 1988—1992, Part I, Washington D.C.: Government
Printing Office.

"Consumer Confidence Was Strong In April," Wall Street Journal, May 8,
1984, p. 17.

Cooper, George [1979], A Voluntary Tax? New Perspectives on
Sophisticated Estate Tax Avoidance, Washington D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Cox, Donald [1987], "Motives for Private Income Transfers," Journal of
Political Economy 95, 508—546.

—80—

Darby, Michael R. [1979], The Effects of Social Security on Income and
the Capital Stock, Washington D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute.

Davies, James B. [1981], "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving
in Retirement," Journal of Political Economy 89, 561—77.

Diamond, Peter A. [1965], "National Debt and Neoclassical Economic
Growth," American Economic Review, 55, 1125—50.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman [1984], "Individual Retirement
and Savings Behavior," Journal of Public Economics 23, 81—114.
Dicks—Mireaux, Louis and Mervyn King [1984], "Pension Wealth and

Household Savings: Tests of Robustress," Journal of Public
Economics.

Drazen, Allan [1978], "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a
Life Cycle Model," Journal of Political Economy 86, 505—516.
Dwyer, Gerald

P.

[1982], "Inflation and Government Deficits," Economic

Inquiry 20, 315—329.

Eisner, Robert [1986], How Real Is the Federal Deficit? New York: The
Free Press.

Eisner, Robert and Paul J. Pieper [1984], "A New View of the Federal
Debt and Budget Deficits," American Economic Review 74, 11—29.

Eisner, Robert and Paul J. Pieper [1986], "Deficits, Monetary Policy and
Real Economic Activity," mimeo, Northwestern University.
Evans, Paul [1985], "Do Large Deficits Produce High Interest Rates?"
American Economic Review 75, 68—87.

-81-

Evans, Paul [1986a], "Do Deficits Raise Nominal Interest Rates?

Evidence

from Six Industrial Countries," mimeo, University of

Houston.

Evans, Paul [1986b], "A Test of Government—Debt Neutrality," mimeo,
University of Houston.

Evans, Paul [19860], "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth? Evidence for the
United States," mimeo, University of Houston.

Evans, Paul [1986d], "Is the Dollar High Because of Large Budget
Deficits?" Journal of Monetary Economics 18, 227—249.

Evans, Paul [1987], "Interest Rates

and Expected Future Budget Deficits

in the United States," Journal of Political Economy 95, 34—58.

Feldstein,

Martin S. [1974], "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and

Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy 82,
905—26.

Feldatein, Martin S. [1985], "Debt and Taxes in the Theory of Public
Finance," Journal of Public Economics 28, 233—245.

Feldstein,

Maretin S. [1976], "Perceived Wealth in Bonds and Social

Security: A Comment," Journal of Political Economy 84, 331—36.
Feldstein, Martin S. [1977], "Social Security and Private Saving:

International Evidence in an Extended Life—Cycle Model," in M.
Feldstein and R. Inman, eds., The Economics of Public Service,

London: Macmillan.
Feldstein, Martin S. [1980]. "International Differences in Social
Security and Saving," Journal of Public Economics 14, 225—244.

—82—

Feldstein, Martin S. [1982a], "Government Deficits and Aggregate
Demand," Journal of Monetary Economics 9, 1—20.

Feldstein, Martin S. [1982b], "Social Security and Private

Saving:

Reply," Journal of Political Economy 90, 630—642.

Feldstein, Martin S. [1986a], "The Effects of Fiscal Policies When

Incomes Are Uncertain: A Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence,"
NBER Working Paper No. 2062.

Feldstein, Martin S. [198Gb], "Budget Deficits, Tax Rules, and Real
Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper No. 1970.

Feldstein, Martin S. [1986c], "The Budget Deficit and the Dollar," NBER
Working Paper No. 1898.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Charles Y. Horioka [1980], "Domestic Saving and
International

Capital Flows," Economic Journal 90, 314—29.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Anthony Pellechio [1979], "Social Security and
Household Wealth Accumulation:

New Microeconometric Evidence,"

Review of Economics and Statistics 61, 361—68.

Ferber, R, et.al. [1969], "Validation of a National Survey of Consumer

Financial Characteristics: Savings Accounts," Review of Economics
and Statistics 51, 436—44.

Flavin, Marjorie A. [1981], "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
Expectations about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy,
89, 974—1009.

Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman [1974], Time on the Cross

Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

—83—

Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshawsky [1985a], "The Cost of

Annuities:

Implications for Saving Behavior," MBER Working Paper

No. 1682
Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshawsky [1985b], "Annuity Prices and
Saving Behavior in the Unites States," NBER Working Paper
No. 1683.

Gale, Douglas [1983], Money in Disequilibrium, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Hafer, R. W. and Scott E. Hem [1984], "Financial Innovations and the
Interest Elasticity of Money Demand: Some Historical Evidence,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 247—252.

Hall, Robert E. [1978], "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle —

Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of
Political Economy 86, 971—987.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Paul L. Menchik [1986], "Planned and Unplanned
Bequests," mimeo, Michigan State University.

Harberger, Arnold C. [1978], "Perspectives on Capital and Technology in
Less Developed Countries," in N. J. Artis and A. R. Nobay, eds.,
Contemporary Economic Analysis, London.
Hayashi, Fumio [1985], "Tests for Liquidity Constraints:

A Critical

Survey," NBER Working Paper No. 1720.

Hooper, P. [1985], "International Repercussions of the U.S. Budget
Deficit," Brookings Discussion Paper No. 27.

Horioka, Charles Y. [1983], "The Applicability of the Life Cycle Model
of Savings to Japan," mimeo, Kyoto University.

—84—

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Kenneth L. Judd [1986a], "Liquidity Constraints,
Fiscal Policy, and Consumption," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (1: 1986), 1—50.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Kenneth L. Judd [1986b], "Finite

Lifetimes,

Borrowing Constraits, and Short—run Fiscal Policy," rnimeo,

Northwestern University.

Hurd, Michael D. [1986a], "Savings and Bequests," NBER Working Paper
No. 1826.

Hurd, Michael D. [1986b], work in progress.
Hutchinson, M. and A. Throop [1985], "U.S. Budget Deficits and the Real
Value of the Dollar," Economic Review of the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, Fall 1985.

Jaffee, Dwight M. and Thons Russell [1976], "Imperfect Information,
Uncertainty, and Credit Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics
4, 651—666.

Kimball, Miles J. [1986], "Making Sense of Two—sided Altruism, mimeo,
Harvard University.

King, Mervyn A. [1983], "The Economics of Saving," NBER Working Paper
No. 1247.

King, Mervyn A. [1984], "Tax Policy and the Business Cycle," mimeo,
M.I.T.

King, Mervyri A. and Don Fullerton [1984], The Taxation of Income from

Capital," Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
King, Mervyn A. and Louis—D.L. Dicks—Mireaux [1982], "Asset Holdings and
the Life—Cycle," Economic Journal 92, 247—67.

—85—

King, Robert G. and Charles I. Plosser [1985], "Money, Deficits, and
Inflation," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
22, 147—196.

Kingston, Geoffrey H. [1984], "Efficient Timing of Income Taxes,"
Journal of Public Economics 24, 271—280.

Kingston, Geoffrey H. [1986], "On the

'Likely

Superiority' of Tax

Financing of Temporary Increases in Government Spending," mimeo,
London School of Economics.

Kochin, Levis A. [1974], "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers?"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 6, 385—94.

Kormendi, Roger C. [1983], "Government Debt, Government Spending, and
Private Sector Behavior," American Economic Review 73,
pp. 994—1010.

Kormendi, Roger C., Laura L.aHaye, and Philip Meguire [1986], "CrossCountry Evidence on the Effects of Government Spending," mimeo,
University of Michigan.

Kormendi, Roger C. and Philip Meguire [1986], "Government Debt,

Government Spending, and Private Sector Behavior: Reply,"
American Economic Review 76, 1180—1187.
Kopits, G. and P.

Household

Gotur

[1979],

"The Influence

of

Social Security on

Saving: A Cross—country Investigation," mimeo,

International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Affairs Department.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. [1979], "Testing the Theory of

Social

Security

and Life Cycle Accumulation," American Economic Review 69,
396—410.

—86—

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. [1986a], "Is Debt Neutral in the Life Cycle
Model?" mimeo, Boston University.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. [1986b], "Deficit Delusion" mimeo, Boston
University.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. [1986c], "Health Expenditures and Precautionary
Savings," mimeo, Boston University.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Avia Spivak [1981], "The Family as an
Incomplete Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy 89,
372—91.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers [1981], "The Role of
Intergenerational

Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation,"

Journal of Political Economy 89, 706—32.

Kurz, Mordecai [1981], "The Life—Cycle Hypothesis and the Effects of

Social

Security and Private Pensions on Family Savings," IMSSS

Technical Report No. 335.

Kurz,

Mordecai [1984], "Capital Accumulation and the Characteristics

of

Private Intergenerational Transfers," Economica 51, 1—22.
Laitner, John P. [1979], "Bequests, Golden—Age Capital Accumulation and
Government Debt," Economica 46, 403—414.
Leimer,

Dean H.

and Selig D. Lesnoy [1982], "Social

Security and Private

Saving: New Time Series Evidence," Journal of Political Economy
90, 606—629.

Lucas, Robert E. [1976], "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"
in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie—Rochester Conference

Series on Public Policy, Vol. 1, Amsterdam: North Holland.

—87—

Lucas,

Robert E. and Nancy L. Stokey [1983], "Optimal Fiscal and
Monetary Policy in an Economy Without Capital," Journal of
Monetary Economics 12, 55—93.

Lydall,

Harold [1955], "The Life Cycle in Income, Saving, and Asset

Ownership," Econometrica 23, 131—50.

Menchik, Paul L. [1980], "Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the U.S.
Distribution of Wealth," Quarterly Journal of Economics 94,

299—316.
Menchik, Paul L. [1984], "Unequal Estate Division: Is it Altruism,
Reverse Bequests, or Simply Noise?" Econometrics Workshop Paper
No. 8401, Michigan State University.

Menchik, Paul L., F. Owen Irvine, and Nancy A. Jianakoplos [1986],
"Determinants

of Intended Bequests," mimeo, Michigan State

University.
Menchik, Paul L. and Martin David [1983], "Income Distribution, Lifetime
Savings,

Mirer, Thad W.

and Bequests," American Economic Review 73,

[1979], "The Wealth—Age Relationship Among the Aged,"

American Economic Review 69,
Modigliani,

435—43.

Franco [1985], "Measuring the Contribution of

Intergenerational Transfers to Total
and

672-90.

Empirical Findings," paper

Wealth: Conceptual Issues

presented at Modeling the

Accumulation and Distribution of Personal Wealth Seminar,
France

Modigliani,

Paris,

(proceedings forthcoming).
Franco [1986], "Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the

Wealth of Nations," American Economic Review 76, 297—313.

—88—

Modigliani, Franca, A. Mason

and

A. Sterling [1986], "Fiscal Policy,

Inflation, and Private Saving: Evidence from an International
Cross—section," mimeo, MIT (preliminary draft).
Modigliani, Franco and Arlie Sterling [19831,

"Determinants

of Private

Saving with Special Reference to the Role of Social Security——
Cross—country Tests," in F. Mogidliani and R. Hemming, eds., The
Determinants of National Saving and Wealth, Proceedings of a
Conference held by the International Economic Association at
Bergamo, Italy.

Modigliani, Franco, and Arlie Sterling [1986], "Government Debt,

Government Spending, and Private Sector Behavior: Comment,"
American Economic Review 76, 1168—1179.

Mulanaphy, James [1974], Statistical Report: 1972—73

Survey

of Retired

TIAA—CREF Annuitants, New York.

Munnell, Alicia [1974], The Effects of Social Security on Personal

Saving, Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger.???
O'Connell, Steven A. and Stephen P. Zeldes [1986], "Ponzi Game and
Ricardian Equivalence," mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
O'Driscoll, Gerald P. Jr. [1977], "The Ricardian Nonequivalence
Theorem," Journal of Political Economy 85, 207—210.

Plosser, Charles I. [19821, "Government Financing Decisions and Asset
Returns," Journal of Monetary Economics 9, 325—52.

Plosser, Charles I. [1986], "Further Evidence on the Relation Between
Fiscal Policy and the Term Structure," mimeo, University of
Rochester.

—89—

Pogue,

Thomas

F. and L. G. Sgontz

[1977], "Social Security and

Investment in Human Capital,"

National

Tax Journal 30, 157—170.

Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers [1986], "Finite Lifetimes and
the Effects of Budget Deficits on National Savings," mirneo, M.I.T.

Prescott, Edward C. [1977], "Should Control Theory Be Used for Economic
Stabilization?" In K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie—
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 7, 13—35.
Projector, Dorothy [1968], Survey of Changes in Family Finances,

Washington D.C.: Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Projector, Dorothy and Gertrude Weiss [1966], Survey of Financial

Characteristics of Consumers, Washington D.C.: Federal Reserve
Board of Governors.

Protopapadakis, Aris A. and Jeremy J. Siegel [1984], "Government Debt,

Money Supply, and Inflation: Theory and Evidence for Seven
Industrialized Economies," Working Paper No. 84—4, Federal Reserve
Bank, Philadelphia, Pa.

Ray, Debraj [1987], "Nonpaternalistic Intergenerational Altruism,"
Journal of Economic Theory 41, 112—132.

Reid, Bradford G. [1985], "Aggregate Consumption and Deficit
Financing:

An Attempt to Separate Permanent from Transitory

Effects," Economic Inquiry 23,

475—487.

Sargent, Thomas J. [1978], "Rational Expectations, Econometric
Exogeneity and Consumption," Journal of Political Economy 86,
673—700.

—90—

Seater, Jorn J. [1982], "Are Future Taxes Discounted?"

Journal

of Money,

Credit, and Banking 14, 376—389.

Seater, John J. and Robert S. Mariano [1985], "New Tests of the Life
Cycle and Tax Discounting Hypotheses," Journal of Monetary
Economics 15, 196—215.

Shefrin, H. M. and R. Thaler [1985], "Life Cycle Vs. Self—control
Theories of Saving," mimeo.

Eytan and

Sheshinski,

Social

Yoram Weiss [1981], "Uncertainty and Optimal

Security Systems," Quarterly Journal of Economics 96,

189—206.

Shorrocks,

A. F. [1975], "The Age—Wealth Relationship: A Cross—Section

and Cohort Analysis," Review of Economics and Statistics 57, 155—
63.

Shoup, Carl S. [1966], Federal Estate
Brookings

Smith,

and

Gift Taxes, Washington D.C.:

Institution.

James D. [1975], "White Wealth and Black People: The
Distribution of Wealth in Washington D.C. in 1967," in his The
Personal Distritution of Income and Wealth, New York.

Starrett, David A. [1986], "Taxation and Savings," mimeo, Stanford
University.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. [1983], "On the Relevance or Irrelevance

of Public

Financial Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 1057.
Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss [1981], "Credit Rationing in Markets
with Imperfect Information," American Economic Review 71, 393—411.

—91—

Sussman, M. B., J. N. Cates,

and

0. T. Smith [1970], Inheritance and the
-

Family, New Yorki Sage.

Tanner, J. Ernest [1970], "Empirical Evidence on the Short—Run Real
Balance Effect in Canada," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
2, 473—85.

Tanner, J. Ernest [1978], "Fiscal Policy and Consumer Behavior," Review
of Economics and Statistics 61, 317—321.

Tanner, J. Ernest [1979], "An Empirical Investigation of Tax
Discounting," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 11, 214—218.
Tobin, James [1967], "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth," in W.
Fellner et. al., eds., Ten Economic Studies in the Tradition of

Irving Fisher, New York: Wiley and Sons.
Tobin, James and Willem Buiter [1980], "Fiscal and Monetary Policies,
Capital Formation, and Economic Activity," in The Government and
Capital Formation, ed. George M. von Furstenberg, Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger Press.

Tomes, Nigel [1981], "The Family, Inheritance, and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Inequality," Journal of Political Economy 89,
928—58.

Weil, Philippe [1984], "'Love Thy Children': Reflections on the Barro
Debt Neutrality Theorem," mimeo, Harvard University.

Wildasin, David E. [1986], "Non—neutrality of Debt with Endogeneous
Fertility," inimeo, Indiana University.

Yaari, Menahem E. [1965], "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the
Theory of the Consumer," Review of Economic Studies 32, 137—50.

