NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO PAYROLL TAX BREAKS STIMULATE FORMALITY?
EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA’S REFORM
Adriana Kugler
Maurice Kugler
Luis Omar Herrera Prada
Working Paper 23308
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23308

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We are grateful to Mariano Bosch, Matías Busso, Santiago Levy, Carmen Pages, as well as
participants of the workshop organized by the IADB for this project and at the Latin American
and Caribbean Economic Association Conference for their helpful comments. This project was
funded by Labor Markets and Social Security Unit of the Inter-American Development Bank.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Adriana Kugler, Maurice Kugler, and Luis Omar Herrera Prada. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Payroll Tax Breaks Stimulate Formality? Evidence from Colombia’s Reform
Adriana Kugler, Maurice Kugler, and Luis Omar Herrera Prada
NBER Working Paper No. 23308
April 2017
JEL No. H2,J2,J24,J31
ABSTRACT
Alternative work arrangements have grown rapidly around the world. In Latin America, these
alternative work arrangements have long been part of the labor market and have continued to
grow. The informal sector grew rapidly in Latin America over the past few decades comprising
up to half of the working population in many countries. Some attribute the growth in alternative
work arrangements and informality to regulations and taxes, while others argue that it is precisely
the lack of enforcement of regulations that allows unprotected employment arrangements to
flourish. We examine whether reducing taxes associated with employment stimulates formal
sector employment. We exploit the fact that the Tax Reform introduced in Colombia in 2012
affected only certain types of workers and not others. In particular, workers earning less than 10
minimum wages (MW) and self-employed workers with more than 2 employees experienced a
reduction of payroll taxes of 13.5% between 2013 and 2014. We use the Colombian Household
Surveys, Social Security records and the Monthly Manufacturing Sample to conduct differencein-difference analyses of the reform. We find evidence of increased formal employment for the
affected groups after the reform using all three datasets. We find that the probability of formal
employment and the likelihood of transitioning into registered employment increased for the
affected groups after the reform. We also find that the level and share of permanent employment
relative to temp employment grew after the reform for those earnings less than 10 MW. The
results are greatest for those in smaller firms and those earnings close to the MW.
Adriana Kugler
Georgetown University
McCourt School of Public Policy
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu
Maurice Kugler
IMPAQ International LLC
1101 Vermont Avenue NW
Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
mkugler@impaqint.com

Luis Omar Herrera Prada
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
luis.o.herrera@me.com

1.

Introduction
Latin America and other developing regions depend on payroll taxes to finance pensions,

disability and maternity benefits, and worker’s compensation that compensates those with
workplace injuries. In the case of Colombia, payroll taxes are also used to finance the National
Vocational Training Service (Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje, SENA, in Spanish) and the
Colombian Institute for Family Welfare (Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar, ICBF, in
Spanish). Until very recently, mandatory contributions in Colombia were close to the European
median, where the payroll tax rate was about 40 percent (Gill et al., 2005). However, payroll
contributions are much higher compared to countries with relatively less regulated labor markets,
such as the United Kingdom and the United States, where contributions have fluctuated between
15 and 20 percent of total compensation (OECD, 2015).
In Latin America and continental Europe, high payroll taxes increase the labor costs that
companies have to pay, thus discouraging companies from hiring workers. Nonetheless, from a
theoretical perspective, the impact of payroll taxes on the labor market is ambiguous. On one
hand, when workers value the benefits paid for with payroll taxes as much as the amount they
contribute, increases in payroll taxes are fully passed through from companies to employees in
the form of lower salaries, with a neutral effect on unemployment. Consequently, in this case,
companies do not experience increases in their overall labor costs. On the other hand, if wages
are not fully flexible or if payroll taxes fund services that do not directly benefit all employees
(such as SENA or ICBF), then wages would not absorb the total payroll taxes as lower wages
and there would be an increase in labor costs and a reduction in employment.
Empirical studies from various countries show mixed evidence regarding the impact of
payroll taxes on employment and wages. For instance, Gruber and Krueger (1991) and Gruber
2

(1994) find neutral effects on employment in the United States (i.e., full pass-through of taxes
onto wages). Gordon (1972) also finds full pass-through taxes onto wages and no impact on
employment in the United States. Nevertheless, Vroman (1974) and Harmermesh (1979) find
that there is partial pass-through with non-neutral effects on wages and employment. Kaestner
(1996) finds that there is no pass-through from payroll taxes onto wages for young workers in the
United States.
In most Latin American countries, minimum wages are relatively high and constitute a
binding restriction on formal sector employment (see, for example, Maloney et al., 2004). As a
result, in this context, it is not feasible to pass-through higher payroll taxes to employees as
lower wages, so it is more likely that increases in payroll taxes reduce formal employment.
Gruber (1997) finds that a reduction in payroll taxes is completely passed-through to employees
in the form of higher wages, without an impact on employment, in Chile. By contrast, Kugler
and Kugler (2009) find that a 10 percent increase in payroll taxes reduces manufacturing
employment by five percent among the least skilled workers. In this context, the increase in
payroll taxes was not transferred to employees through lower wages. This finding is consistent
with evidence provided by Maloney et al. (2004) that the minimum wage was binding in
Colombia at the time.
In the current study, we explore the effects of the recent drop in the payroll tax rate
associated with the Tax Reform, Law 1607, implemented at the end of 2012. The goal of this
reform was to increase employment and, in particular, formal employment. As a result, in this
study we focus on evaluating the impact of the reform on formal employment. Although the
effects of changes in payroll taxes have already been studied in the Colombian context, it is
important to study the effects of this particular reform for two reasons. First, the effects of
3

changes in payroll taxes are likely to be asymmetric depending on whether there is a hike or a
decline. Due to a binding minimum wage, it is more feasible for a reduction in payroll taxes to be
passed-through to employees as higher wages than for an increase in payroll taxes to be passedthrough to employees as lower wages. On the other hand, changes in the tax rate would have
larger effects on employment if the levied taxes were used to finance services that do not directly
benefit contributors and that, as a result, cannot be passed-through to workers’ wages.
In Colombia, the link between benefits and contributions was relatively weak before the
introduction of Law 1607. This made workers less willing to accept the lower wages offered by
employers in response to increases non-wage labor costs. As Kugler and Kugler (2009) show this
implies that there is less formal employment and, consequently, it becomes harder to find a
formal sector job. Kugler and Kugler (2009) provide evidence that reductions in payroll taxes –
often proposed to stimulate demand for low-wage labor – are an effective measure to reduce
unemployment and informality among young and low-skilled workers, especially if the tax cuts
are focused on indirect benefits (like SENA and ICBF).
The analysis in this paper examines the effects of Law 1607, which reduced payroll taxes
for those with less than 10 minimum wages and for self-employed who hired two employees or
more. These two groups that qualify for payroll tax reductions under the reform. The analysis
exploits the fact that specific groups of employers and employees were affected by the reform to
estimate the impact of the reduction in the payroll tax using a quasi-experimental evaluation
design. The analysis consists of comparisons of the following two pairs of groups: (i) workers
with fewer and more than 10 minimum wages, before and after the reform; and (ii) selfemployed workers with two or more employees, and others who either are not self-employed or
who are self-employed but hire fewer than two employees, before and after the reform.
4

Our analysis uses three different data sets to examine the effects of the reform. In
particular, we analyzed data from: the Household Surveys collected by the Colombian National
Department of Statistics (Gran Encuesta Integrada de Hogares or GEIH, in Spanish),
administrative data from the Social Security System (Planilla Integrada de Liquidación de
Aportes or PILA, in Spanish), and survey data from the Monthly Manufacturing Sample (MMS).
The data from the Household Surveys and from the Social Security records enable us to examine
individual-level data to analyze effects on levels and transitions to the formal sector. The data
from the MMS allow us to examine the effects of the reform on permanent employment at the
establishment-level.
The results from the three data sets consistently show positive effects of the reform on
formal employment. The results from the Household Surveys show an increase of 8.5 percentage
points or a 15 percent increase in the probability of having a signed contract, and an increase of
12.4 percentage points or a 32% increase in the probability of contributing to the pension and/or
health schemes for those with less than 10 minimum wages after the reform. The effects are
bigger among smaller companies. Likewise, the results using Social Security records show an
increase of 3.5 percentage points or 15.2 percent in the probability of going from informality or
unemployment to formality for those paid under 10 minimum wages after the reform.
The results also show small positive effects for self-employed workers with more than
three employees using both the Household Survey and Social Security data. The probability of
employment and of transitioning to a job with health benefits and/or pensions increases by one
and sixteen percentage points after the reform for self-employed workers with more than three
employees.

5

The results using the Manufacturing Sample also show that the reform increased
permanent employment in the manufacturing sector. The evidence shows that manufacturing
establishments that pay less than 10 minimum wages on average increase their number of
permanent employees by 46 workers. They also show that the percentage of permanent workers
employed by those establishments increased by 10 percent following the reform. In general, the
reform is associated with an increase in formal employment for individuals and for companies
with less than 10 minimum wages after the reform. The effects are robust to different
specifications and are greater among smaller companies.
2.

Changes in the Structure of Payroll Taxes
About four years ago, Colombia introduced important legislative changes to reduce

payroll taxes. The most important reform in changing payroll taxes since the reforms of the
1990s was the introduction of Law 1607. This reform reduced payroll taxes for workers with low
wages, who a priori should had experienced greater distortions and had fewer formal job
opportunities due to the higher labor costs before the reform.
A couple of years before, in 2010, the First Employment Law reduced payroll taxes for
employers hiring young workers and others entering the labor force. As a result, in this analysis
we try to distinguish the First Employment Law effects from those of the more expansive
reforms introduced by Law 1607.
2.1.

Law 1607 of 2013
The tax reform introduced with Law 1607 included exemptions to employer payroll taxes

used to finance training programs, family and childcare programs, and compulsory health
benefits. While the law was approved in 2012, starting on May 1st, 2013, exemptions were first
6

applied to the contributions going to training programs (SENA, 2%) and family and childcare
programs (ICBF, 3%), for a total exemption of 5% in payroll taxes. Importantly, neither training
nor family and childcare programs are typically used and benefit all of those who contribute
payroll taxes to these programs, so the link between the benefit and the contributions made to
these programs is weak.
Beginning on January 1st, 2014, the exemptions were also applied to employer
contributions to the Contributory Health Scheme (of 8.5%), first introduced in 1993 by article
204 of Law 100. In our analysis, we evaluate the differential impact on formal employment for
workers exempted and not exempted from taxes by the new law starting in 2013.
According to Law 1607, issued by decree 862 in April 26, 2013, the exemption on
payroll taxes applies to two groups of individuals. First, it applies to all legal, contributing forprofit entities paying taxes and that have in their payroll workers who individually accrue fewer
than ten (10) monthly, legal, minimum wages. Second, it applied to all self-employed individuals
who employ two or more workers. The law also indicates those individuals who do no benefit
from the exemptions. These include legal entities that do not pay income taxes, such as unions,
community action boards, horizontal joint ownership boards, and, in general, those listed in
articles 22, 23, 23-1, and 23-2 of the National Tax Code. It also includes legal, non-profit
entities, such as cooperatives, employee funds, associations, corporations, and foundations. In
addition, it includes Free Tax Zones established by December 31st, 2012 or with pending
applications at that time as well as users of previous Free Tax Zones that have qualified or could
qualify in the future to these zones and that are subject to the special income tax rate of 15%
established by the first subsection of article 240-1 of the National Tax Code. Finally, it includes

7

all employees who earn more than 10 minimum wages and self-employed individuals who
employ fewer than two employees.
At the same time, the Colombian government introduced its Plan to Increase Productivity
and Employment or PIPE program (Plan de Impulso a la Productividad y el Empleo in Spanish),
which intended to replace the revenues lost from the exemptions for SENA, ICBF and public
health insurance through other sources of funding. To off-set the revenue losses from the
exemptions, the tax reform included an equity income tax or CREE (Impuesto sobre la Renta
para la Equidad in Spanish). The CREE rate was 9% starting in 2013. In 2015, the CREE
increased by an additional 5%, which has continued to increase by 1% every year until 2018.
This percentage is distributed as follows: 1.4 percentage points go to SENA, 2.2 percentage
points go to ICBF, and 4.4 percentage points go to the social security health scheme. The
additional 1.2 percentage point charged during the first three years was devoted to financing
public institutions of higher education (40%), the subsidized health scheme (30%), and social
investments in the agricultural sector (30%). Importantly, the equity income tax is levied on
profits and, thus, tends to affect the most profitable firms, which are also the largest firms.
In conclusion, beneficiaries of the payroll tax exemptions instituted by Law 1607 from
2012 are CREE contributors who hire workers with less than 10 minimum wages and selfemployed individuals who hire two or more workers. The reduction of the employer payroll tax
rates for SENA and ICBF by 5% and of health contributions by 8.5% introduced by the reform
intends to not only reduce informal employment, but also to generate new formal jobs. The
reason why employment creation in the formal sector would be incentivized is that payroll taxes
which are associated with formal employment would fall. Even though the equity income tax

8

was introduced, this tax is on profits and not associated with employment thus de-linking the
new taxes from employment.
2.2.

Law 1429 from 2010
Before the implementation of the Tax Reform, the First Employment Law was introduced

in 2010. This reform also reduced the labor costs generated by payroll taxes to certain types of
recently hired workers.
The First Employment Law allows companies to deduct from their income tax
contributions the payroll tax payments destined to finance services not directly benefiting all
their employees, including tax contributions to finance SENA, ICBF, as well as contributions to
the Solidarity Guarantee Fund or FOSYGA (Fondo de Solidaridad y Garantias in Spanish),
which subsidizes health services for the poorest, and the contributions to the Minimum Pension
Guarantee Fund or SGP (Sistema General de Pensiones in Spanish) which subsidizes pensions
for the poorest. These deductions applied to companies that hired: workers younger than 28 years
of age; female heads of households; individuals who have been displaced or are in the process of
reintegration; individuals who are disabled; women older than 40 years of age, and workers
earning less than 1.5 minimum wages. Although this law also covers pensions, the First
Employment Law is more limited in the number of individuals it covers relative to the payroll
tax reform. This is because it is only valid for new hires covering young workers, women over
40, and those who earn less than 1.5 times the minimum wage, as opposed to the 10 minimum
wage threshold in the tax reform.
In addition, the benefits only apply to new workers. The law defines new workers as
those who appear for the first time in the administrative social security records, or those who

9

were previously in the system as self-employed workers. This prevents companies from trying to
claim exemptions for workers who are laid-off and rehired or new hires who are simply
replacing previously hired workers.
To benefit from the exemptions of Law 1429, employers must also fulfill the following
requirements established by the law. Companies have to be formally registered and have to hire
the type of workers described by the law. Also, they have to increase their payrolls and not
replace old personnel. That is, the number of employees must increase relative to the number of
employees that were contributing in the previous year, and the total value of payroll must
increase by the month of December of the previous year in which the discounts are applied.
In the empirical analysis presented in this paper, we will focus on the impacts of the Tax
Reform (Law 1607) by exploiting the fact that the reform covered certain groups but not others.
Moreover, we will attempt to disentangle the effects of the tax reform from those of the First
Employment Law (Law 1429) since the latter preceded the tax reform and some of the coverage
of the latter may have overlapped somewhat with Law 1607.
3.

Data

3.1.

Household Surveys
Colombia collects cross-sectional data on labor force participation, earnings, and quality

of life indicators of households since the 1960s. However, since the start of this data collection
process and up to 2006, data were only available for 13 cities and their metropolitan areas.
Starting in 2006, the entire survey covers 24 cities and their metropolitan areas. In addition, the
modules on labor markets and household earnings also cover rural sectors.

10

The purpose of this data collection effort is to provide information about the size and
structure of the labor force (employed, unemployed, and inactive) as well as of sociodemographic characteristics of the population. Consequently, the Household Surveys allow to
classify the population according to the concepts detailed by the International Conference of
Labor Statisticians (CIET, in Spanish); to calculate the main labor market indicators
(participation rate, occupation rate, unemployment rate, etc.); to measure general population
characteristics (characteristics of dwellings, access to public services); to obtain sociodemographic information from the population (sex, schooling levels, civil status, etc.), and to
measure employment characteristics, among others.
The existing database is the result of a probabilistic sampling of several stages, stratified
by unequal conglomerates, and weighed for the 24 capital cities and their metropolitan areas. The
universe is the entire civilian, non-institutionalized population residing in Colombia. The
sampling unit is a segment of 10 contiguous households. The sample size is 20,669 households.
The sampling error is no greater than 5% and possesses national coverage, including
differentiation by zone, department, and large regions. Data were collected weekly for big cities
and monthly for capital cities.
In order to construct the treatment group that was exempt because they earned less than
10 times the minimum wage, we calculated a variable called Times Minimum Wage (MW) as
the ratio of nominal yearly earnings to the yearly minimum wage (515,000 Colombian pesos for
2010; 535,600 Colombian pesos for 2011; 566,700 Colombian pesos for 2012; and 589,500
Colombian pesos for 2013). We, then, used this variable to construct a dummy for 10 times the
MW. We also constructed variables for: self-employment; employers; contract type for wageearners. We also construct firm size variables that identify if firms are less than 3 employees;
11

between 4 and 10; between 10 and 50, and more than 50 employees. This allows us to construct
an indicator for the second treatment group by interacting the self-employment dummy with the
less than 3 employee dummy. We also created an indicator for 2013 to capture the effects of the
reform by interacting the post-reform period with the indicators of whether workers earned less
than 10 times the MW and whether they were self-employed and hired at least two employees.
For the dependent variables, we constructed several measures of formality. In particular,
we constructed five different measures of formality: an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the
employee has a written contract and zero otherwise; an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the
employer or employee contributed to social security and zero otherwise; an indicators that take
the value of 1 if the employer or employee contributed either to the health system, pensions, and
workers’ compensation and zero otherwise.
Among the control variables, we include data on socio-economic factors about
individuals, such as age, age squared, marital status, whether the person is literate (i.e., can read
and write), years of schooling, department dummies, and year dummies among others.
Finally, to corroborate the robustness of the results, we create additional variables to
generate placebos by replacing some criteria, and controls for the First Employment Law. In
particular, we generated a variable for fewer than 20 MW, as well as variables for individuals
younger than 29 years of age, women older than 40 years, and for individuals with salaries below
1.5 MW in order to control for the First Employment Law.
Table 1 shows different measures of formality for the years from 2010 to 2013. The table
shows that formality has increased over time, regardless of the measure used. For example, the
proportion of people who contribute to health or pension schemes or both increased by 30% in

12

2010 to 33% in 2013. Similarly, the proportion of people contributing to workers compensation
increased from 28% in 2010 to 31% in 2013. The proportion of individuals with a written
contract from 29% in 2010, to 31% in 2013. Table 1 also shows that the coverage of the reform
was broad, since 99.5% of workers in 2012 (the year that the reform was approved) earned less
than 10 MW. Also, 22% of individuals were self-employed workers and 6% were self-employed
with more than 2 employees in 2012. Finally, over half of the individuals in the sample, 59%, are
men; about 55%, are married or have lived with their partner for more than two years; 56%, have
a high school degree while a minority of them has no high school or university degree in 2013.
3.2.

Social Security Administrative Records
The social security records come from the PILA, which is the data that integrates all the

payroll contributions made by workers. These records contain contributors’ reported information
for each of the funds in which they are required to contribute. It is the responsibility of the
contributor to provide information in order for the contributions to be paid by the Social Security
System.
The PILA database analyzed in this study has around 1.25 billion registries that reflect
the tracking of 16.8 million individuals over 7 years (from 2008 through 2014). The data has no
defined periodicity, since they are based on the contribution reports to the health and pension
systems made by individuals at any point in time during the period from 2008-14. This means
that a person may register more than one monthly payment to the same fund and that the number
of days quoted in a month can be greater than the duration of the month.
For this analysis, we consolidated all the payment reports and quoted days for each fund
in each month. The total monthly income was converted to constant December 2014 prices using

13

the monthly inflation rate for each department. This was then used to estimate the number of
times a person earns the minimum wage. In addition, the database contains reports from the
contributing company and reports related to employees. Using this code, we added individuals
who reported monthly for one company and used this to infer the firm size. The database has no
information regarding date of birth or age for individuals before 2014, so we did not consider
these characteristics. The control variables were constructed for each month, year, type of
industry, and department.
We consider workers who have a payment report as being in the formal labor market at
that moment in time. Thus, we estimate transitions from non-employment to formal or registered
employment as those in which an individual was not in the system the previous month and then
appears as contributing into the system the next month. The results of contributions to the health
and pension funds are very similar, but there is a possibility of registering payments to the health
scheme without actually working. For this reason, we rely only on registries into the pension
funds to identify transitions into formal employment.3
The analysis includes an unbalanced panel by individual year-month. Consequently,
some of the controls and added periods do not contain any information. These are considered as
additional categories in the fixed effects.
Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for the PILA database for the entire sample and
by company size. The proportion of employees transitioning from outside the labor force,
unemployment, or informality towards formality or the fraction of individuals who enter into
registered employment is, on average, about 23% per month. The average size of registered
3

Estimations were made using 25% of the sample due to the volume of information.

14

companies in the PILA database is of 840 employees. This table also shows that formal
employment is concentrated in the capital (Bogota with 5.25%) and the two departments where
the next largest cities of the country are located are located (Antioquia with 5.1% and Valle with
3. 4%).
3.3.

The Monthly Manufacturing Sample (MMS)
The MMS includes data on employment, wages, production, and characteristics of

establishments in the manufacturing sector, i.e., those with Industry Code CIIU Rev. 3.4
The data of the MMS are used to detect changes that could occur in the manufacturing
sector in the short-term, including changes in employment, wages, hours worked, production,
and sales of Colombian manufacturing establishments. At the same time, the sample allows to
determine the performance of the sector in different industrial activities; to determine the size
and evolution of different sectors; to create competiveness indices; to analyze the impact of the
economic dynamics on the productive sector; and to construct an index to temporarily estimate
GDP.
Each establishment’s information is given to DANE (the National Administrative
Statistics Department) by the accountant, manager, owner, or the person in charge of accounting
matters in the establishment. The MMS uses as sampling, observation, and analysis unit the
industrial establishment and it is part of the Annual Manufacturing Sample with a 5% error rate
4

This dataset dates back to May 1962, when the country started compiling industrial sampling data in order to build
employment and wage indicators. In parallel, the country also collected data on industrial production, an effort that
was stopped in 1970 when the data collection process was unified under a single system, using code ISIC Rev. 1.
This design was in use until 1980. Nevertheless, the first change in the data collection process took place in 1978
when the design of the sample was modified in order to comply with code ISIC Rev. 2. This design was maintained
until 1990. At the same time, during the most recent years of the 1980s, a new adjustment to the design was
introduced and was maintained until the end of the millennium. Towards the end of the 1990s and beginning of the
21st century, changes in representativeness and the need to adopt a third revision of the ISIC motivated the adoption
of the current design.

15

at the national level. It includes stratified probabilistic sampling (although random for each
stratum), and stratification is done by production, personnel, and type of industry. The
compilation of the information is performed within the first 20 days of each month.
These data are subject to confidentiality restrictions and statistical reserve. Although we
had access to the data through DANE’s computers, it is not possible to get access to these data
outside of the country. For this reason, the descriptive information we obtained from the database
is limited. One of the reasons for such confidentiality is that for a given region, a company that
meets certain characteristics (for instance, size, production, and type of industry) may be the only
company that does so and, as a result, confidentiality would be lost. Confidentiality is one of the
main agreements with the companies providing information.
In this study, we use the MMS to examine the impacts of the reform on employment and
hours worked of different types of workers in the manufacturing sector. The data to which we
had access has about 120,770 entries (about 16,400 annual entries). The database we used had
information on the establishment characteristics previously mentioned as well as monthly
temporary jobs from January 2007 through April 2014. Even though there is an identifying
number that may seem unique, it is not possible to do a panel-like tracking because oftentimes
the response of each unit is voluntary and it is sometimes forcefully imputed because of
probabilistic matters.
We constructed several variables with the MMS for analysis. Unlike the Household
Surveys and the Social Security data, the MMS does not have individual level wages. We can,
however, estimate the ratio of the average wage in the establishment to the MW of 515,000 in
2010 Colombian pesos. Then, we estimate a dummy variable for establishments whose average
wages are less than 10 times the MW to identify establishments in which employees are most
16

likely affected by the payroll tax reform. Our outcomes are the total number of the total number
of production and non-production permanent employees and the proportion of permanent
production and non-production workers out of the total number of employees (both permanent
and temporary). The idea is that permanent employment should increase both in levels and as a
proportion of total employment, since payroll taxes are required for permanent workers but
sometimes exempt temporary workers. We also examine the impact of the reform on the number
of hours worked by permanent employees. Since the fixed cost of hiring a permanent worker
goes down, employers should now prefer hiring more permanent workers and reducing their
hours worked. We also construct a placebo of fewer than 20 MW, to check that our results are
driven by the reform and not by some other factor that affects firms paying lower wages.
Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for the data from the MMS. The average number of
permanent non-production and production employees in the sample are 52.2 and 99.5 employees,
respectively. The average number of yearly regular and extraordinary hours worked for
permanent production and non-production employees are 19,587 and 1,725, respectively.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of establishments by department. The vast majority of
manufacturing establishments are in Bogota, Antioquia, and el Valle; the rest of the
establishments are distributed throughout the country. Bogota has 32.9% of the establishments
and 7.3% are located in Cundinamarca (a department next to Bogota); 21.4% are in Antioquia;
12.8% are in el Valle; 6.3% are in the Atlantic (in the Caribbean coast) and 3.4% are in
Santander. The rest are distributed throughout the country with no more than 2.5% of the
establishments located in any one of the other departments.

17

4.

Empirical Evidence
We explore empirically whether the reduction and restructuring of payroll taxes

generated incentives to create formal jobs. We also evaluate if the reform increases employment
at the extensive margin (number of employees) and reduces employment at the intensive margin
(number of hours) using data at the individual-, household- and establishment-level.
4.1.

Results from the Household Surveys
We estimated the following model to calculate the probability of having a formal job

using data from the Household Surveys:
P(Fit) = bXit + ls + fr + τt + δ0Less 10 MWit + δ1Postt × Less 10 MWit
+ δ2Postt × Self-Employed_More 3 Employeesit+ uit
Where P(Fit) is the probability of having a formal employment and where formal
employment is equal to one if the individual has a formal job defined as: (a) having a written
contract, (b) the individual or employer pays for health benefits, (c) the individual or employer
contributes to a pension fund, (d) the individual or employer contributes to a health and/or
pension scheme, and (e) the individual or employer pays for workers’ compensation. Less 10
MWit is a dummy variable that equals one if the person receives fewer than 10 minimum wages.
Self-Employed More 3 Employeesit is an indicator that equals one if the employee is selfemployed and hires three or more workers.5 Postt is an indicator for whether the person is
observed after 2013. Thus, the coefficients on the interaction terms, δ1 and δ2, capture the effects
of the reform on formal employment. Xit is a vector of controls that includes characteristics such
as age, marital status, gender, schooling level, firm size, and an indicator for whether the

5

Note that the data does not allow distinguishing 2 or more employees, so we construct a variable for three or more
employees.

18

employee is self-employed or not as well as interactions between this last indicator with firm
size. The sectorial, geographic, and temporal effects are captured by ls, fr and τt, respectively.
We cluster standard errors by department.
Table 4 reports coefficients δ1 and δ2 , which capture the effects of the individuals with
fewer than 10 minimum wages and on self-employed with more than 2 employees. The results
show that the reform generated an increase in the probability of having formal employment.
Specifically, the probability of having a written contract after the reform is 8.5 percentage points
greater for employees with wages less than 10 MW. The probability of contributing to health
benefits is 13.4 percentage points higher. The probability of contributing to a pension scheme
increased by 11.1 percentage points and the probability of contributing to a health and/or pension
system increases by 12.4 percentage points for workers with fewer than ten MW after the reform.
Finally, the probability of contributing to workers’ compensation increases by 17.1 percentage
points. These coefficients are robust and are significant even with clustered standard errors. To
understand the magnitude of these effects, we estimated the elasticity of employment with
respect to non-wage labor costs. The effects translate into elasticities of 3 and 4.2 for the effects
regarding written contracts and jobs that contribute to social security. These effects are in line
with the biggest effects reported by Hamermesh (1996) and similar to those observed in
countries like Germany, where labor costs are similar to those of Colombia and where wages are
downwardly rigid.
Table 4 also reports coeffficients of the post-reform indicator interacted with the indicator
for self-employed workers with 3 or more employees. The results show that the probability to
pay for health benefits or to contribute to a health or pension fund increases by one percentage
point among self-employed workers with more than two employees after the reform. This effect
19

translates into an elasticity of employment of 0.3, which is much lower than the elasticity we
calculated for workers with less than 10 minimum wages, but it is within the average range of
elasticities found by Hamermesh (1996).
When the effects are estimated separately for men and women, it is clear that while the
effects for those with less than 10 minimum wages are observed for both men and women, the
effects for the self-employed with more than 3 employees is only observed for men. Panel B of
Table 4 shows the effects for women and Panel C for men. The results for those earnings less
than 10 MW are greater for women and they are observed across all measures of formality. For
example, the probability of having a written contract increases to 9.3 percentage points while the
probability of contributing to either health or pension benefits increases to 15 percentage points
for women earning more than 10 MW after the reform. The results in Panel C shows equivalent
effects on these measures of formality of 7.8 and 8.2 percentage points for men. However, the
effects on the probability of contributing to a pension plan or workers’ compensation are not
significant for men. By contrast, there is no effect on self-employed women, but the effect of the
reform increases the probability of contributing to the health insurance system for self-employed
men with more than 2 employees.
Table 5 shows the results of the effects of the Tax Reform by firm size. The results show
that Law 1607 had greater effects on formal employment among those working in the smallest
firms. Panel A report estimates for the full sample; Panel B report estimates for those in firms
with fewer than 10 employees; Panel C report results for firms between 11 and 50 employees,
and Panel D report results for those in firms with more than 50 employees. The effects for those
working in firms with fewer than 10 employees are larger than those for the entire sample. The
probability of having a formal job under any of our definitions of formality increases by about
20

six percentage points for self-employed workers with more than 3 employees and by about 230
percentage points for those with less than 10 minimum wages. The effects for workers with less
than 10 minimum wages and who work in firms with 10 to 50 employees are significant and
bigger than those in the entire sample, but smaller than those found for small firms with fewer
than 10 employees. Formality among men and women earning less than 10 minimum wages in
medium-sized firms increased between 22 to 30 percentage points, but there is no effect among
self-employed workers in medium-sized firms. By contrast, formality among workers earning
less than 10 minimum wages in firms with more than 50 employees increased between 2.5 to 5
percentage points after the reform, which are smaller effects than those found in the full sample.
This reveals an obvious pattern. The effects are bigger among those in smaller firms. This makes
sense given that bigger firms were more likely to have to pay the CREE and smaller firms are
more likely to have qualified for exemptions for employees closer to the MW and for selfemployed hiring others.
To guarantee that these results capture the effects of the reform and not some other
factors affecting lower-earning workers after the reform, we performed regressions with
placebos. In our placebo, we changed the threshold of ten MW (as specified by Law 1607) to 20
MW in order to calculate the dummy variable for employee wages. In these regressions, we
excluded all workers with fewer than 10 MW. Table 6 shows these results with clustered
standard errors. We found that there was no effect on formality for people with fewer than 20
MW. As can be observed on Table 6, in many cases the coefficients become negative and they
were always insignificant.
Finally, Table 7 shows similar effects to those presented in Tables 4 and 5, but
controlling for effect on groups affected by the First Employment law. In particular, we included
21

indicators for individuals younger than 29 years of age, women older than 40, and individuals
earning less than 1.5 MW and we interacted them with a post-2011 indicator, since the First
Employment Law was enacted in December 2010. These results show that the effects of the
interaction between the reform and employees with less than 10 MW is still positive and
significant and that the effect is even greater when controlling for the First Employment Law. In
this case, the probability of having a formal employment increases by about 22 to 25 percentage
points. The effects for people younger than 29 years and for those who earn less than 1.5 MW
after 2011 are either statistically or economically insignificant. On the other hand, the effects for
self-employed workers with more than two employees after the tax reform and among women
older than 40 after the First Employment law are now negative and significant.
In conclusion, people earning less than 10 minimum wages benefited the most from the
reform in terms of having a higher likelihood of holding a formal sector job and the effects are
greater for women and for workers in small firms.
4.2.

Results from Social Security Records
We estimated the following model to calculate the impact of the reform on transitions

from unemployment, inactivity, and informal employment into registered employment:
P(Fit) = bXit + ls + fr + τt + µm + δ0Less 10 MWit + δ1Postt × Less 10 MWit
+ δ2Postt × Self-employed More 3 Employeesit + uit
P(Fit) is the probability of transitioning from non-employment or informal employment into the
formal sector. Less 10 MWit and Self-employed More 3 Employees are indicators for groups
exempted from the payroll tax, that is, those with less than 10 minimum wages and selfemployed workers with two or more employees. Postt is an indicator for whether the company is
22

observed after 2013. Xit includes economic activity and size of the firm. The PILA database does
not contain data on age, education, or any other individual characteristic. The geographic and
sectorial effects are captured by ls and fr respectively and the year and month effects are
captured by τt and µm. All of the regressions estimate clustered standard errors at the individual
level.
Table 8 shows the effects on transitions into registered jobs for the full sample and by
firm size. Columns (1) and (2) show the coefficients for the interaction terms in regressions using
the full sample. Columns (3) and (4) show the estimates for firms with fewer than 3 employees,
Columns (5) and (6) show the estimates for firms between 3-10 employees; Columns (7) and (8)
show the estimates for firms between 10-50 employees and Columns (9) and (10) show the
estimates for firms with more than 50 employees. The overall results in Column (1) show an
increase in the probability of transitioning into formal sector employment of 3.5 percentage
points among employees with less than 10 minimum wages and of 16.3 percentage points among
self-employed workers employing more than 2 employees. The specification in Column (2)
allows for differential effects for those earnings less than 2 MW, those earnings between 2 and 5
MW and those earning between 5 and 10 MW. As expected, these results show that the impact is
greatest on those earning close to the MW and smaller for those with higher wages. The
probability of transitioning into formal employment increases by 5.1 percentage points for those
earning less than 2 MW, by 2 percentage points for those earning between 2-5 MW and by 1
percentage point for those earning between 5-10 MW. Since it is more difficult to pass on higher
payroll taxes onto workers when workers face a binding minimum wage, it is likely that a
reduction in payroll taxes also has the greatest impact in terms of formal employment for this
group of workers.
23

Columns (2)-(10) of Table 8 show the effects on entry into registered jobs for firms of
different sizes. Columns (2) and (4) show that the likelihood of transitioning into registered
employment increases by 39.4 and 29.7 percentage for those in firms with fewer than 4
employees and in firms with 4 to 10 employees who earn less than 10 MW after the reform.
Also, Columns (3) and (5) show that the effects are bigger for those earning less than 2 MW,
somewhat smaller for those earning between 2-5 MW and even smaller, though still positive and
significant, for those earning between 5 and 10 MW. The effects are negative for those in larger
firms. Likewise, the likelihood of transitioning into registered employment increases by 11.7, 6
and 7.5 percentage points for self-employed workers with 4 to 10 employees, with 10-50
employees and with more than 50 employees.
4.3.

Results from the Manufacturing Survey
We estimated the following model to calculate the impact of the reform on the level and

composition of employment using the monthly manufacturing sample:
Ejst = αKjst + ls ++ fr + Ψt + δ0Less 10 MWjst-1 + δ1Postt × Less 10 MWjst-1 + vjst
Ejst is employment in establishment j for permanent production and non-production
employees, as well as the percentage of permanent production and non-production employees.
Less 10 MWjst-1 is a dummy variable that equals one if the establishment pays on average wages
that are less than ten minimum wages before the reform. Postt is an indicator for whether
employment at the company occurs after May 2013. The geographic, sectorial, and temporal
effects are captured by ls, fr, and Ψt. Kjst represents installed capital. All of the standard errors
are clustered by department.

24

The coefficients of interest are those for the interaction between the variable for less than
10 minimum wages and the variable for after 2013 for the different types of workers. Panel A in
Table 9 shows the results for the entire sample, while Panels B, C, D, and E in the same table
show the results for establishments with less than 4, 4-10 employees, 10-50 employees, and more
than 50 employees, respectively. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 9 report the impacts on the
number and percent of permanent non-production employees, Columns (3) and (4) reports
impacts on the number and percent of permanent production workers. For establishments that
pay on average less than 10 minimum wages, we observed an increase in the number of
permanent workers and employees after 2013. In particular, Columns (1) and (3) in Panel A
show that there is an increase of 46.1 permanent non-production employees and of 254
permanent non-production employees in establishments that pay less than 10 minimum wages
after the reform. This by itself suggests increased job creation in the manufacturing sector. In
addition, Columns (2) and (4) of Panel A show an increase of 10% in the share of permanent
non-production employees, though no effect on the share of permanent production employees.
Columns (5) and (6) in Table 9 also show the effects on regular and extraordinary hours
for all permanent workers. The results in Column (5) show substitution in working hours for
permanent employees. There is a reduction of 279 regular hours or a reduction of 1.5% in regular
hours for this group of workers, though no effect for extraordinary hours.
Panels B-E in Table 9 show effects by establishment size. The results show that even
though the effects regarding additional permanent workers are naturally smaller in smaller
establishments, the effects are clearly larger for smaller companies when looking at the shares of
permanent workers. Panels B and C in Table 9 show that the percentage of permanent nonproduction employees increases by 85.8 and 55.5 percent, respectively, in establishments with
25

fewer than 4 employees and in companies with 4 to 10 employees and that pay less than 10
minimum wages on average. Likewise, for small companies that pay less than 10 minimum
wages on average, there is an increase in the percentage of permanent production workers. Also,
there is a reduction in the regular and extraordinary working hours of permanent employees in
establishments with less than 4 employees and a reduction in regular hours in establishments
with 4-10 employees. By contrast, Panels D and E Table 9 show that while there is a positive
effect on the number of permanent non-production and production employees, there are no
effects on the shares of permanent non-production and production employees or on regular and
extraordinary permanent hours among bigger establishments with 10 to 50 employees and with
50 or more employees. Thus, consistent with the data using the Household Surveys and the
Social Security records, we find bigger effects on smaller employers. This is likely because the
smaller employers are more likely to face higher labor costs due to the inability to pass these
costs to their employees. Also, the equity income tax introduced by the Tax Reform likely had a
higher incidence on larger employers.
As with the Household Surveys, we carried out regressions with a placebo group using
the MMS data. Table 10 shows the results of this placebo using as a threshold 20 minimum
wages on average at the establishment-level. The results show no significant effects in the
regressions that use 20 MW as a threshold.
5.

Conclusions
The results of estimations using data from Household Surveys, the Social Security

records, and the Monthly Manufacturing Sample are consistent with an increase in the creation
of formal employment in response to the Tax Reform that eliminated payroll contributions for
training, family services and health benefits.
26

In the case of regressions using data from the Household Surveys and the Social Security
records, there is strong evidence indicating a greater propensity towards formality among the two
groups who experienced payroll tax reductions due to the reform, i.e., those with less than 10
MW and self-employed with more than 2 employees.
The analysis with the data from the Household Surveys and the data from the Social
Security records show similar effects on formal employment with contributions to pension funds.
The Household Surveys show an impact of 11.1 percentage points on the likelihood of being
employed jobs with contributions to pension funds for those with less than 10 minimum wages.
The Social Security data shows an increase of 3.5 in the likelihood of transitioning to
employment registered in a pension fund. The results from the two databases also show effects of
one percentage point on formal employment among self-employed workers with more than two
employees. The Household Surveys also show an increase of 1 percentage point in the likelihood
of being employed in a job with contributions to both health and pension plans for self-employed
workers with more than 2 employees. Likewise, the Social Security data shows an increase of
16.3 in the likelihood of transitioning into a job registered with pension contributions.
Moreover, the results using the Household Surveys and Social Security records show that
small firms are the ones most likely to respond to the reform by creating formal jobs. Moreover,
the results using the Social Security records are also stronger for those who earn lower salaries
closer to the minimum wage. We also included placebo regressions to verify that the results were
not driven by the reform and not by other factors. We do a placebos including interactions with
less than 20 MW instead of 10 MW and the results show no effects. The fact that the placebo
group was not affected, and that the groups most likely to be affected are indeed the ones for
which we find greater effects, confirms that the results are likely driven by the reform.
27

The Manufacturing Sample results confirm these results and show an increase in
permanent employment. These results show an increase in the number and proportion of
permanent production and non-production employees after the reform among establishments that
pay less than 10 minimum wages on average. The Tax Reform also caused a substitution in the
regular hours worked by permanent workers, as would be expected since the costs of hiring
permanent workers decreased. As with the individual-level results, establishment-level results
show that the Tax Reform had greater impact among companies with fewer than 10 employees.
These effects are larger in comparison to the reform from the mid-nineties in Colombia.
Kugler and Kugler (2009) find a much smaller effect − a 10% percent increase in payroll taxes
reduced employment by about 5%. The results from the MMS, which are closest to those used by
Kugler and Kugler (2009), show that a decrease of 13.5% in payroll taxes introduced by the
reform increased the share of permanent non-production workers by 46%.
At the same time, the effects are substantial compared to other reforms carried out in
Colombia affecting both the supply and demand of labor. On the demand side, the exemptions
introduced by the First Employment Law for new hires from specific groups do not appear to be
as effective as the exemptions introduced by the Tax Reform. On the supply side, the program
Youth in Action (or Jóvenes en Acción in Spanish), which provided vocational training and
internships to young individuals, increased formal employment among men and women by 6 and
7 percentage points, respectively. In this case, the cost per employee was $770 dollars. In
comparison, the tax reform probably generated fewer costs, since the funds lost due to the tax
exemptions were recovered through the equity income tax. On the other hand, Kugler et al.
(2015) find that the effects of the Youth in Action program were permanent. It is too early to

28

know if the effects of the Tax Reform are long-term, but it is possible that entering the formal
sector can generate hysteresis and increase the probability of remaining in the formal sector.

29

References
Bell, Linda. 1997. “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Colombia.” Journal of Labor Economics
15, no. 3, suppl.: S102–S135.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn. 1999. “Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
1399–1461. New York: Elsevier.
Gordon, Robert. 1972. “Wage-Price Controls and the Shifting Phillips Curve.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, no. 2:385–421.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits.” American Economic
Review 84, no. 3:622–41.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile.” Journal of
Labor Economics 15, no. 3, suppl.: S72–S101.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Alan Krueger. 1991. “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided
Insurance: Lessons from Workers’ Compensation Insurance.” In Tax Policy and the Economy,
ed. David Bradford, 111–44. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1996. Labor Demand. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Heckman, James, and Carmen Page´s. 2004. “Introduction.” In Law and Employment: Lessons
from Latin America and the Caribbean, ed. James Heckman and Carmen Pages, 1–108. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press/National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaestner, Robert. 1996. “The Effect of Government-Mandated Benefits on Youth Employment.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 50, no. 1:122–42.
Kugler, Adriana. 1999. “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment: Evidence
from the Colombian Labour Market Reform.” International Tax and Public Finance 6, no.
3:389–410.
Kugler, Adriana. 2004. “The Effect of Job Security Provision Regulations on Labor Market
Flexibility: Evidence from the Colombian Labor Market Reform.” In Law and Employment:
Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, ed. James Heckman and Carmen Page´s, 183–
228. Chicago: University of Chicago Press/National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kugler, Adriana. 2005. “Wage-Shifting Effects of Severance Payments Savings Accounts in
Colombia.” Journal of Public Economics 89, nos. 2–3:487–500.
Kugler, Adriana. 2011. “Is there an Anti-labor Bias of Taxes? A Survey of the Evidence from
Latin America and around the World,” Research Department Publications No. 4746, InterAmerican Development Bank.
Kugler, Adriana, and Maurice Kugler. 2009. “Labor Market Effects of Payroll Taxes in
Developing Countries: Evidence from Colombia,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
57(2): 335-358.
30

Kugler, Adriana, Maurice Kugler, Juan E. Saavedra and Luis Omar Herrera. 2015. “The Longterm Direct and Spillovers Effects of Job Training: Experimental Evidence from Colombia,”
NBER Working Paper No. 21607.
Levy, Santiago. 2008. Good Intentions, Bad Outcomes: Social Policy, Informality, and Economic
Growth in Mexico. Brookings Institution Press.
Maloney, William. 1999. “Does Informality Imply Segmentation in Urban Labor Markets?
Evidence from Sectoral Transitions in Mexico.” World Bank Economic Review 13, no. 2:275–
302.
Maloney, William. 2004. “Informality Revisited.” World Development 32, no. 7:1159–78.
Maloney, William, and Mariano Bosch. 2006. “Gross Worker Flows in the Presence of Informal
Markets: The Mexican Experience, 1987–2002.” Research Working Paper no. 3883, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
Maloney, William, Edwin Goni, and Mariano Bosch. 2007. “The Determinants of Rising
Informality in Brazil: Evidence from Gross Worker Flows.” Research Working Paper no. 4375,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Maloney, William, and Jairo Núnez. 2004. “Minimum Wages in Latin America.” In Law and
Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, ed. James Heckman and Carmen
Pages, 109–30. Chicago: University of Chicago Press/National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nickell, Stephen, and Richard Layard. 1999. “Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
3029–84. New York: Elsevier.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2015. Taxing Wages. Paris:
OECD.
Vroman, Wayne. 1974. “Employer Payroll Taxes and Money Wage Behavior.” Applied
Economics 6, no. 3:189–2.

31

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Household Survey, 2010-13
Employer or Employee contributes to Social Security
Employer or Employee contributes to Pension Fund
Employer or Employee contributes to Health System
Workers' Compensation
Employer or Employee contributes to Pension/Health Fund
Self-Employed
Employee
Works for the same Company that Pays
Written Contract
Self-Employed with More than 2 People Hired
Income less than 10 MW
Firm with less than 10 Employers
Male
Cohabitants for Less than 2 years
Cohabitants for More than 2 years
Married
Other Marital Status
Less than High School
High-SchoolDegree
Trainning College Degree
University Degree or more
Illiterate
Number of Observations

2010
0.30
0.30
0.37
0.28
0.37
0.19
0.46
0.41
0.29
0.05
0.997
0.71
0.60
0.03
0.29
0.26
0.42
0.05
0.59
0.15
0.21
0.05
344,726

2011
0.30
0.30
0.38
0.29
0.38
0.21
0.47
0.46
0.29
0.06
0.997
0.71
0.59
0.03
0.30
0.25
0.42
0.05
0.57
0.16
0.21
0.05
357,901

2012
0.31
0.31
0.38
0.30
0.39
0.22
0.48
0.46
0.29
0.06
0.996
0.70
0.59
0.03
0.30
0.24
0.43
0.04
0.58
0.18
0.20
0.05
360,195

Note: The table reports the percentaje of people with socio-economic and work characteristics from 2010 to 2013.

2013
0.33
0.33
0.39
0.31
0.40
0.23
0.48
0.47
0.31
0.07
0.995
0.69
0.59
0.03
0.30
0.24
0.42
0.04
0.56
0.20
0.20
0.05
354,241

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Social Security Records, 2008-2014
Full Sample Firms < 3 Employees Firms 4-10 Employees Firms 11-50 Employees Firms > 50 Employees
Firm Size
Average wages / Minimum wages
Probability of Transition from
Non-employment to Employment
Number of Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

840.3
(4,121.2)
0.52
(1.94)
0.23
(0.42)
368,310,936

1.33
(0.59)
0.33
(1.24)
0.50
(0.54)
32,240,555

6.57
(2.05)
0.70
(1.90)
0.56
(0.50)
9,402,418

26.4
(11.42)
0.89
(2.11)
0.55
(0.50)
20,038,184

3,259.9
(7,625.3)
1.67
(3.30)
0.53
(0.50)
9,741,231

Note: This table shows the mean and standard deviation in parenthesis from a 25% randomized sample of the universe of Social Security records from January 2008 to
December 2014. Firm size is estimated as the number of people who report their payment for the same company.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for the Monthly Manufacturing Sample, 2007-2014
Share of Permanent Non-production Employees
Share of Permanent Production Employees
Regular Hours Permanent Non-production Employees
Extra Hours Permanent Non-production Employees
Salary of Permanent Non-production Employees
Salary of Permanent Production Employees
Number of Observations

Mean
52.2
(109.0)
99.5
(171.4)
19,587.1
(34,327.25)
1,725.0
(4,599.4)
160,799.1
(387,913.7)
150,674.0
(307,710.6)
120,770

Note: This table reports the mean and standard deviations (in parenthesis) of the share of production and non-production
employees, and their regular and extraordinary hours as well as their salaries.

Table 4: Effects of the Payroll Tax Reform on Formality, Household Surveys
Written
Health
Pension
Contract Contribution Contribution

Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations

(1)

(2)

0.085**
(0.031)
0.003
(0.005)
377,669

0.134***
(0.032)
0.009**
(0.004)
377,669

0.093***
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.006)
180,167

0.155***
(0.031)
0.009
(0.006)
180,167

0.078**
(0.037)
0.007
(0.007)
197,482

0.092***
(0.028)
0.010*
(0.006)
197,482

(3)

Health and
Pension
Contribution

Workers'
Compensation

(4)

(5)

Panel A. Full Sample
0.111*
0.124***
(0.054)
(0.030)
0.001
0.008**
(0.006)
(0.003)
377,669
377,669
Panel B. Women
0.127*
0.149***
(0.063)
(0.029)
-0.004
0.005
(0.011)
(0.005)
180,167
180,167
Panel C. Men
0.075
0.082***
(0.057)
(0.026)
0.004
0.009*
(0.009)
(0.005)
197,482
197,482

0.171**
(0.072)
0.006
(0.005)
377,669
0.139***
(0.036)
0.002
(0.011)
180,167
0.142
(0.092)
0.010
(0.006)
197,482

Note: The table reports coeficients and clustered standard errors by department (in parenthesis) of linear probability models of different measures of
formality on the interaction terms of the post-reform dummy with indicators of whether the worker earns less than 10 MW or the workers is selfemployed and hires more than 2 employees. The formality measures include: a Written Contract dummy; an indicator of whether the employer or
employee pay Health and Pension Contributions; an indicator of whether the employee is covered by Workers' Compensation. To estimate the share of
workers paid less than 10 MW, wages (deflated to their real value at 2013 prices) were divided by the Colombian Minimun Wage of 589,500 pesos in
2013 pesos. All regressions control for age, age squared, years of education, education squared, a male dummy, dummies for marital status, the number
of MW the indiviudal earns, the worker's type, firm size, the interaction between firm size and worker type and fixed effects for industry and year. ***
p<0.01, p<0.05, *p<0.1.

Table 5: Effects of the Tax Reform on Formality by Firm Size, Household Surveys
Health and
Workers'
Pension
Compensation
Contribution
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Full Sample
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.085**
0.134***
0.111*
0.124***
0.171**
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.054)
(0.030)
(0.072)
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
0.003
0.009**
0.001
0.008**
0.006
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.005)
Number of Observations
377,669
377,669
377,669
377,669
377,669
Panel B. Less than 10 Employees
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
2.343***
2.679***
2.323***
2.713***
2.253***
(0.567)
(0.770)
(0.674)
(0.763)
(0.669)
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
0.057***
0.065***
0.059***
0.065***
0.056***
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.011)
Number of Observations
101,062
101,062
101,062
101,062
101,062
Panel C. Firms with more than 11 and less than 50 employees
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.216***
0.297***
0.280***
0.299***
0.252***
(0.071)
(0.080)
(0.087)
(0.079)
(0.081)
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
0.004
0.004
0.015
0.003
0.015
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.009)
Number of Observations
61,666
61,666
61,666
61,666
61,666
Panel D. More than 50 Employees
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.025**
0.040***
0.055***
0.038***
0.052**
(0.009)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.011)
(0.020)
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
0.000
0.003
0.005*
0.002
0.005
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.004)
Number of Observations
191,158
191,158
191,158
191,158
191,158
Written
Contract

Health
Contribution

Pension
Contribution

Note: The table reports coeficients and clustered standard errors by department (in parenthesis) of linear probability models of formality on
interactions of Less than 10 MW and Self-Employed who hire more than 3 Workers by firm size. The following measures of formality are
used: a Written Contract Dummy; an indicator of whether the employer or employee contributes to Health and Pension funds; an indicator of
wether the worker is covered by Workers' Compensation. All regressions include controls for: age, age squared, year of education, education
squared, a male dummy, marital status dummy, the share of wages out of the MW, firm size, type of worker indicators and interaction of firm
size with type of worker and fixed effects by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 6: Placebo Effects of Less than 20 MW on Formality, Household Surveys
Written
contract
(1)
Less than 20 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations
Less than 20 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations
Less than 20 Minimum Wages X Reform
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
Number of Observations

-0.005
(0.012)
0.010
(0.016)
153,533
-0.001
(0.016)
0.020
(0.022)
47,134
0.006
(0.015)
0.009
(0.021)
106,398

Health and
Workers
Pension
Compensation
Contribution
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Full Sample
-0.001
-0.025
-0.004
-0.004
(0.013)
(0.021)
(0.010)
(0.021)
0.003
0.006
0.000
-0.008
(0.017)
(0.029)
(0.014)
(0.028)
153,533
153,533
153,533
153,533
Panel B. Women
-0.010
-0.054
-0.005
0.006
(0.022)
(0.036)
(0.014)
(0.041)
0.034
-0.016
0.014
-0.104*
(0.030)
(0.051)
(0.019)
(0.057)
47,134
47,134
47,134
47,134
Panel C. Men
0.010
-0.005
0.004
0.001
(0.016)
(0.026)
(0.014)
(0.025)
-0.016
0.001
-0.014
0.011
(0.022)
(0.036)
(0.019)
(0.034)
106,398
106,398
106,398
106,398

Health
Contribution

Pension
Contribution

Note: The table reports coeficients and clustered standard errors by department (in parenthesis) of linear probability models of different measures of formality
on the interaction terms of the post-reform dummy with indicators of whether the worker earns less than 10 MW or the workers is self-employed and hires
more than 3 employees. The formality measures include: a Written Contract dummy; an indicator of whether the employer or employee pay Health and Pension
Contributions; an indicator of whether the employee is covered by Workers' Compensation. To estimate the share of workers paid less than 10 MW, wages
(deflated to their real value at 2013 prices) were divided by the Colombian Minimun Wage of 589,500 pesos in 2013 pesos. All regressions control for age, age
squared, years of education, education squared, a male dummy, dummies for marital status, the number of MW the indiviudal earns, the worker's type, firm
size, the interaction between firm size and worker type and fixed effects for industry and year. *** p<0.01, p<0.05, *p<0.1.

Table 7: Effects of Payroll Tax Reform and First Employment Reform on Formality, Household Surveys
Health and
Written
Health
Pension
Pension
Contract
Contribution
Contribution
Contribution
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Less than 10 Minimum Wages X 2010
0.224***
0.240***
0.238***
0.240***
(0.036)
(0.044)
(0.040)
(0.041)
Self-employed with More than 3 Workers X Reform
-0.034***
-0.025***
-0.026***
-0.026***
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Less than 29 Years Old X 2010
-0.006
-0.001
0.006
0.001
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Women older than 40 Years Old X 2010
-0.021***
-0.013***
-0.006
-0.013***
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Less than 1.5 Mminimum Wages X 2010
-0.000***
-0.000***
-0.000***
-0.000***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Times Real Minimum Wage
0.009***
0.009**
0.009***
0.008***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Number of Observations
377,669
377,669
377,669
377,669

Workers'
Compensation
(5)
0.248***
(0.049)
-0.027***
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.012***
(0.004)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.011***
(0.004)
377,669

Note: The table reports coeficients and clustered standard errors by department (in parenthesis) of linear probability models of different measures of formality on the
interaction terms of the post-reform dummy with indicators of whether the worker earns less than 10 MW or the workers is self-employed and hires more than 2
employees. The formality measures include: a Written Contract dummy; an indicator of whether the employer or employee pay Health and Pension Contributions; an
indicator of whether the employee is covered by Workers' Compensation. To estimate the share of workers paid less than 10 MW, wages (deflated to their real value at
2013 prices) were divided by the Colombian Minimun Wage of 589,500 pesos in 2013 pesos. All regressions control for age, age squared, years of education, education
squared, a male dummy, dummies for marital status, the number of MW the indiviudal earns, the worker's type, firm size, the interaction between firm size and worker
type and fixed effects for industry and year. *** p<0.01, p<0.05, *p<0.1.

Table 8: Effects of Payroll Tax Reform on Transitions to Registered Empoyment by Firm Size, Social Security Records
Full Sample
Up to 3 workers
More than 3 to 10 workers
More than 10 to 50 workers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Less than 10 MW X Reform
0.035***
0.394***
0.297***
-0.102***
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.003)
Self-empl. w/ More than 3 Workers X Reform 0.163*** 0.168***
0.142***
0.117***
0.059***
0.060***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0-2 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.051***
0.457***
0.228***
-0.106***
(0.001)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.003)
3-5 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.020***
0.393***
0.363***
-0.102***
(0.001)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.003)
6-10 Minimum Wages X Reform
0.010***
0.267***
0.255***
-0.091***
(0.001)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.003)
Reported Wages / Minimun Wages
0.001*** 0.001*** 0.023*** 0.026*** 0.017***
0.014***
-0.005***
-0.005***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Reform
-0.038*** -0.051*** -0.367*** -0.423*** -0.341***
-0.299***
0.098***
0.102***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Number of Observations
7,200,257
16,125,810
4,717,052
10,005,116

More than 50 workers
(9)
(10)
-0.058***
(0.001)
0.075*** 0.074***
(0.002)
(0.002)
-0.053***
(0.001)
-0.073***
(0.001)
-0.052***
(0.001)
-0.004*** -0.004***
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.061*** 0.059***
(0.001)
(0.001)
47,352,279

Note: The table reports coeficients and clustered standard errors by indiviudal (in parenthesis) of linear probability models of the transition to registered employment. All regressions control for the ratio of reported
wages (deflated real values at 2015 prices) to the Colombian Minimun wage in 2015 which was 644,350 pesos. All specifications cotrol for industry, department, year and month fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

Table 9: Effects of the Payroll Tax Reform on Manufacturing Employment, Monthly Manufacturing Sample

Average Wages Less than 10 MW X Reform
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
Number of Observations
Average Wages Less than 10 MW X Reform
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
Number of Observations
Average Wages Less than 10 MW X Reform
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
Number of Observations
Average Wages Less than 10 MW X Reform
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
Number of Observations
Average Wages Less than 10 MW X Reform
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
Number of Observations

Number of
Permanent NonProduction
Employees

Number of
Permanent
Production
Employees

(1)

(2)

46.164***
(12.299)
4.696***
(0.913)
98,953
2.363**
(0.897)
0.157***
(0.053)
5,169
3.077***
(0.932)
0.283***
(0.078)
7,844
4.839***
(1.708)
0.363***
(0.102)
21,205
35.356***
(11.132)
3.180***
(1.129)
64,777

% Permanent Nonproduction
Employees

% Permanent
Production
Employees

Regulat Hours for
All Permanent
Employees

(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Full Sample
253.904***
0.104**
-0.073
-278.551*
(36.251)
(0.041)
(0.113)
(146.293)
17.510***
0.004
-0.012*
1.020
(4.765)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.806)
98,953
98,953
98,953
98,953
Panel B. Less than 4 employees
5.961***
0.858***
0.294
-2,545.175***
(1.177)
(0.199)
(0.202)
(95.998)
0.633***
0.110***
0.041*
33.558***
(0.107)
(0.028)
(0.023)
(8.607)
5,169
5,169
5,169
5,169
Panel C. More than 4 and less than 10 employees
9.482***
0.555***
0.439**
-1,830.071*
(2.152)
(0.198)
(0.188)
(942.582)
0.817***
0.048***
0.022*
10.135***
(0.187)
(0.015)
(0.012)
(3.687)
7,844
7,844
7,844
7,844
Panel D. More than 10 and less than 50 employees
17.002***
0.020
0.171
-437.734
(4.961)
(0.103)
(0.172)
(308.641)
0.714
-0.000
0.025*
-0.255
(0.452)
(0.006)
(0.014)
(2.564)
21,205
21,205
21,205
21,205
Panel E. More than 50 employees
168.972***
0.030
0.006
-88.831
(54.994)
(0.029)
(0.136)
(66.200)
10.364**
-0.007*
-0.013*
-0.772
(4.831)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(1.406)
64,777
64,777
64,777
64,777

Extraordinary
Hours for All
Permanent
Employees
(6)
-37.942
(27.730)
0.097
(0.178)
98,953
-29.745**
(12.110)
3.138***
(1.079)
5,169
-31.833
(27.470)
0.830**
(0.344)
7,844
-75.621
(69.687)
0.221
(0.488)
21,205
-16.047
(11.642)
-0.230
(0.270)
64,777

Note: The table reports the coeficients and robust standard error (in parenthesis) by firm size. The regressions include controls for average (deflated in real 2015 values) divided by the minimung
wage of 2015 (644.350 Colombian pesos). All specifications control for industry, department, year and month fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 10: Placebo Effects of Less than 20 MW on Manufacturing Employment, Monthly Manufacturing Sample
Number of
%
Number of
Regulat Hours Extraordinary
Permanent
Permanent % Permanent
Permanent
for All
Hours for All
NonNonProduction
Production
Permanent
Permanent
Production
production
Employees
Employees
Employees
Employees
Employees
Employees
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Average Wages Less than 20 MW X Reform 10.877
7.833
-0.065
0.171**
-174.418***
-15.042**
(9.613)
(4.998)
(0.071)
(0.064)
(57.207)
(5.406)
Average Wages / Minimun Wages
-3.560***
-0.043
-0.007**
-0.006***
-2.783
-0.239
(1.216)
(0.188)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(1.609)
(0.141)
Number of Observations
4,358
4,358
4,358
4,358
4,358
4,358
Note: The table reports the coeficients and robust standard error (in parenthesis) by firm size. The regressions include controls for average (deflated in real 2015
values) divided by the minimung wage of 2015 (644.350 Colombian pesos). All specifications control for industry, department, year and month fixed effects. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Figure 1. Share of firms by department in the MMS
Bogotá

32.89

Antioquia

21.38

Valle

12.77

Cundinamarca

7.27

Atlántico

6.28

Santander

3.36

Bolivar

2.5

Risaralda

2.19

Caldas

1.97

Cauca

1.59

Tolima

1.17

Boyacá

1.1

N. Santander

1.02

Quindío

0.95

Nariño

0.58

Magdalena

0.51

Meta

0.48

Cesar

0.44

Córdoba

0.44

Huila

0.37

Otros

0.36

Sucre

0.29

Caquetá

0.07

Note: This figure reports share of establishments in each department from MMS data for the years 2008-2014.

