NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBROGATION AND THE THEORY OF INSURANCE WHEN SUITS CAN BE BROUGHT
FOR LOSSES SUFFERED
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 23303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23303

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised April 2018

This article is forthcoming in the Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization. We are grateful to
editor Andrew Daughety, three referees, Kenneth Abraham, Scott Baker, Tom Baker, Mark
Geistfeld, Daniel Gottlieb, Scott Harrington, Oliver Hart, Louis Kaplow, Saul Levmore, Stephen
Mildenhall, Ariel Porat, David Rosenberg, Ted Sichelman, Kathryn Spier, and Ralph Winter for
comments; James Fox, Anastasios Moraitis, and Paul Riskind for research assistance; and the
John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at Stanford Law School and the John M. Olin
Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Subrogation and the Theory of Insurance When Suits Can Be Brought for Losses Suffered
A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 23303
March 2017, Revised April 2018
JEL No. G22,K13,K41
ABSTRACT
The theory of insurance is considered here when an insured individual may be able to sue another
party for the losses that the insured suffered—and thus when an insured has a potential source of
compensation in addition to insurance coverage. Insurance policies reflect this possibility through
so-called subrogation provisions that give insurers the right to step into the shoes of insureds and
to bring suits against injurers. In a basic case, the optimal subrogation provisions involve full
retention by the insurer of the proceeds from a successful suit and the pursuit of all positive
expected value suits. This eliminates litigation risks for insureds and results in lower premiums—
financed by the litigation income of insurers, including from suits that insureds would not
otherwise have brought. Moreover, optimal subrogation provisions are characterized in the
presence of moral hazard, administrative costs, and non-monetary losses and it is demonstrated
that optimal provisions entail sharing litigation proceeds with insureds in the first two cases but
not when losses are non-monetary.

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
polinsky@stanford.edu
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
In this article we consider the theory of insurance when insured individuals may be able
to sue other parties for the losses they have suffered—and thus have a potential source of
compensation in addition to insurance. Such situations are ubiquitous: an insured driver whose
car is damaged in an accident may be able to sue another driver who caused the accident for
repair costs; an insured homeowner whose house burns down due to a gas leak may be able to
sue the utility company for the value of his residence; or a person covered by health insurance
who slips and falls in a store may be able to sue the proprietor for medical expenses.
Insurance policies reflect the reality that it is often possible for an insured to sue an
injurer for losses sustained. Namely, insurance policies not only promise to compensate insureds
for their losses, they also usually include what are known as subrogation provisions that accord
the insurer the right to step into the shoes of an insured and to sue a party who caused the
insured’s losses. 1 Suppose that driver A owns collision insurance coverage on his car and that
driver B negligently causes an accident that damages A’s car. Driver A would receive payment
from his insurer for repair costs after the accident and then, under the subrogation terms of his
insurance policy, driver A’s insurer could sue driver B. Such a subrogated insurer typically
would be authorized to retain much or all of the proceeds from suit 2 and also would bear much or
all of the litigation costs. 3

1

For a general description of subrogation, see Jerry and Richmond (2012, pp. 648-54). See also Abraham
and Schwarcz (2015: 266-68), Baker and Logue (2017: 297-300), and Harrington and Niehaus (2004: 195).
Subrogation provisions may be explicit in insurance contracts, supplied by statute, or legally presumed to apply; see
Jerry and Richmond (2012: 651-54). In some instances, subrogation effectively comes about when insureds
themselves bring suit and then reimburse insurers for the coverage that they had received; see 16 Couch on
Insurance §226:1, 3, 4, 41 (2017). On the origins of subrogation, which date from antiquity, see Marasinghe (1976a,
b).
2

On the practices and legal doctrines governing the amount that subrogated insurers retain from judgments,
see generally 16 Couch on Insurance §223 (2017). The subrogation income that insurers collect can be significant;

2

In the United States, subrogation provisions are a common feature of property insurance,
liability insurance, health and medical insurance, and disability insurance policies. 4 Subrogation
provisions may also apply to governmentally-provided insurance, notably, to workers
compensation, Medicare, and Medicaid programs. 5 The prevalence of subrogation provisions is
similar in other countries as well. 6
Our object here is to demonstrate that subrogation provisions are a fundamental feature of
optimal insurance contracts—those that maximize the expected utility of insureds subject to the
constraint that the insurer covers its expected expenses—and also to study the specific character
of optimal subrogation provisions. To this end, we build on a model of subrogation introduced
by Shavell (1987: 255-56) in which a risk-averse individual who confronts the risk of an accident
may purchase insurance and, if an accident occurs, may have his insurer sue the injurer on his
behalf. Suit is assumed to be successful only with a probability, in which event the injurer must
pay damages equal to harm. Unlike Shavell, however, we suppose that litigation is costly.
In Section 2, we show that insurance policies with subrogation provisions are superior to
pure insurance policies—policies that pay coverage after an accident occurs but that do not
address the possibility of suit. In essence, there are two reasons for this conclusion. First, as
identified by Shavell, the insured avoids the risk of litigation by subrogating his legal claims to
for example, a study cited in Perry et al. (2015) found that for automobile insurers such income amounted to 27% of
their paid losses for collisions.
3

The insurer would usually be responsible for the entirety of litigation costs when the insurer retains the
full judgment but only for a proportional share of the costs when the insurer keeps less than the full judgment; see 16
Couch on Insurance §223: 113, 119 (2017).
4

See, for example, Dobbyn and French (2016: 425-28) on property, liability, health and medical insurance,
and Bleed (2001: 734) and Dobbyn and French (2016: 46) and on disability insurance.
5

See, for example, Dobbyn and French (2016: 429-30) on workers compensation and Jerry and Richmond
(2012: 652) on Medicare and Medicaid.
6

See, for example, Insurance Day (2009), reviewing subrogation worldwide, including in England,
Germany, France, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, Brazil, India, Singapore, China, and Australia.

3

the insurer. In exchange for forgoing his claims, the insured obtains a lower insurance premium
because the insurer receives income from suit. Second, by subrogating his claims to the insurer,
the insured obtains a reduction in the premium because the insurer will bring some positive
expected value suits that the insured would not otherwise have pursued. Specifically, if the
insured did not have a subrogation provision, he would not have pursued some positive expected
value suits because of his risk aversion. The reduction in the premium due to the insurer bringing
such suits did not arise in Shavell because he assumed that litigation is costless. 7
In Section 3, we study the nature of optimal insurance policies with subrogation
provisions in the presence of moral hazard, administrative costs, and non-monetary losses. Each
of these factors leads to the optimality of less than complete insurance coverage. The shortfall of
insurance coverage raises the question whether the insured should receive a share of the litigation
proceeds obtained by a subrogated insurer in order to better compensate him. This question is the
subject of debate in both legal literature and judicial opinions. 8 We address it with respect to
each of the three factors just noted.
In the case of moral hazard, we assume that insureds can reduce the probability of one
kind of accident by the exercise of unobservable care (for example, homeowners can reduce the
risk of fire by storing flammables away from heat sources), whereas insureds play no role in the
occurrence of a different kind of accident that is caused by other parties (home fires can arise due
to the negligence of contractors). Optimal insurance coverage will be less than complete for the
familiar reason that some exposure to risk will provide an incentive for insureds to take care to
reduce accident risk—here the risk of the first kind of accident. However, we demonstrate that

7

If litigation is costless, a risk-averse individual would bring all suits because he would not suffer any loss
if a suit is unsuccessful.
8

See, for example, Jerry and Richmond (2012: 657-60).

4

the optimal subrogation provision will award the insured a positive share of the damages from a
successful suit. The reason is that the receipt of a share of damages by the insured will help to
offset the portion of the loss not covered by insurance. Significantly, this implicit form of
additional coverage will not contribute to moral hazard. That is because, for a suit to be
successful, the accident must be found by a court to have been caused by another party (a
contractor rather than a homeowner). Moreover, we show that it is desirable for the insurer to
pursue some negative expected value suits because the benefit of the implicit additional coverage
from the associated subrogation payments exceeds the expected net loss from bringing the suits.
With regard to administrative costs, we suppose that insurers bear expenses (notably, due
to checking the veracity of claims) that rise with the level of coverage. Insurance premiums will
then include a loading above their actuarially fair level, and optimal insurance coverage will be
less than full, as is well-known. We show that the optimal subrogation provision will provide the
insured a positive share of damages from a successful suit. The receipt of such damages by the
insured will beneficially reduce the portion of the loss not covered by insurance, as in the case of
moral hazard, and this additional coverage will be effectively free of administrative costs. 9 It also
will be in the insured’s interest for some negative expected value suits to be pursued by the
insurer for essentially the reason noted in the case of moral hazard.
In the case of a non-monetary loss (such as the death of a spouse), it is well understood
that optimal insurance coverage would not reflect such a loss (presuming that it does not affect
the marginal utility of wealth). Optimal coverage would be restricted to monetary losses. Courts,
however, award damages for both types of losses. It follows that under the optimal subrogation
provision, the insurer would retain all of the damages from suit, including the damages for the
9

The administrative costs at issue are negligible, as they are only those associated with transferring funds
to the insured. (This statement is not inconsistent with the fact that litigation costs are distinctly positive.) See
Section 3.B.

5

non-monetary loss. The insured would of course benefit from the insurer’s receipt of damages
for the non-monetary loss through a reduction in the insurance premium. Additionally, under the
optimal subrogation provision, the insurer would bring suit if and only if the expected return is
positive because, unlike in the moral hazard and administrative cost cases, the insured would
purchase ideal insurance coverage.
We conclude in Section 4 with several observations about issues that are not addressed in
our analysis, including litigation efficiencies enjoyed by insurers as a factor favoring
subrogation, undesirable legal restrictions on subrogation, and the possible sale of claims as a
substitute for subrogation.
Before proceeding, we note that little attention has been paid to subrogation in the
economic literature on insurance 10 and we are aware of only three publications that formally
address the topic: Shavell (1987: 255-56), Sykes (2001), and Gomez and Penalva (2015). As
discussed above, Shavell recognized that subrogation is desirable because it shifts litigation risk
from the insured to the insurer, but because he assumed that litigation is costless, he did not
observe that subrogation is also desirable because it leads to the bringing of all positive expected
value suits. Sykes examined the optimal form of subrogation provisions allowing for moral
hazard, administrative costs, and non-monetary losses; he did not, however, consider why
subrogation provisions are generally desirable. Sykes found that the insured should not receive
any subrogation proceeds in the cases of moral hazard and administrative costs, and all the
subrogation proceeds in the case of non-monetary losses—the opposite of our conclusions in all
three cases. The reason for these differences is that Sykes made assumptions that lack apparent

10

Notably, none of the thirty-seven articles in Dionne (2013)—Handbook of Insurance—considers
subrogation.

6

economic justification. 11 Gomez and Penalva focus on identifying the effects of subrogation on
the deterrence of accidents rather than, as here, on the form of the optimal insurance contract
with subrogation. 12

2. Basic Analysis
We consider here the standard model of insurance for accident risks, but supplemented by
the ability of insured individuals to bring suit for harm that they suffer. In particular, we assume
that identical risk-averse individuals face a chance of suffering harm from an accident; that they
purchase insurance policies that maximize their expected utility; and that if an accident occurs,
they will be able to sue a potentially liable party for recompense, where suit would involve a
litigation cost and result in success only with a probability. 13
Let
y = initial wealth of an individual;
U(∙) = utility of an individual from wealth, where U′(∙) > 0 and U″(∙) < 0;
p = probability of an accident; p  (0, 1);
h = harm if an accident occurs; h > 0;
k = cost of bringing a suit; k ≥ 0; and
q = probability of winning a suit, resulting in an award of h; q  [0, 1].
11

See notes 23, 26, 28, and 30 below.

12

However, in the course of their analysis, they duplicated Shavell’s result. See also notes 18 and 40
below. Of additional interest is Viscusi’s (1989) empirical investigation of subrogation, as well as legal literature on
the subject (which often reflects economic views), including Kimball and Davis (1962), Abraham (1986: 153-55),
Reinker and Rosenberg (2007), and articles cited in 16 Couch on Insurance Part XI (2017).
13

We abstract in the model from the possibility of settlement because we want litigation to involve risk—
otherwise we cannot study how subrogation alleviates litigation risk. We could have considered a more complicated
model involving the possibility of both settlement and trial (notably, a model involving asymmetric information in
settlement bargaining), and thus involving litigation risk. But we do not believe that such a model would lead to
significant additional insight.

7

For simplicity, we assume that there is a single value of each of the above variables (and thus
that these values are known to all parties).
A pure insurance policy is defined by a premium that the insured pays at the outset and a
coverage amount that the insured receives immediately after an accident occurs but before a suit
might be brought by the insured. This assumption about the time at which coverage is received
reflects two aspects of reality: that a person will frequently have consumption needs that he must
satisfy shortly after an accident (like replacing a car that he requires for transportation); and that
litigation outcomes (or settlements) usually occur significantly later. 14
An insurance policy with a subrogation provision adds to the pure insurance policy an
instruction to the insurer whether to bring a suit on behalf of the insured after an accident
occurs, 15 states that the insurer will bear litigation costs k if a suit is brought, 16 and specifies the
share (perhaps zero) that the insurer will pay to the insured from the award h if a suit is
successful.
Let
π = insurance premium;
c = insurance coverage; c ≥ 0;

14

In the course of analyzing the model presented here, we also investigated a model in which consumption
occurs at two times—directly following an accident and after the outcome of litigation. In the latter model, it was
optimal for the insured to receive compensation immediately following an accident. However, this twoconsumption-period model did not provide much understanding beyond that gained from the model that we study
here in which insurance payments are assumed to be made just after an accident.
15

Because our purpose is to derive the terms of the insurance contract that maximizes the expected utility
of insureds and it is possible for the contract to include instructions about when to sue, we study such instructions. In
practice, however, we would not expect insurance contracts to have explicit instructions about when the insurer
should bring a suit due to problems of asymmetry of information (see Section 4).
16

This assumption is made for simplicity; it would be straightforward to show that it is a feature of the
optimal contract in the basic analysis.

8

 = instruction whether the insurer sues under a subrogation provision; if  = 0, suit
is not brought; if  = 1, suit is brought; and
s = insured’s share of the award h under a subrogation provision if a suit is
successful; s  [0, h].
Thus, a pure insurance policy is described by a premium π and a coverage level c; and a policy
with a subrogation provision is described additionally by an instruction  about suit, and the
insured’s share s of an award.
By the optimal insurance policy we mean the policy (among either pure policies or
policies with a subrogation provision) that maximizes the expected utility of the insured subject
to the constraint that the premium equals the expected expenses of the insurer.
Under a pure insurance policy, the premium constraint is
π = pc.

(1)

The expected utility of the insured given c will depend on whether he would bring a suit if an
accident occurred. If he would not, his expected utility would be
EUN(c) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + pU(y – π – h + c).

(2)

If the insured would bring a suit, his expected utility would be
EUS(c) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + p[qU(y – π + c – k) + (1 – q)U(y – π – h + c – k)],

(3)

where h does not appear in the first term in brackets because the insured receives h from a
successful suit. Therefore, given any c, the insured will bring a suit after an accident occurs if
and only if (3) exceeds (2), and his expected utility will be max[EUN(c), EUS(c)]. 17 The optimal
pure insurance policy therefore solves the problem
max{max[EUN(c), EUS(c)]}over c.
17

(4)

We assume for concreteness that if the insured is indifferent between suing and not suing, he will not sue,
and we will adopt similar conventions below without comment.

9

Let c* denote the optimal level of coverage. We now show
Proposition 1. Under the optimal pure insurance policy,
(a) if suits are not optimal to bring, optimal coverage is full, c* = h, and each insured thus
has certain wealth of y – ph;
(b) if suits are optimal to bring, optimal coverage c* is in (k, h + k), where c* is
determined by
U(y – pc) = qU(y – pc + c – k) + (1 – q)U(y – pc – h + c – k),

(5)

and each insured has expected utility of EUS = (1 – p)U(y – pc*) + p[qU(y – pc* + c* – k) +
(1 – q)U(y – pc* – h + c* – k)]; and
(c) suits are optimal to bring if and only if their expected value exceeds a positive
threshold: given any q and h, there exists a t satisfying 0 < t < qh such that if qh – k > t, suit is
optimal to bring; and if qh – k ≤ t, suit is not optimal to bring.
The proofs of this and subsequent propositions are contained in the Appendix.
Notes. (i) In part (a) the problem for the insured is the standard insurance problem in
which optimal coverage is well-known to be full.
(ii) The intuition underlying (b) is that, if an accident occurs, the insured will bear k in
litigation costs, suggesting that he would want to insure for at least that amount; and since he will
also bear the risk of losing the suit, he might want to insure for as much as h more. It is plausible,
however, that c* would be significantly less than h + k, and, indeed, less than h. The reason is
that c would often result in excessive total compensation, for if the suit is successful, the insured
collects damages of h in addition to c. This point is reinforced by the fact that the probability q
that suit would be won will tend to be high, since the hypothesis is that suit is optimal to bring. 18
18

Gomez and Penalva (2015) found that c* < h in their model, in which litigation costs were assumed to be
zero; their result is a special case of our conclusion when k = 0.

10

(iii) Part (c) follows from the fact that the insured bears litigation risk, rendering some
positive expected value suits not worth bringing.
Next consider the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision. In this case, if
the instruction is  = 0, not to sue after an accident, the premium constraint will be (1), expected
utility will be (2), and by Proposition 1(a), optimal coverage will be c* = h and utility will be
U(y – ph). If, however,  = 1, to sue after an accident, the premium constraint will be
π = pc – p(q(h – s) – k)

(6)

because the insurer will receive income of h – s if it wins a suit and will incur the litigation cost k
if there is an accident. Hence, the expected utility of the insured will be
EUS(c, s) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + p[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c) + qU(y – π – h + c + s)].

(7)

The optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision solves the problem
max[U(y – ph), max EUS(c, s) over c and s],

(8)

and we have
Proposition 2. Under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision,
(a) if suits are not optimal to bring, optimal coverage is full, c* = h, and each insured has
certain wealth of y – ph;
(b) if suits are optimal to bring, optimal coverage is full, c* = h, the optimal subrogation
share is zero, s* = 0, and each insured has certain wealth of y – ph +

p(qh – k);

(c) suits are optimal to bring if and only if they have positive expected value, qh – k > 0,
in which case insureds are better off by the positive amount p(qh – k) than if suits are not
brought; and
(d) the insured’s expected utility is strictly higher than under the optimal pure insurance
policy if suits have positive expected value (and otherwise is equivalent).

11

Notes. (i) The explanation of part (a) is the same as that above.
(ii) Part (b) holds because it is desirable for the insured to be fully protected against both
accident risk and litigation risk, and this is accomplished when coverage is full and the
subrogation share is zero.
(iii) Part (c) follows from (b). Because insureds are fully protected against all risks, they
will be made better off from suit if and only if suit results in a lower premium. That will be true
when suit has positive expected value.
(iv) Part (d) follows from observing that, under the optimal pure insurance policy, one of
two inferior outcomes will occur when suits have positive expected value: either suits will not be
brought, in which case wealth will be certain but lower than that under the optimal insurance
policy with a subrogation provision because the insurer does not earn the additional expected
income p(qh – k) from bringing suit; or suits will be brought, but insureds will bear accident risk
(because c* is generally different from h) as well as litigation risk.

3. Moral Hazard, Administrative Costs, and Non-Monetary Losses
We now consider optimal subrogation provisions given three common factors that alter
the nature of optimal insurance coverage: moral hazard, administrative costs, and non–monetary
losses. Importantly, as noted in the introduction, each of these factors leads optimal insurance
coverage to be less than sufficient to make the insured whole. We show that in the cases of moral
hazard and administrative costs, the optimal subrogation provision provides for the insured to
obtain a positive portion of the proceeds from successful litigation, but not in the case of nonmonetary losses.

12

A. Moral Hazard
We here consider a problem of moral hazard, in which the incentive of an insured to take
care to reduce the risk of an accident is dulled by his receipt of insurance payments. Specifically,
we assume that the insured’s level of care is not observable by the insurer and that it is nonmonetary. Let
x = level of care of an insured; x ≥ 0; and
d(x) = disutility of care; d(0) = 0; d′(0) = 0; d′(x) > 0 for x > 0; d″(x) > 0.
We assume that that there are two mutually exclusive types of accident. The first type is caused
by the insured, and its probability can be lowered by his exercise of care. For example, as we
said in the introduction, a home owner can reduce the risk of fires by storing flammables away
from the furnace. Let
p1(x) = probability of a type 1 accident, caused by an insured; 0 < p1(x) < 1; p1′(x) < 0;
p1″(x) > 0.
The second type of accident is caused by another party, such as a contractor whose faulty
installation of wiring leads to a house fire. We assume that the probability of this type of accident
is exogenous. 19 Let
p2 = probability of a type 2 accident, caused by another party; p2 > 0.
Thus, the total probability of an accident is
p(x) = p1(x) + p2.

(9)

If an accident occurs, the insurer is assumed not to have any information about its type,
so that the instruction  whether to sue cannot be conditioned on its type. If a suit is brought,

19

It will be seen that under this assumption, no moral hazard will be created by making a subrogation
payment to the insured when an accident is of type 2. The significance of the assumption is only that the moral
hazard associated with type 2 accidents is less than that associated with type 1 accidents; the moral hazard need not
be zero.

13

however, the court is assumed to be able to determine which type of accident occurred and to
award a judgment to the insured if and only if the accident was of the second type, caused by
another party. 20
Suppose that the instruction is not to sue after an accident. Then the insured’s expected
utility is
EUN = (1 – p(x))U(y – π) + p(x)U(y – π – h + c) – d(x),

(10)

where neither c nor π can depend on x because the insurer is unable to observe it. The optimal
insurance policy maximizes EUN over c and π subject to
π = p(x)c,

(11)

the insured maximizes EUN over x, given c and π.

(12)

and

The role of moral hazard in this problem is obvious from (12) when c = h. Then the insured’s
expected utility is EUN = U(y – π) – d(x), in which case the insured would choose x = 0. If,
however, c is less than h, then the insured’s exposure to risk will be seen to lead him to choose x
> 0. Let xN be the x chosen by the insured under the optimal insurance policy assuming that suit
is not brought.
Now assume that  = 1, that suit will be brought if an accident occurs. Then the insured’s
expected utility is

20

We presume that the court does not observe the insured’s level of care, and thus that the insurer cannot
obtain such information from the court in order to combat moral hazard. The motivation for this assumption is that
in reality there are many dimensions of care that a court would not be likely to consider. For instance, suppose that a
homeowner sues a contractor because the contractor’s negligent installation of wiring caused a fire that destroyed
his kitchen. The evidence in the legal proceeding relevant to the homeowner’s claim would concern the wiring in the
kitchen. If the homeowner had also been negligent with respect to something he did bearing on fire risk elsewhere in
the house––say leaving oily rags near the furnace in the basement—that fact would ordinarily not be relevant to the
claim at issue, in which case the insurer would not learn about the home owner’s negligence from the suit against the
contractor.

14

EUS = (1 – p(x))U(y – π) + p(x)[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c)

(13)

+ qU(y – π – h + c + s)] – d(x).
The optimal insurance policy maximizes EUS over c, s, and π subject to the constraints
π = p(x)c – p(x)(q(h – s) – k),

(14)

and
the insured maximizes EUS over x, given c, s, and π.

(15)

Observe that q, the probability of winning a suit conditional on an accident having
occurred, is p2/(p1(x) + p2), because our assumption is that a suit is won if and only if the
accident turns out to have been caused by another party. Because q depends on x we will
sometimes write it as q(x). Note that p(x)q(x), the unconditional probability that a judgment will
be obtained, is (p1(x) + p2)[p2/(p1(x) + p2)] = p2. The explanation is that all accidents caused by
other parties will result in liability, whereas no accidents caused by insureds will result in
liability. It follows that the level of care cannot affect the number of judgments because x
influences only the probability of accidents caused by insureds. Relatedly, because p(x)q = p2,
p(x)(1 – q) = p(x) – p2 = p1(x); that is, the probability of having an accident and then losing at
trial is the probability of having an accident that was caused by the insured.
Hence, (13) becomes
EUS = (1 – p(x))U(y – π) + p1(x)U(y – π – h + c)

(16)

+ p2U(y – π – h + c + s) – d(x),
and (14) becomes
π = p(x)(c + k) – p2(h – s).

(17)

Consequently, the choice of care of insureds affects their premiums only through the coverage
amount and litigation costs, not through the return to insurers from bringing suits.

15

Given (16), the constraint (15) can be shown to be equivalent to the first-order condition
–p1′(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] = d′(x);

(18)

that is, the marginal benefit from reducing the risk of type 1 accidents (and thus bearing h – c)
equals the marginal cost of care. Note that the subrogation payment s does not appear in (18) and
thus does not directly affect the insured’s choice of care; this is because s is obtained only if
there is a judgment, and the probability p2 of a judgment is not affected by his care.
We can now describe the optimal insurance policy.
Proposition 3. Suppose that moral hazard is associated with the provision of insurance
coverage (as described). Then under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision,
(a) if suits are not optimal to bring, optimal coverage is incomplete, c* < h;
(b) if suits are optimal to bring, optimal coverage is incomplete, c* < h, and the optimal
subrogation payment is positive, s* > 0; and
(c) suits are optimal to bring whenever they would have positive or zero expected value if
suits were not brought, q(xN)h – k ≥ 0, and some negative expected value suits are also optimal
to pursue.
Notes. (i) When suits are not optimal to bring, the insurance policy becomes an example
of the standard insurance policy involving moral hazard, in which c* < h is optimal so as to
induce the insured to take some positive level of care. 21
(ii) When suits are optimal to bring, the result that c* < h is essentially due to the reason
just given. The explanation for s* > 0 is as follows. First, since c* < h, the marginal utility of
wealth after an accident and receipt of c* is higher than in the no-accident state, meaning that
arranging for a positive s is similar to arranging for a beneficial increase in insurance coverage.
Second, the possible countervailing argument that receipt of a payment s from the insurer would
21

See, for example, the synthesis by Winter (2013: 208-12).

16

dilute the incentives of the insured to take care is not applicable: as we observed (after (18)), the
insured’s receipt of s is independent of his choice of care x because s is obtained only when an
accident is caused by another party. 22 Consequently, raising s from zero reduces the risk-bearing
created by c* < h without contributing to moral hazard. 23
(iii) That suits are optimal to pursue when they have positive expected value is based on
the following logic. Given any contemplated level of coverage c, premiums can be lowered if
such suits are brought, and the insured need not bear any additional risk since s = 0 could be
chosen. This suggests that insureds must be better off, but the effect of a lower premium on the
optimally chosen level of care needs to be taken into account to complete this argument. That
suits with zero or small negative expected value are optimal to bring is explained by the point
made in note (ii) that, since c* < h, risk-bearing is reduced by bringing suit because that permits
s* > 0.
(iv) We have implicitly assumed that the insurance contract would not be renegotiated,
but it would be in the insured’s and insurer’s ex post interest to do so: since s* > 0, the insured
bears risk, and because the insurer is risk-neutral, they would both benefit if the insured were to
receive a certain amount before a suit is brought (for example, qs – ε for a small ε). However, it
is not in the ex ante interest of the parties for this to occur; such a renegotiated contract would
contribute to moral hazard, for the payment to the insured would be made whether or not he

22

Actually, arranging for s > 0 turns out to increase care. The reason is that when s > 0, the premium rises,
and an increase in the premium will elevate care (because the premium increase is equivalent to a reduction in the
insured’s wealth). See the demonstration that x′(s) > 0 in step (v) of the proof of part (b).
23

Sykes (2001: 393-94) supposed that the problem of moral hazard is identical whether an accident results
in a successful suit or does not. If that were true, s* would equal zero. But it is implausible that the fact that a suit is
successful would provide no information to an insurer about the role of the insured in an accident (in our case, about
whether the accident was caused by the insured or by another party).

17

caused the loss. 24 Consequently, the insurer has an interest in suppressing renegotiation and may
be able to do so by prohibiting employees from changing stated policy terms. Moreover,
renegotiation may not occur because of the cost of bargaining or may fail due to asymmetric
information. To the extent that renegotiation does not occur or fails for the preceding reasons,
our rationale for s* to be positive would apply.
B. Administrative Costs
We suppose here that insurers bear administrative costs that rise with the level of
coverage. Notably, the cost to an insurer of checking the validity of a claim would tend to
increase with the magnitude of coverage. 25 We assume for simplicity that such administrative
costs rise in proportion to coverage. Let
λ = the administrative cost per dollar of coverage; λ > 0,
where λ will also be referred to as the loading factor.
If the instruction in the policy is not to sue after an accident, the premium constraint is
π = p(1 + λ)c.

(19)

In this case, expected utility given c is EUN(c) as stated in (2), where π is determined by (19).
When the instruction is to bring suit if an accident occurs, the premium constraint is
π = p(1 + λ)c – p(q(h – s) – k).

(20)

24

The potential for renegotiation to which we refer is a version of that studied in Fudenberg and Tirole
(1990) and related literature on renegotiation and moral hazard. In that literature, possible renegotiation occurs after
the agent has chosen his unobservable level of care and before the outcome that depends on his care choice—loss or
no loss in the context of insurance—eventuates. Here, the renegotiation occurs after the possible loss––but before a
suit is resolved.
25

For a discussion of this and other reasons for a loading on coverage, see, for example, Harrington and
Niehaus (2004: 180-81). To elaborate on the reason mentioned in the text, consider a model with a z of levels of
harm h distributed with positive density f(h). Suppose that the cost to the insurer to verify that an insured has
suffered at least harm z is k(z), where k(z) > 0. If the insured’s coverage is c, the insurer will have to verify the full
harm for h  c and only harm up to c for h > c. Hence, the insurer’s expected claim verification costs are
c
k(h)f(h)dh + k(c)[1 – F(c)],
0
which are increasing in coverage c.

18

Note that although the loading factor applies to insurance coverage c, we assume that it does not
apply to the subrogation payment s to the insured. The justification for this assumption is
twofold. First, if a suit is won, the court will have validated the insured’s claim concerning the
harm that he suffered. Second, the insurer would bear essentially no additional resource cost in
making the payment of s—the cost of mailing a check or of wiring funds is negligible. 26 The
expected utility of the insured will be EUS(c, s) as given in (7), with π determined by (20).
The optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision solves the problem
max[max EUN(c) over c, max EUS(c, s) over c and s],

(21)

leading to the following result.
Proposition 4. Suppose that there is a positive administrative cost λc associated with the
provision of insurance coverage c. Then under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation
provision,
(a) if suits are not optimal to bring, optimal coverage is incomplete, c* < h;
(b) if suits are optimal to bring, optimal coverage is incomplete, c* < h, the optimal
subrogation payment is positive, s* > 0, and c* + s* < h; and
(c) suits are optimal to bring whenever they have positive or zero expected value,
qh – k ≥ 0, and some negative expected value suits are also optimal to pursue.
Notes. (i) When suits are not optimal to bring, c* provides less than full coverage for a
well-understood reason: were coverage full, a person would be locally risk-neutral, but because
of the loading factor, reducing coverage a small amount would raise his expected wealth. 27

26

Sykes (2001: 392) overlooked this point and assumed that a positive loading factor is associated with
making a subrogation payment to an insured.
27

See, for example, Schlesinger (2013: 170).

19

(ii) When suits are optimal to bring, c* is less than complete not only due to the loading
factor, but also due to the possibility that a suit would be won and that a positive s* would be
obtained, reducing the need for coverage.
(iii) The reasons that s* > 0 are essentially these: on one hand, since c* < h, the marginal
utility of wealth after an accident and receipt of c* is higher than in the no-accident state; and on
the other hand, the implicit premium that the insured pays to obtain s* is actuarially fair because,
as we observed above, there is no administrative cost associated with the payment of s* to the
insured. 28 In other words, an individual’s election of s* > 0 is similar to his purchasing insurance
on actuarially fair terms in the event that his suit is won, when his usual insurance coverage was
incomplete due to the loading factor.
(iv) However, choosing a positive s* is not identical to purchasing insurance coverage,
for the implicit premium paid for s* (namely, pqs*) is borne in each contingency faced by the
insured, including when he has an accident and loses his subsequent suit. In that contingency, his
wealth is lowest, so the increase in the premium is relatively costly in utility terms. This
observation explains why c* + s* < h rather than equals h.
(v) The explanation of the suit decision parallels that in the case of moral hazard.
Bringing a positive expected value suit beneficially lowers the premium (and the insured need
not bear any risk since s = 0 can be chosen), and bringing a suit with zero or small negative
expected value is desirable since that permits s* > 0 (with a probability), thereby partially
offsetting incomplete coverage.
(vi) As in the case of moral hazard, we have implicitly assumed that the insurance
contract would not be renegotiated. Again, it would be in the interest of the insured and insurer
28

In contrast, Sykes (2001: 391-92) concluded that s* is zero. This is because he assumed that the same
loading factor λ is associated with a payment s to an insured as with insurance coverage c. But, for the reason
provided above, we believe that the proper assumption is that there is no loading cost associated with a positive s.

20

to do so: because s* > 0, the parties would have an incentive to arrange for the insured to obtain
a certain payment (less than qs). Such an agreement would not, however, alter the thrust of our
point, which is that the optimal subrogation contract results in the insured receiving a portion of
any financial benefit obtained by the insurer from the bringing of a suit.
C. Non-Monetary Losses
Now suppose that the losses from an accident include both a monetary component and a
non-monetary component, such as when the injured party both bears medical expenses and
suffers pain. Let
u = loss of utility due to the non-monetary component of harm; u > 0; and
a = court award for the non-monetary loss; a > 0.
If a person is involved in an accident and his level of wealth is z, assume that his utility will be
U(z) – u. Accordingly, the occurrence of the non-monetary loss will not affect his marginal
utility of wealth. 29 In all other respects, the model analyzed in this subsection is that employed in
Section 2, including that the monetary loss is h and that the court will award h for this
component of loss.
If suit will not be brought after an accident, the premium will be (1) and the insured’s
expected utility given c will be
EUN(c) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + p[U(y – π – h + c) – u].

(22)

If a suit will be brought after an accident, the premium will be
π = pc – p(q(h + a – s) – k)

(23)

because the insurer’s expected profit given that an accident occurs is q(h + a – s) – k. Hence, the
insured’s expected utility given c and s will be
29

This assumption seems most realistic, though cases in which non-monetary losses affect the marginal
utility of wealth are considered in the literature on insurance; see originally Arrow (1974) and Cook and Graham
(1977).

21

EUS(c, s) = (1 – p)U(y – π)

(24)

+ p[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c) + qU(y – π – h + c + s) – u].
The optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision solves
max[max EUN(c) over c, max EUS(c, s) over c and s],

(25)

and is as follows.
Proposition 5. Suppose that there are both monetary and non-monetary losses when an
accident occurs. Then under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision,
(a) if suits are not optimal to bring, optimal coverage equals the monetary loss alone,
c* = h;
(b) if suits are optimal to bring, optimal coverage equals the monetary loss alone, c* = h,
and the optimal subrogation share is zero, s* = 0; and
(c) suits are optimal to bring if and only if they have positive expected value,
q(h + a) – k > 0.
Notes: (i) The result in part (a) is the well-understood point that optimal insurance
coverage for a non-monetary loss is zero when such a loss does not affect the marginal utility of
wealth (Arrow 1974; Cook and Graham 1977).
(ii) The result in part (b) is due to two factors: on one hand, optimal insurance coverage is
limited to monetary losses h as just observed; on the other hand, the insured can forgo collecting
a positive subrogation share but still benefit from the court award a for the non-monetary loss
through a lower premium. 30
(iii) The result in part (c) is due to the point that the insurer’s income from suits, and thus
the insured’s reduction in his premium, will be maximized if and only if all positive expected
30

Sykes (2001: 389) found that it is optimal for the insured to retain the entire award a for non-monetary
losses. That is because he assumed that it is impossible for the insured—who brings suit himself—to transfer the
award a to the insurer. There is no apparent economic justification for this assumption.

22

value suits are pursued. Unlike in the cases of moral hazard and administrative costs, there is no
motive to bring suits with small negative expected values in order to improve insurance coverage
through a positive subrogation payment since the insured will already have been fully covered
for his monetary loss.

4. Discussion
We conclude with observations about several issues that we did not consider above.
Litigation efficiencies enjoyed by insurers. An additional factor favoring subrogation is
that insurers can probably more cheaply prosecute cases on behalf of their insureds because of
economies of scale in litigation and informational advantages. Although large law firms might
also benefit from economies of scale, insurers arguably would still enjoy lower costs because, in
order to fulfill their insurance functions, they would already have obtained information relevant
to determining the magnitude of losses and the behavior of insureds.
Cooperation of insureds in the litigation process. When suit is desirable under the terms
of subrogation provisions, the cooperation of insureds—notably, supplying information needed
in the litigation process and giving testimony—will be important to achieving a successful
outcome. This suggests not only that optimal subrogation provisions would include clauses
requiring such cooperation—which they do in fact 31—but also that it would be beneficial for the
subrogation share paid to insureds to be positive to better motivate them to cooperate.
Asymmetric information and delegation of the decision to litigate. Although we assumed
that both insureds and insurers know the probability of winning at trial q and litigation costs k, in
reality insureds especially will tend to have imperfect information about these variables. Thus,
instructions in the insurance policy concerning litigation cannot practically depend on q and k. If
31

See Abraham and Schwarcz (2015: 208) for a typical example.

23

as a result the insured delegates the litigation decision to the insurer, the insurer may or may not
bring suit when the insured would wish. In the basic case in Section 2 and in the case of nonmonetary losses, the insured’s and the insurer’s interests will be aligned. In those two cases the
insured desires that the subrogation payment s is zero and that suits are brought if and only if
they have positive expected value. Clearly, if s is zero—meaning that the insurer keeps the entire
proceeds from litigation—the insurer will decide to bring suits exactly when they have positive
expected value. However, in the cases of moral hazard and loading, there will be a conflict of
interest between the insured and the insurer. For then the insured desires that s is positive and
that suits are brought if they have positive expected value or a small negative expected value.
But if s is positive, the insurer will not capture the entire judgment and therefore will not bring
some positive expected value suits and of course will not bring any negative expected value
suits. In the light of such conflicts of interest between insureds and insurers, it is not surprising
that subrogated insurers face general duties not to unduly compromise the well-being of insureds
in litigation. 32
Legal restrictions on subrogation. Subrogation provisions may be constrained by law, 33
and such constraints may adversely affect the welfare of insureds. 34 Notably, the law bars
subrogated insurers from collecting awards for pain and suffering. 35 This limitation reduces the
expected utility of insureds because, as we discussed in Section 3.C, insureds would prefer not to
receive any compensation for pure losses in utility; they would prefer instead to obtain lower

32

See Jerry and Richmond (2012: 156-57).

33

See Jerry and Richmond (2012: 651-52) and Dobbyn and French (2016: 432-34).

34

On this general theme see Reinker and Rosenberg (2007).

35

Courts generally permit subrogated insurers to collect damages only for types of losses that were insured;
see, for example, 16 Couch on Insurance §223: 85 (2017). Thus, because insurance coverage against pain and
suffering is essentially non-existent, subrogated insurers would be barred from retaining pain and suffering damages.

24

premiums that subrogation of pain and suffering awards would generate. Another example is that
the law precludes subrogation of awards for wrongful death even though insureds would
presumably wish their life insurers to have subrogation rights for the general reasons discussed in
Section 2. 36
The “made whole” rule of subrogation. According to an important default rule of the law
on subrogation, an insured who has not been fully compensated for his loss by his insurance
coverage should be given a share of litigation proceeds sufficient to make him whole. 37 Only
after the insured is made whole is the insurer permitted to retain any litigation proceeds. Our
results that under moral hazard and administrative costs it is optimal for insureds to receive a
positive portion of damages, when their insurance coverage is less than full, point in the direction
of the made-whole rule; but insureds will not necessarily be made whole (and definitely will not
be in the case of administrative costs, where c* + s* < h). However, our conclusion that damages
for non-monetary losses should be retained by the insurer implies that the made whole rule
would be undesirable to apply in that case.
Selling claims as an alternative to subrogation. It might be thought that many of the
virtues of subrogation could be obtained by insureds if they purchased pure insurance policies
and sold their claims to other parties. In that way, insureds would obtain value for their claims
without bearing litigation risk. However, the sale of claims is not observed in fact. The
explanation appears to lie in several factors. First, legal barriers to such sales exist. 38 Second,

36

See Jerry and Richmond (2012: 653-54) on the prohibition against subrogation for life insurers. Life
insurance may be viewed as insurance for an insured’s beneficiary (say a spouse) against the cessation of the
insured’s stream of income. As such, the lesson from Section 2 is that subrogation for life insurers would benefit
insureds by avoiding overinsurance against loss of the insured’s stream of income—resulting in a lower premium—
and reducing litigation risk.
37

On this “made whole” rule, see, for example, Jerry and Richmond (2012: 654-57).

38

See, for example, Sebok (2011: 74-121) and 6 American Jurisprudence 2d Assignments §§53, 55 (2018).

25

purchasers of claims would be at a cost disadvantage relative to insurers, as mentioned in the
first comment above. Third, risk-bearing would not be eliminated through the sale of claims
because the revenue obtained by insureds would vary depending on the expected value of their
claims. 39
Subrogation versus insurance contingent on the outcome of litigation. One might believe
that many of the benefits of subrogation could be achieved under an insurance policy that
provides coverage only after a suit is resolved. In the setting of Section 2, consider a policy that
pays an amount equal to litigation costs plus harm if a suit is lost and for just litigation costs if a
suit won. Under this policy, the final levels of wealth of the insured would be the same as those
under optimal subrogation. However, such an arrangement would not in fact be desirable for
insureds because, as we explained in Section 2, insureds generally would want to receive
compensation immediately after an accident because of their consumption needs at that time.
Consumer ignorance of subrogation terms. It is plausible that when individuals purchase
insurance, they often do not consider the possibility that they might be able to bring a suit for
losses that they might suffer, and they are unaware of the concept of insurance subrogation (and
thus of its presence or absence in their policy). Given consumer ignorance of this nature,
competitive pressures would still be likely to lead to subrogation, for its adoption by insurers
would permit them to lower premiums, and individuals would presumably notice and find lower
premiums attractive. However, we would not necessarily expect the specific terms of subrogation
provisions to be in insureds’ interests. Notably, insurers might wish to retain as much of the
proceeds from suit as possible, whereas we have shown that insureds should obtain a share of the
proceeds in the cases of moral hazard and administrative costs.
39

In theory, this problem could be cured by having the insured sell his right to bring suits before any
accident has occurred. That kind of sale, however, would still suffer from an informational disadvantage relative to
subrogation.

26

Subrogation and social welfare. Although our focus has been on subrogation as a feature
of insurance contracts that maximize the expected utility of insureds, subrogation also has
broader effects that influence social welfare. Notably, subrogation results in a greater volume of
suit against potentially liable parties (compare Proposition 1(c) to Proposition 2(c)), and thus
increases the deterrence of undesirable acts as well as the litigation costs that society incurs. An
analysis of the effects of subrogation on social well-being would take such factors into account. 40

40

Gomez and Penalva (2015) undertake such an analysis in comparing a subrogation regime, a regime
barring subrogation, and a regime in which insurance benefits are subtracted from damage payments. See also the
remarks in Abraham (1986: 154-55) and Shavell (1987: 235-40).

27

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: (a) If suits are not optimal to bring, then from (2) and π = pc, the
insured’s problem is to maximize (1 – p)U(y – pc) + pU(y – pc – h + c) over c. Jensen’s
inequality gives us
(1 – p)U(y – pc) + pU(y – pc – h + c)

(A1)

≤ U((1 – p)(y – pc) + p(y – pc – h + c)) = U(y – ph),
where the inequality is strict if y – pc ≠ y – pc – h + c, or if c ≠ h. And since if c = h, expected
utility is U(y – ph), (A1) implies that c = h is optimal.
(b) Using (3) and π = pc, we obtain
EUS′ (c) = –p(1 – p)U(y – pc) + p(1 – p)[qU(y – pc + c – k)

(A2)

+ (1 – q)U(y – pc – h + c – k)],
implying that
EUS′ (0) = p(1 – p){[qU(y – k) + (1 – q)U(y – h – k)] – U(y)} > 0,

(A3)

so that c* > 0. Hence, c* must satisfy
EUS′ (c) = –p(1 – p)U(y – pc) + p(1 – p)[qU(y – pc + c – k)

(A4)

+ (1 – q)U(y – pc – h + c – k)] = 0,
which yields (5). Note also that
EUS(c) = p2(1 – p)U(y – pc) + p(1 – p)2[qU(y – pc + c – k)

(A5)

+ (1 – q)U(y – pc – h + c – k)] < 0,
which is the second-order condition for a maximum of (3), so that (5) identifies a (unique)
maximum. When (5) holds, it must be that
y – pc* – h + c* – k < y – pc* < y – pc* + c* – k.

28

(A6)

The first inequality here implies that c* < h + k and the second that c* > k, so that c* is in
(k, h + k).
~
~
~
(c) We first demonstrate that there is a k satisfying 0 < k < qh such that for k < k suit is
~
preferred, at k = k suit and no suit are equally desirable (and by our convention, suit will not
~
occur), and for k > k no suit is preferred. Let EUS(k) be expected utility when c is chosen
optimally given k. At k = 0, the insured will be better off if he brings suit than not, for he might
win the suit. Hence, EUS(0) > U(y – ph). At k = qh, the insured will be worse off if he brings suit,
for
EUS(qh) = (1 – p)U(y – pc) + p[qU(y – pc + c – qh) + (1 – q)U(y – pc – h + c – qh)]

(A7)

< (1 – p)U(y – pc) + pU(y – pc + c – h) < U(y – ph).
The first inequality follows from the use of Jensen’s inequality on the term in brackets, and the
second inequality also follows from Jensen’s inequality. Since EUS(k) is continuous and
~
~
~
decreasing in k, there must be a unique k satisfying 0 < k < qh at which EUS(k ) = U(y – ph) and
thus having the claimed properties.
~
~
~
The threshold t in (c) equals qh – k . For if qh – k > qh – k , or equivalently if k < k , suit is
~
~
optimal to bring; and similarly, if qh – k ≤ qh – k , or if k ≥ k , suit is not optimal to bring. Also,
~
~
because k = qh – t and 0 < k < qh, we have 0 < qh – t < qh, or 0 < t < qh. Q
Proof of Proposition 2: (a) The proof of this part is identical to that of Proposition 1(a).
(b) By Jensen’s inequality, we have
EUS(c, s) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + p[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c) + qU(y – π – h + c + s)]
≤ U((1 – p)(y – π) + p[(1 – q)(y – π – h + c) + q(y – π – h + c + s)])
= U(y – π + p(c – h) + pqs).
29

(A8)

Using (6) we have that y – π + p(c – h) + pqs = y – ph + p(qh – k). Hence,
EUS(c, s) ≤ U(y – ph + p(qh – k)),

(A9)

where the inequality is strict unless y – π = y – π – h + c = y – π – h + c + s, which is to say,
unless c = h and s = 0. Hence, we know that c* = h and s* = 0.
(c) If the insurer is instructed not to bring a suit, the insured’s wealth is y – ph, whereas if
the insurer is instructed to bring a suit, the insured’s wealth is y – ph + p(qh – k). Consequently,
it will be optimal to instruct the insurer to bring a suit if and only if qh – k > 0, in which case the
insured’s wealth will rise by p(qh – k).
(d) If qh – k ≤ 0, then by Propositions 1(a) and 1(c) and 2(a) and 2(c) the insured’s
expected utility is the same under the optimal pure insurance policy and the optimal insurance
policy with a subrogation provision. If qh – k > 0, then by Proposition 2(b) and 2(c), a suit will
be brought under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision and utility will be
U(y – ph + p(qh – k)). There are two possible outcomes under a pure insurance policy,
depending on whether qh – k exceeds the threshold level t. If qh – k ≤ t, then by Proposition 1(a)
and 1(c), a suit will not be brought under a pure insurance policy and utility will be U(y – ph) <
U(y – ph + p(qh – k)). If qh – k > t, then by Proposition 1(b) and 1(c), a suit will be brought
under a pure insurance policy and expected utility will be
US = (1 – p)U(y – pc*) + p[qU(y – pc* + c* – k) + (1 – q)U(y – pc* – h + c* – k)]

(A10)

< U(y – ph + p(qh – k)),
where the inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality, which must apply strictly because y – pc*
= y – pc* + c* – k = y – pc* – h + c* – k cannot hold. Hence, again, the insured is worse off
than under the optimal insurance policy with a subrogation provision. Q
Proof of Proposition 3: (a) We demonstrate that c* < h when  = 0 in several steps.

30

(i) c* cannot exceed h: From (10), we have
EUN′(x) = –p1′(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] – d′(x),

(A11)

since p′(x) = p1′(x). If c ≥ h, (A11) is negative for x > 0; thus, x = 0 would be chosen by the
insured. Hence, using (10) and (11), we know that for any c > h,
EUN = (1 – p(0))U(y – p(0)c) + p(0)U(y – p(0)c – h + c) – d(0),

(A12)

and for c = h,
EUN = U(y – p(0)h) – d(0).

(A13)

Jensen’s inequality implies that (A13) exceeds (A12), so c > h cannot be optimal.
(ii) For any c in [0, h] and any π, the insured’s choice of x is uniquely determined by the
first-order condition EUN′(x) = 0: If c < h, (A11) implies that EUN′(0) > 0, so that x > 0 must be
optimal. Hence, EUN′(x) = 0 must hold, that is
–p1′(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] = d′(x).

(A14)

If c = h, we noted in step (i) that x = 0 is optimal; and when this is the case, (A14) also holds.
Thus, we know that for any c in [0, h] and π, the chosen x must satisfy (A14). We also note that
the second-order condition for a local maximum is satisfied. 41 To see that the solution to (A14) is
unique, rewrite it as
[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] = –d′(x)/p1′(x).

(A15)

Since –d′(x)/p1′(x) is strictly increasing in x, the solution to (A14) must be unique. 42
(iii) For any c in [0, h], the insured’s choice of x is uniquely determined by the first-order
condition (A14) and by (11): In other words, the claim is that this x is uniquely determined by
the condition 43

41

EUN″(x) = –p1″(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] – d″(x) < 0 for any c ≤ h.

42

In other words, we have justified the use of the first-order approach in describing the choice x of the
insured given his policy. On this issue, see, for example, Rogerson (1985).

31

–p1′(x)[U(y – p(x)c) – U(y – p(x)c – h + c)] = d′(x).

(A16)

We know from step (ii) and (11) that (A16) must hold at any x that is chosen given c. To show
that the x solving (A16) is unique, note first that if c = h, then x = 0 is obviously the unique
solution to (A16). Now assume that c < h and suppose to the contrary that (A16) holds for some
x1 < x2. Then
U(y – p(x1)c) – U(y – p(x1)c – h + c) > U(y – p(x2)c) – U(y – p(x2)c – h + c),

(A17)

since p(x1) > p(x2) and U is concave. We can rewrite (A16) as
U(y – p(x)c) – U(y – p(x)c – h + c) = –d′(x)/p1′(x).

(A18)

Using (A18), (A17) implies that
–d′(x1)/p1′( x1) > –d′(x2)/p1′( x2).

(A19)

Yet (A19) cannot hold because, as we observed above, –d′(x)/p1′(x) is strictly increasing in x, a
contradiction. Let us denote the x that solves (A16) given c by x(c).
(iv) c* < h: We have shown that the problem of maximizing (10) over c subject to (11)
and (12) is equivalent to maximizing
EUN(c) = (1 – p(x(c)))U(y – p(x(c))c) + p(x(c))U(y – p(x(c))c – h + c) – d(x(c))

(A20)

over c  [0, h]. Using (A16), we have
EUN′(c) = –[p′(x(c))x′(c)c + p(x(c))][(1 – p(x(c)))U′(y – p(x(c))c)

(A21)

+ p(x(c))U′(y – p(x(c))c – h + c)] + p(x(c))U′(y – p(x(c))c – h + c).
Hence,
EUN′(h) = –p′(0)x′(h)hU′(y – p(0)h).

43

(A22)

Note that the uniqueness of the solution to (A16) does not follow from (ii). Suppose that for some c, there
exist x1 < x2 that each satisfy (A16). That would not be inconsistent with (ii), since π would be p(x1)c for x1 and
p(x2)c, a different value, for x2.

32

To prove that c* < h, we show that EUN′(h) < 0, which will hold if x′(h) < 0. To demonstrate the
latter, we implicitly differentiate (A16) with respect to c and solve for x′(c). The sign of x′(c)
must equal the sign of 44
∂{–p′(x)[U(y – p(x)c) – U(y – p(x)c – h + c)] – d′(x)}/∂c,

(A23)

which is
p′(x)[p(x)U′(y – p(x)c) + (1 – p(x))U′(y – p(x)c – h + c)].

(A24)

At c = h, (A24) is p′(x)U′(y – p(x)h) < 0. Thus, c* < h.
(b) We demonstrate that c* < h and s* > 0 when  = 1 in several steps.
(i) c* cannot exceed h: Using (16) we have
EUS′(x) = –p1′(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π – h + c)] – d′(x).

(A25)

If c ≥ h, the term in brackets is less than or equal to zero, so that EUS′(x) < 0 for x > 0. Hence, the
insured would choose x = 0 for c ≥ h. Thus, for any c > h,
EUS(c, s) = (1 – p(0))U(y – π(c, s)) + p1(0)U(y – π(c, s) – h + c)

(A26)

+ p2U(y – π(c, s) – h + c + s);
and for c = h and s = 0,
EUS(h, 0) = (1 – p(0))U(y – π(h, 0)) + p1(0)U(y – π(h, 0)) + p2U(y – π(h, 0))

(A27)

= U(y – p(0)h).
But it can readily be verified that U(y – p(0)h)) > EUS(c, s) by Jensen’s inequality. This means
that a policy with c* > h could not be optimal.
(ii) For any c in [0, h] and any s and π, the insured’s choice of x is uniquely determined
by the first-order condition (18), EUS′(x) = 0: If c < h, (A25) implies that EUS′(0) > 0, so that x >
0 is optimal and EUS′(x) = 0 must hold. If c = h, we observed in step (i) that x = 0, and it is clear
44

Equation (A16) is of the form F(x, c) = 0, where F is the first-order condition for the optimal choice of x
by the insured. Implicitly differentiating, we obtain Fxx′(c) + Fc = 0, so that x′(c) = –Fc/Fx. We know that Fx < 0, for
this is the second-order condition for x to have been chosen optimally. Hence, the sign of x′(c) equals the sign of Fc.

33

that EUS′(0) = 0 holds. We also note that if x satisfies (18), the second-order condition for a local
maximum is satisfied. That the solution is unique follows from the argument made in step (ii) of
the proof of part (a).
(iii) For any c in [0, h], the insured’s choice of x is uniquely determined by the first-order
condition (18) and by (14): That is, x is uniquely determined by
–p1′(x)[U(y – (p(x)(c + k) – p2(h – s))) – U(y – (p(x)(c + k) – p2(h – s)) – h + c)]

(A28)

= d′(x).
This claim follows from an argument essentially identical to that made in step (iii) of the proof of
part (a). We continue to let x(c) denote the insurer’s choice of x given c (suppressing s in the
notation).
(iv) c* < h: Having shown in step (i) that c* ≤ h, we can prove that c* < h if we
demonstrate that c* = h is not possible. To this end, we first observe that if c* = h, it must be that
s* = 0. In particular, if c = h, we know from step (i) that x = 0. Hence, if c = h and s > 0, we
have
EUS(h, s) = (1 – p(0))U(y – π(h, s)) + p1(0)U(y – π(h, s))

(A29)

+ p2U(y – π(h, s) + s),
whereas from (A27) we have EUS(h, 0) = U(y – p(0)h)). Since U(y – p(0)h)) > EUS(h, s) by
Jensen’s inequality, c = h and s > 0 cannot be optimal.
Finally, we show that the conclusion that c* = h and s* = 0 leads to a contradiction—that
the insured would be better off if c < h when s = 0. We have
EUS(c, 0) = (1 – p(x(c)))U(y – π(c, 0)) + p(x(c))U(y – π(c, 0) – h + c) – d(x(c)),
so that, using (18),

34

(A30)

dEUS(c, 0)/dc = –(1 – p(x(c))(p′(x(c))x′(c)(c + k) + p(x(c)))U′(y – π(c, 0))

(A31)

+ (1 – p(x(c)) – p′(x(c))x′(c)(c + k))p(x(c))U′(y – π(c, 0) – h + c).
Hence,
dEUS(h, 0)/dc = –p′(x(h))x′(h)(h + k)U′(y – π(h, 0)).

(A32)

Because x′(h) < 0, 45 dEUS(h, 0)/dc < 0, meaning that c* must be less than h.
(v) s* > 0: We now hold c constant at c* < h and show that if s = 0, expected utility can
be raised by increasing s, implying that s* > 0. To this end, let us treat x as a function of s,
determined implicitly by (18) and (17), and π as a function of s determined by (17). Hence, we
may write EUS as EUS(x(s), π(s), s). Thus, our object is to demonstrate that dEUS(x(0), π(0),
0)/ds > 0. Using (16) and (18), we have
dEUS(x(s), π(s), s)/ds = –π′(s){(1 – p(x(s)))U′(y – π(s)) +

(A33)

p1(x(s))U′(y – π(s) – h + c*) + p2U′(y – π(s) – h + c* + s)}
+ p2U′(y – π(s) – h + c* + s).
Observe that π′(s) = p′(x(s))x′(s)(c* + k) + p2. Hence, at s = 0, (A33) becomes
–p′(x(0))x′(0)(c* + k)[(1 – p(x(0)))U′(y – π(0)) + p(x(0))U′(y – π(0) – h + c*)]

(A34)

+ p2(1 – p(x(0)))[U′(y – π(0) – h + c*) – U′(y – π(0))].
Since c* < h, the second term in (A34) is positive. Thus, a sufficient condition for (A34) to be
positive is that the first term is positive, which will be true if x′(0) > 0. To see that this holds,
substitute (17) into (18) and implicitly differentiate the resulting expression with respect to s and
solve for x′(s). The sign of x′(s) must equal the sign of 46

45

The sign of x′(c) equals the sign of the partial derivative with respect to c of –p1′(x)[U(y – π) – U(y – π –
h + c)] – d′(x), using the logic explained in note 44. Since π = p(x)(c + k) – p2h, the partial derivative with respect to
c is –p1′(x)p(x)[U′(y – π – h + c) – U′(y – π)] + p1′(x)U′(y – π – h + c). At c = h, this becomes p1′(x)U′(y – π) < 0.
46
See note 44 above.

35

∂{–p′(x)[U(y – p(x)(c* + k) + p2(h – s))

(A35)

– U(y – p(x)(c* + k) + p2(h – s) – h + c*)] – d′(x)}/∂s,
which is
p′(x)p2[U′(y – p(x)(c + k) + p2(h – s)) – U′(y – p(x)(c + k) + p2(h – s) – h + c)] > 0,

(A36)

where the inequality follows from observing that the bracketed term is negative because c* < h.
Thus, x′(0) > 0 and s* > 0.
(c) Again, we prove the claim in steps.
(i) If q(xN)h – k > 0, suits are optimal to bring: Suppose to the contrary that suits are not
optimal to bring and let cN* be the optimal c in this case. We will show that there is an insurance
policy under which suits are brought and insureds are better off, which will be a contradiction. In
particular, hold c fixed at cN* and let
s = (q(xN)h – k)/q(xN).

(A37)

Then s > 0 by our hypothesis and, using (14),
π(cN*, s) = p(xN)cN* – p(xN)(q(xN)(h – s) – k) = p(xN)cN*.

(A38)

Because c and π have not changed, it is clear from (18) and (A14) that xN will continue to be
chosen by the insured. The insured must be better off under this policy because he has the same
coverage, pays the same premium, chooses the same level of care, but obtains s > 0 whenever he
wins a suit, which occurs with probability p2 > 0. Hence, it must be optimal for suit to be
brought.
(ii) If q(xN)h – k = 0, suits are optimal to bring: Suppose to the contrary that suits are not
optimal to bring. We will show that there is an insurance policy under which suits are brought
and insureds are better off. Again, hold c fixed at cN* and let s = 0. Then π(cN*, s) = π(cN*, 0) =
p(xN)cN*. Because c and π have not changed, xN will still be chosen. Hence, the insured is just as

36

well off as he was when suits were not brought. However, by part (b) of the proposition, s* > 0.
Thus, the policy with cN* and s = 0 cannot be optimal, meaning that there exists a policy
involving suit that is superior, and thus better than the optimal policy involving no suit.
(iii) Some suits for which q(xN)h – k < 0 are optimal to bring: Let ko be such that q(xN)h –
ko = 0. We claim that for all k in (ko, ko + ε), for a sufficiently small positive ε, suits are optimal to
bring. This will prove the claim since for such k, q(xN)h – k < 0. Let EUS(c*, s*, k) denote
expected utility when suit is brought and c and s are chosen optimally given k. Also, observe that
EUN(cN*) does not depend on k. Now in (ii) we showed that EUS(c*, s*, ko) > EUN(cN*). And
since EUS(c*, s*, k) is continuous in k, we must have EUS(c*, s*, k) > EUN(cN*) for all k within ε
of ko for a sufficiently small positive ε. Hence, suits are optimal to bring for k in (ko, ko + ε). Q
Proof of Proposition 4: (a) If c* = 0, then c* < h. If c* > 0, it is determined by the firstorder condition from (2), making use of (19),
p(1 + λ)[(1 – p)U′(y – π) + pU′(y – π – h + c)] = pU′(y – π – h + c).

(A39)

Since λ > 0, (A39) implies that (1 – p)U′(y – π) + pU′(y – π – h + c) < U′(y – π – h + c), or that
U′(y – π) < U′(y – π – h + c), meaning that c* < h.
(b) We first show that s* > 0. Suppose otherwise, that s* = 0. Then the proof of (a)
implies that c* < h; for even though π is determined by (20) rather than (19), (A39) still holds.
We next demonstrate that c* < h and s* = 0 leads to a contradiction—which will imply
that s* > 0. Observe that
EUS′(s) = –pq(1 – p)U′(y – π) + pq[(1 – pq)U′(y – π – h + c + s)

(A40)

– (1 – q)pU′(y – π – h + c)],
so that
EUS′(0) = pq(1 – p)[U′(y – π – h + c) – U′(y – π)] > 0,

37

(A41)

where the inequality follows from c* < h. Since EUS′(0) > 0, s* cannot be 0, a contradiction.
Last, we show that c* + s* < h, which will also imply that c* < h. Now since s* > 0,
EUS′(s) = 0 holds, which from (A40) is
(1 – p)U′(y – π) + p[qU′(y – π – h + c + s) + (1 – q)U′(y – π – h + c)]

(A42)

= U′(y – π – h + c + s).
If c* + s* < h is not true, then c + s ≥ h, implying that y – π – h + c + s ≥ y – π. Also, since s >
0, y – π – h + c + s > y – π – h + c. Thus, the wealth argument on the right-hand side of (A42) is
greater than or equal to each of the three wealth arguments on the left-hand side, and strictly
greater than y – π – h + c. Hence, U′(y – π – h + c + s) is less than or equal to each of the
marginal utilities on the left-hand side, and strictly less than U′(y – π – h + c). Furthermore, the
probability weights on the three marginal utilities on the left-hand side add to 1. Accordingly, the
left-hand side of (A42) is less than the right-hand side, a contradiction. It follows that c* + s* <
h.
(c) We first show that suits that have positive expected value will be brought. Suppose
otherwise, that a suit with qh – k > 0 is not brought and coverage c* is purchased. Expected
utility will be
EUN(c*) = (1 – p)U(y – π) + pU(y – π – h + c*),

(A43)

where π = p(1 + λ)c*. But this expected utility can be improved upon with an insurance policy in
which suit is brought, coverage is maintained at c*, and s = 0. Then expected utility will be
EUS(c*, 0) = (1 – p)U(y – π^) + pU(y – π^ – h + c*),
where π^ = p(1 + λ)c* – p(qh – k). Since qh – k > 0, π^ < π and hence (A44) exceeds (A43),
contradicting the optimality of not bringing suit.

38

(A44)

Next consider a suit that has zero expected value. If such a suit is not brought, expected
utility will be (A43), and again consider a policy in which suit is brought, coverage remains at
c*, and s = 0. Then (A44) will apply, with π^ = p(1 + λ)c* – p(qh – k) = p(1 + λ)c* = π. Hence,
EUS(c*, 0) = EUN(c*). But by (b), we know that if a suit is brought, s* > 0. Accordingly,
EUS(c**, s*) > EUS(c*, 0), where c** is the optimal c when suits are brought. Thus, EUS(c**,
s*) > EUN(c*), contradicting the optimality of not bringing suit.
That it is optimal to bring some negative expected value suits follows from the
preceding paragraph. Because it is strictly optimal to bring suit when qh – k = 0, by continuity, it
must also be strictly optimal to bring suit if litigation costs are k + ε for small positive ε. Q
Proof Proposition 5: (a) We want to show that
EUN(h) = U(y – ph) – pu > (1 – p)U(y – pc) + pU(y – pc – h + c) – pu = EUN(c)

(A45)

for c ≠ h. This is equivalent to U(y – ph) > (1 – p)U(y – pc) + pU(y – pc – h + c) for c ≠ h, which
follows from Jensen’s inequality.
(b) We want to show that
EUS(h, 0) = U(y – ph + p(q(h + a) – k)) – pu

(A46)

> (1 – p)U(y – π) + p[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c)
+ qU(y – π – h + c + s) – u] = EUS(c, s)
for any c ≠ h or any s > 0. Equivalently, we want to show that
U(y – ph + p(q(h + a) – k)) >
(1 – p)U(y – π) + p[(1 – q)U(y – π – h + c) + qU(y – π – h + c + s)]
for any c ≠ h or any s > 0. Now expected wealth on the right-hand side of this inequality is

39

(A47)

(1 – p)(y – π) + p[(1 – q)(y – π – h + c) + q(y – π – h + c + s)] =

(A48)

y – π – p(h – c) + pqs = y – [pc – p(q(h + a – s) – k)] – p(h – c) + pqs
= y – ph + p(q(h + a) – k,
which is the wealth on the left-hand side. Hence Jensen’s inequality demonstrates that (A47)
holds, and strictly because the levels of wealth y – π, y – π – h + c, and y – π – h + c + s are not
all equal if c ≠ h or if s > 0.
(c) We know from the preceding steps that EUN(c*) = U(y – ph) – pu and that EUS(c*, s*)
= U(y – ph + p(q(h + a) – k)) – pu. Thus, suit will be desirable if and only if
U(y – ph + p(q(h + a) – k)) > U(y – ph),
which is to say if and only if p(q(h + a) – k) > 0 or, equivalently, q(h + a) – k > 0. Q

40

(A49)

References
Abraham, Kenneth S. 1986. Distributing Risk: Insurance, Legal Theory, and Public Policy. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Abraham, Kenneth S., and Daniel Schwarcz. 2015. Insurance Law and Regulation. Cases and
Materials. 6th ed. St. Paul: Foundation Press.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1974. “Optimal Insurance and Generalized Deductibles,” 1974 Scandinavian
Actuarial Journal 1-42.
Baker, Tom, and Kyle D. Logue. 2017. Insurance Law and Policy: Cases and Materials. 4th ed.
Frederick, MD: Wolters Kluwer.
Bleed, Lisa N. 2001. “Enforcing Subrogation Provisions as ‘Appropriate Equitable Relief’ Under
ERISA Section 502(A)(3),” 35 University of San Francisco Law Review 727-50.
Cook, Philip J., and Daniel A. Graham. 1977. “The Demand for Insurance and Protection: The
Case of Irreplaceable Commodities,” 91 Quarterly Journal of Economics 143-56.
Dionne, Georges, ed. 2013. Handbook of Insurance. 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Dobbyn, John F., and Christopher C. French. 2016. Insurance Law in a Nutshell. 5th ed. St. Paul:
West Academic.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1990. “Moral Hazard and Renegotiation in Agency
Contracts,” 58 Econometrica 1279–1319.
Gomez, Fernando, and Jose Penalva. 2015. “Tort Reform and the Theory of Coordinating Tort
and Insurance,” 43 International Review of Law and Economics 83-97.
Harrington, Scott E., and Gregory R. Niehaus. 2004. Risk Management and Insurance. 2nd ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Insurance Day. 2009. “International Comparative Review of Subrogation Law,” September.

41

Jerry II, Robert H., and Douglas R. Richmond. 2012. Understanding Insurance Law. 5th ed. New
Providence, NJ: Lexis-Nexis.
Kimball, Spencer L., and Don A. Davis. 1962. “The Extension of Insurance Subrogation,” 60
Michigan Law Review 841-72.
Marasinghe, M. L. 1976a. “An Historical Introduction to the Doctrine of Subrogation: The Early
History of the Doctrine I,” 10 Valparaiso University Law Review 45-65.
————. 1976b. “An Historical Introduction to the Doctrine of Subrogation: The Early History
of the Doctrine II,” 10 Valparaiso University Law Review 276-99.
Perry, Bill, David Rosenberg, and Ianika Tzankova. 2015. “Money Machine: Subrogation
Strategy is Evolving in the US.” Insurance Day, April 23.
Reinker, Kenneth S., and David Rosenberg. 2007. “Unlimited Subrogation: Improving Medical
Malpractice Liability,” 36 Journal of Legal Studies S261-89 (June).
Rogerson, William P. 1985. “The First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems,” 53
Econometrica 1357-67.
Schlesinger, Harris. 2013. “The Theory of Insurance Demand,” in G. Dionne, ed., Handbook of
Insurance. 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Sebok, Anthony J. 2011. “The Inauthentic Claim,” 64 Vanderbilt Law Review 61-139.
Shavell, Steven. 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Sykes, Alan. 2001. “Subrogation and Insolvency,” 30 Journal of Legal Studies 383-99.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1989. “The Interaction between Product Liability and Workers’ Compensation
as Ex Post Remedies for Workplace Injuries,” 5 Journal of Law, Economics, &
Organization 185-210.

42

Winter, Ralph A. 2013. “Optimal Insurance Contracts Under Moral Hazard,” in G. Dionne, ed.,
Handbook of Insurance. 2nd ed. New York: Springer.

43

