NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Rodolphe Desbordes
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 23309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23309

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We would like to thank Celine Azemar, Loe Franssen, Stuart McIntyre, Ian Wooton, and two
anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Scottish Institute for Research in Economics (SIRE). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Rodolphe Desbordes and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Financial Development on Foreign Direct Investment
Rodolphe Desbordes and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 23309
April 2017
JEL No. F21,O1
ABSTRACT
This paper empirically investigates the various effects that source and destination countries’
financial development (SFD and DFD respectively) have on foreign direct investment (FDI).We
establish causality by exploiting variations in both country-specific financial development and
sector-specific financial vulnerability. This approach is made possible by our use of detailed
databases on real manufacturing FDI projects worldwide. We find that both SFD and DFD have a
large positive influence on greenfield, expansion, and mergers & acquisitions FDI, by directly
increasing access to external finance and indirectly promoting manufacturing activity. The overall
economic impacts of SFD and DFD tend to be similar but their direct and indirect effects vary
across margins and types of FDI.

Rodolphe Desbordes
University of Strathclyde
Department of Economics
SWD Building
130 Rottenrow
G4 0GE Glasgow
United Kingdom
rodolphe.desbordes@strath.ac.uk
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23309

1 Introduction
Many countries actively seek to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) because they believe
that multinational enterprises will contribute to economic growth by creating new job opportunities, increasing capital accumulation, and raising total factor productivity. Indeed, a large
body of empirical evidence shows that FDI tends to generate net gains for both home and host
countries.1 The growth-enhancing effects of FDI flows have motivated a thorough investigation of their determinants. Robust push and pull factors are market size, cultural and physical
proximity, relative labour market endowments, and corporate tax rates (Eicher et al., 2012;
Blonigen and Piger, 2014). Financial development should certainly be added to this list.2 FDI
flows strongly grew during the period 2003-2007 but experienced an abrupt decline the two
following years.3 The fact that the tight external financing conditions resulting from the global
financial crisis have been partly blamed for this fall (UNCTAD, 2010) suggests that access to
external finance is an important determinant of FDI. We investigate this issue, by providing a
comprehensive and causal exploration of the various effects that source and destination countries’ financial development (SFD and DFD respectively) have on FDI.
We are not the first cross-country study to look at the effects of financial development on
FDI.4 However previous research broadly suffers from three key shortcomings: inadequate
measurement of FDI, absence of causal identification, and limited scope.
The majority of studies have used balance of payments (BOP) FDI data, aggregated at the
country-level. While widely available, these data provide a poor picture of the international
expansion of multinational enterprises (MNEs) because they only include the funds which have
been provided by parent companies in the forms of equity capital, intercompany debt, or reinvested earnings.5 They notably ignore external funds raised in host countries, preventing any
examination of the impact of DFD on real FDI and possibly leading to the wrong conclusions;
if SFD and DFD are substitutes, higher investment in new or existing foreign affiliates can occur despite observing lower BOP FDI.6 BOP FDI data also provide a murky picture of foreign
investment by being reported on a net basis and mixing together flows of funds for new foreign affiliates, existing foreign affiliates, and parent companies. Hence, without a good proxy
1

Excellent surveys of the literature can be found in Moran (2001), Navaretti and Venables (2005), Caves (2007)
Dunning and Lundan (2008), or Moran (2011).
2
The World Economic Forum (World Economic Forum, 2012) defines financial development in its 2012 Financial Development Report as “the factors, policies, and institutions that lead to effective financial intermediation
and markets, as well as deep and broad access to capital and financial services” (p.3).
3
Global FDI flows declined by 20% in 2008 and a further 37% in 2009.
4
See, for example, Hausmann and Fernàndez-Arias (2000), Albuquerque et al. (2005), Di Giovanni (2005),
Ang (2008), Hijzen et al. (2008), Coeurdacier et al. (2009), Hyun and Kim (2010), or Mohamed and Sidiropoulos
(2010). These studies tend to find a positive but not always statistically significant impact of SFD or DFD on
balance of payments FDI flows or cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) transactions.
5
For example, Feldstein (1995) points out that the total value of assets of U.S. foreign affiliates (what he calls
the ‘natural’ definition of U.S. FDI stock) was almost three times greater than the ‘narrow’ BOP definition of U.S.
FDI stock in 1989.
6
Note that this issue cannot be solved by the use of bilateral FDI data.

1

for real FDI, investigating the impact of SFD and DFD on the foreign expansion of firms is
difficult.
To a certain extent, this measurement issue disappears when studies use data on cross-border
M&A. However, this does not solve the problem of causal identification. Financial development
is likely to be correlated with other country attributes which can influence FDI, such as overall
institutional quality, human capital, natural resources, capital controls liberalisation, or foreign
ownership restrictions. Even with a large number of control variables, the risk of an omitted
variable bias remains and multicollinearity may become an issue. Some studies have included
country fixed effects, controlling in that way for any time-invariant factor potentially correlated
with financial development. As discussed by Coeurdacier et al. (2009), this strategy may not be
fruitful. Measures of financial development often exhibit low time-series variation, generating
imprecise estimates, and relying on time-series variation to identify the parameters does not
necessarily lead to the estimation of the relationship of interest if permanent and transitory
changes in financial development have very different effects on FDI.7 Overall, without a proper
identification strategy, it is nearly impossible to establish that SFD and DFD are long-run causal
determinants of FDI.
As a way of circumventing a potential omitted variable, a few studies use confidential firmlevel data from a single source country (Japan or the United States) and rely on ingenious
natural experiments to identify the causal effects of SFD on the occurrence of Japanese FDI
(Klein et al., 2002) or of DFD on the sales or capital expenditures of U.S. foreign affiliates
(Desai et al., 2006; Antras et al., 2009). The estimated effects are largely positive. However,
these studies are confined to specific events and specific source countries, casting doubt on the
external validity of their findings. They also do not cover how the effects of SFD and DFD can
diverge with the nature of the FDI project (greenfield, M&A, or expansion) or across margins
of FDI (occurrence and number of FDI projects vs. average size of the projects).8 Finally,
they do not explore in a comprehensive manner the direct and indirect effects that SFD and
DFD can have on FDI. While the vast majority of existing studies have stressed how financial
development can increase FDI by improving access to external finance, SFD and DFD may
also have indirect and not necessarily positive impacts on FDI, by promoting overall economic
activity in source and destination sectors.
In response to these various gaps in the literature, we use comprehensive and under-exploited
data on real manufacturing FDI projects during the period 2003-2006 to investigate the various
7

For instance, average inward FDI may be higher in countries where the average stock market capitalisation to
GDP ratio is higher, because it reflects easier access to external finance or more potential targets for cross-border
M&A. However, temporary departures of the ratio of stock market capitalisation to GDP from its average size may
have a negative impact on inward FDI if foreign investors are attracted by temporarily undervalued host-country
assets (so-called ‘fire-sale’ FDI). Hence, in this scenario, the time-series effect of DFD on FDI would not not be
informative of the cross-sectional effect of DFD on FDI.
8
Policymakers may be particularly interested in work on greenfield and expansion FDI as they tend to perceive
these foreign projects as having more benefits, in terms of new jobs and production activity created, than M&A
(Sauvant, 2009).

2

effects of financial development on bilateral FDI in a difference-in-differences approach, where
we exploit variations in both country-specific financial development and sector-specific financial vulnerability. In doing so, we can make a substantial contribution to the existing literature.
Our data provide us with a worldwide coverage of source and destination countries and allow
us to look at the impacts of both SFD and DFD on FDI. We have the opportunity to investigate
how various types of real FDI (greenfield, expansion, M&A) at different margins (extensive or
intensive) respond to financial development. By focusing on the relationship between sectorspecific dependence on external finance and financial development, our identification approach,
which is novel in the context of bilateral FDI, increases the likelihood that we identify causal
effects.9 The intuition is that engaging in FDI involves substantial upfront fixed costs that financially vulnerable firms (i.e. firms with high requirements for external capital) will struggle
to finance without easy access to external finance (Buch et al., 2009). Hence, causal effects of
SFD and DFD can be isolated by looking at whether financial development has a disproportionate impact on FDI in more financially vulnerable manufacturing sectors. Finally, to a certain
extent, we are able to decompose the total effects of SFD and DFD into the direct and indirect
effects suggested by our integrative literature review.
Our empirical results unambiguously indicate that a deep financial system in source and
destination countries strongly facilitates the international expansion of firms through FDI. The
total effects of SFD and DFD on relative greenfield FDI in financially vulnerable manufacturing sectors, as well as on the overall level of aggregate greenfield FDI, are positive, statistically
significant, economically large, and complementary. SFD and DFD have net positive effects on
new greenfield FDI by directly increasing access to external finance and indirectly promoting
manufacturing activity in source and destination countries. This direct impact of financial development accounts for most of the total effects of SFD and DFD and primarily operates at the
intensive margin through its positive contribution to the average size of FDI projects. Expansion FDI and M&A FDI also positively respond to greater SFD and DFD but not necessarily
in the same way as greenfield FDI. Lastly, economic impacts of SFD and DFD on FDI appear
to be similar overall, but they do not necessarily have the same influence on the extensive and
intensive margins of the different types of FDI. These results substantially expand existing research on FDI. In common with the few studies which have investigated in a causal manner
some of the effects of SFD or DFD on FDI, we find a positive effect of financial development
on the expansion of MNEs. However, we reach this conclusion by very different means,10 and
9

See, among others, Rajan and Zingales (1998), Beck (2002), Braun and Larrain (2005), Kroszner et al. (2007),
Manova et al. (2011), Chor and Manova (2012), or Manova (2013) for use of this identification strategy in the fields
of economic growth or international trade.
10
In the most recent version of their working paper, using a difference-in-differences approach similar to ours,
Bilir et al. (2014) investigate the effects of DFD on the levels of foreign sales of U.S. MNEs. They also find an
overall positive effect of DFD on the relative volume of sales in financially vulnerable sectors. However, most of
their discussion and robustness checks tend to be focused on how DFD influences the share of affiliate sales to
various destination markets. Hence, while their paper is extremely rich, a larger fraction of our paper is devoted
to the analysis and robustness of the effects of DFD on relative FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. In addition,

3

our findings yield novel insights.
Our research has implications for our understanding of both the effects of FDI on economic
growth and the functioning of MNEs’ internal capital markets. Many studies have stressed that
a well-developed financial system is crucial for local firms to benefit from foreign technology
spillovers (Hermes and Lensink, 2003; Alfaro et al., 2004, 2009, 2010) while other studies
have highlighted positive links between the domestic and foreign activities of firms (Desai
et al., 2005, 2009; Herzer, 2010; Navaretti et al., 2010). We show that SFD and DFD promote
outward and inward FDI, thereby contributing indirectly to economic growth in source and
destination countries. Highlighting the role of external finance in the expansion of MNEs also
helps to understand the sources and limitations of their internal capital markets. The financial
advantage that foreign firms tend to enjoy over local firms (Desai et al., 2004b, 2008; Alfaro and
Chen, 2012) is related to their home countries’ financial depth and, beyond short-term horizons,
MNEs cannot fully bypass restricted local access to external finance by making use of foreign
sources of funds.
Finally, our study is related to works investigating the effects of credit constraints on international trade. The positive effect of SFD on the volume of exports of firms belonging to
financially vulnerable sectors is well documented.11 Expansion through FDI involves much
higher fixed costs than exports (Buch et al., 2010), and therefore our results are fully in agreement with those of the trade literature.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we review the various effects that
SFD and DFD are likely to have on FDI. In Section 3, we describe our FDI data. and introduce
our difference-in-differences models. In Section 4, we describe our variables of interest and
the estimation methods. We also provide some stylized facts. In Section 5, we present our
empirical results. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.

2 The various effects of financial development on FDI
In this section, we examine in an integrative literature review the various structural effects that
SFD and DFD may have on FDI.12 When discussing the existing empirical literature, we focus
on the few studies which have adopted robust causal identification strategies.
their sample is limited to the foreign activities of MNEs headquartered in the United States, they ignore the role
of SFD, and they do not distinguish between various types of FDI.
11
See for example Beck (2002, 2003), Amiti and Weinstein (2011), or Manova (2013). Foley and Manova
(2015) provide an excellent survey of this literature.
12
In the short run, MNEs may engage in opportunistic FDI to take advantage of a transient improvement of
financial conditions at home (Baker et al., 2009) or temporary disruptions in host countries’ financial markets
(Krugman, 2000; Aguiar and Gopinath, 2005; Desai et al., 2008). Given our identification strategy, which largely
rely on cross-country differences in financial development, this ‘short-term’ literature is beyond the scope of this
paper.

4

2.1 Direct effects
Firms wishing to engage in FDI must incur substantial upfront fixed costs. As for exporting,
market research needs to be done to identify profitable destinations and learn about their specificities, products may have to be modified to meet foreign tastes or regulatory requirements,
distribution and servicing channels must be established (Roberts and Tybout, 1997). Some of
these costs may have to be incurred once and may not apply for follow on investments. However, crucially, each new FDI project also involves establishing or purchasing a production
facility in the destination country (Helpman et al., 2004; Buch et al., 2010). The ability of
firms to finance the upfront fixed costs of FDI with internal funds varies across sectors. Some
sectors are technologically more dependent on external finance, meaning that firms’ desired
investment levels typically exceed their internal cash flows. This may be due to a large initial
project scale, a long gestation period, a short harvest period, or the requirement for continuing
investment (Rajan and Zingales, 1998). Firms in these financially vulnerable sectors will have
to rely heavily on external finance to engage in FDI since they will only be able to internally
finance a small fraction of the fixed costs of FDI (Buch et al., 2009, 2010).13 Firms’ access
to external finance depends on financial development. Hence, higher SFD should have a positive direct external finance effect on the volume of outward FDI, which ought to be larger in
more financially vulnerable sectors.14 Klein et al. (2002) provide some evidence that credit
constraints influence outward FDI. They show that the number of FDI projects undertaken by
Japanese firms in the United States during the Japanese banking crisis was inversely correlated
with the deterioration of the financial health of their main bank. Their results suggest that a rise
in firm-specific credit constraints resulted in lower FDI.
Higher DFD can also have a positive direct external finance effect on the volume of inward
FDI if a fraction of the external financing required by financially vulnerable firms to engage
in FDI is raised in the destination country. Firms may choose to use this source of external
finance if local financing conditions are favourable (Desai et al., 2004a; Harrison et al., 2004a;
Shapiro, 2006). They may also be constrained to do so if source countries’ financial institutions
are reluctant to fully cover the costs of FDI (or ask for a risk premium) because monitoring a
foreign project and enforcing cross-border claims raise difficulties which are not present with
the financing of a domestic project (Buch et al., 2009; Bilir et al., 2013). The importance for
U.S. MNEs to operate in host countries with high DFD is highlighted in Feinberg and Phillips
(2004), Desai et al. (2006), and Bilir et al. (2014). These three studies show that the expansion
13

External finance is a complementary source of funds for these firms because the range of their investment
opportunities expands with its availability. This does not necessarily imply that external finance will be accessed
after exhaustion of internal funds. Firms can raise more external funds than the level of their internal funds would
dictate if they find advantageous to do so, e.g. to benefit from the tax deductibility of interest payments or simply
to maintain financial slack. See the survey of chief financial officers on their capital structure choice by Graham
and Harvey (2001).
14
Low endowment in tangible assets that might serve as collateral can be another source of financial vulnerability (Braun, 2003; Buch et al., 2009; Manova, 2013).

5

of the activities of U.S. foreign affiliates is constrained in host countries where external finance
is relatively limited and expensive, despite the inherent financial advantage that foreign affiliates
have over local firms as a result of their access to internal capital markets (Desai et al., 2004b).15
While SFD and DFD can be expected to have a joint positive impact on FDI, SFD is likely
to matter relatively more for the funding of new FDI. Parent companies have had time to develop close relationships with their lenders in the home country and the literature on banking
relationship suggests that these repeated interactions tend to translate into better borrowing
conditions, such as an increase in the availability of credit or favourable contract terms (Boot,
2000; Ongena and Smith, 2000). In contrast, relationships between the parent company (or the
new foreign affiliate) and local banks in host countries may be more tenuous.
Antras et al. (2009) raise the possibility that higher DFD can have a negative direct disintegration effect on FDI if it encourages greater substitution of foreign outsourcing for integration.
The reason is that lenders are less likely to require the MNE to hold an equity share in its financially vulnerable foreign partner in countries with deep financial development because strong
financial institutions ensure that the efforts of the entrepreneur are monitored and aligned with
value maximization. Higher DFD may therefore alleviate the external pressure on an MNE to
hold a controlling interest in foreign firms involved in its supply chain, reducing in that way
its engagement in FDI. Antras et al. (2009) empirically confirm this theoretical prediction by
showing that U.S. firms tend to engage more in arm’s length technology transfers as opposed
to only engaging in FDI in more financially developed countries. However, this finding does
not imply that greater DFD necessarily reduces overall multinational activity. Antras et al.
(2009) theoretically and empirically show that higher DFD increases the number and scale of
U.S. foreign affiliates due to stronger investor protections.16 Hence, in destination countries,
the positive direct access to external finance effect of DFD is likely to dominate any potential
negative direct disintegration effect.

2.2 Indirect effects
Beyond their direct effects, higher SFD and DFD can also have an influence on FDI through
their promotion of overall economic activity, especially in financially vulnerable sectors (Rajan
and Zingales, 1998; Braun, 2003; Klapper et al., 2006; Manova, 2013).
In source countries, the higher number of potentially larger producers associated with more
SFD should mechanically increase the number of FDI projects in a given sector. At the same
time, more active firms can also lead to an increase in competition. On the one hand, lower
15

This study shows that parent borrowing partly substitutes for external borrowing in host countries where low
financial development results in a relatively high cost of external finance.
16
In addition, vertical integration of suppliers in countries with low DFD requires MNEs not to be themselves
financially constrained by host countries’ financial development. As previously mentioned, this is unlikely to be
the case, especially in financially vulnerable sectors.

6

profits for each firm operating in the sector may reduce the ability of some of them to engage
in FDI, for instance because a share of the fixed costs of each FDI project must be covered
by firms’ internal funds. On the other hand, stronger domestic competition could encourage
firms to allocate a greater fraction of their limited financial resources towards foreign expansion rather than domestic expansion,17 and greater financial development should allow firms to
compensate part of the shortfall in internal funds with external funds. Empirically, in the context of the effects of credit constraints on international trade, Manova (2013) finds that financial
development indirectly increases exports through its positive impact on overall production. This
suggests that the positive indirect access to external finance effect of SFD is likely to dominate
any potential negative indirect competition effect.
In destination countries, Ju and Wei (2010) and Bilir et al. (2013) have highlighted that
DFD can also have a negative indirect competition effect in making a country a less attractive
destination than before to MNEs. This ought especially to be the case for FDI aimed at serving
the local market because, with higher DFD-induced entry of (local and foreign) producers, the
price of local inputs may increase and, relative to MNEs targeting other markets, the volume
of their (potential) sales unambiguously falls.18 The empirical results of Bilir et al. (2013) are
consistent with greater DFD having a negative indirect competition effect on FDI in addition
to a positive direct financing effect. The overall sales of U.S. MNEs are larger in financially
advanced countries, but both the level of individual affiliates’ local sales and the share of local
sales in total affiliate sales fall when DFD increases.
While greater sector-specific activity may increase competition forces, it is also likely to
generate external economies of scale, which can encourage firms to agglomerate in a given
location rather than disperse their activities to avoid competition.19 For example, Crozet et al.
(2004) provide a simple theoretical model in which they highlight how the overall effect of
a large number of firms on the profit of a prospective foreign investor is ambiguous due to
the existence of both a negative competition effect and a positive agglomeration externality.
Their empirical evidence, consistent with earlier work (Head et al., 1999; Barrell and Pain,
1999; Norbäck, 2001), suggests that the latter effect dominates as they find that a larger number
of existing domestic and firms in a given sector and location has a positive influence on the
location choice of MNEs (see also Bobonis and Shatz (2007)).20 Overall, the growth of local
17

The redeployment of scarce financial resources by MNEs towards more profitable markets when economic
conditions change in a given market have been put forward by Stein (1997), Mudambi (1999), Feinberg and
Phillips (2004), and Bilir et al. (2014).
18
Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to distinguish between vertical and horizontal FDI.
19
These economies of scale may be due to information sharing, labour market pooling or the existence of
specialised suppliers (see Rosenthal and Strange (2004) for a survey).
20
It could be argued that this positive agglomeration effect purely reflects the tendency of foreign firms to
locate in geographical areas with favourable sector-specific factor endowments, as signalled by the large volume
of production in a given sector. This is unlikely to be entirely the case. In the absence of agglomeration benefits,
clustering of firms would gradually make the location less attractive by increasing the competition among firms for
access to the same local inputs or local market (Head et al., 1995). It is also much harder to explain, on the basis

7

manufacturing sectors induced by higher financial development should have a positive indirect
agglomeration effect on inward FDI, which is likely to dominate any potential negative indirect
competition effect. The possibility of an indirect agglomeration effect has been neglected by
the existing literature.

2.3 Type and margins of FDI
2.3.1 Greenfield, M&A, expansion FDI
Firms can initially invest abroad by establishing a new foreign affiliate (greenfield FDI) or acquiring an existing local firm (M&A FDI). The various effects of financial development that
we have discussed in this section should broadly influence in similar ways both modes of entry,
although qualifications may be raised. It could be argued that the access to external finance effect of financial development matters less for M&A FDI. Relative to establishing a new foreign
affiliate, the purchase of an existing firm may involve smaller fixed costs because it allows a
foreign investor to save on some costs, such as the identification of distribution and servicing
channels (Caves, 2007). Nevertheless, the acquisition price is likely to reflect the value of these
intangible assets and, for both types of FDI, firms in financially vulnerable sectors should still
benefit from greater financial development to finance the acquisition of new or existing foreign
assets. It could also be pointed out that most papers discussing the impact of existing sectorspecific activity on the attraction of MNEs seem to have in mind, or deal with, greenfield FDI.
A negative indirect competition effect can still occur for M&A FDI, although its potential existence could be weaker than for greenfield FDI given that a M&A does not add another seller to
the market and may eliminate a potential rival (Navaretti and Venables, 2005; Caves, 2007). A
high volume of existing sector-specific activity can also increase the quantity (Head and Ries,
2008) and the quality of potential targets.
Once their initial FDI has been made, some MNEs may decide to expand the activities of
their foreign affiliate and, for a fraction of them, will again require access to external finance.
Several reasons argue for a larger role of DFD than SFD in the financing of this expansion
FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. As mentioned in the previous section, the literature suggests that financially vulnerable firms have to rely on both SFD and DFD to finance a new
FDI because cross-border projects are difficult to monitor and international claims cannot be
easily enforced. To a large extent, this dual financing need disappears with expansion FDI,
since it does not involve a cross-border investment and the foreign affiliate has established local banking relationships. In addition parent companies in financially vulnerable sectors ought
of a factor-endowment location theory only, the positive impact that the agglomeration of domestic firms in the
same industry but different sites exerts on the location of foreign firms in a given location. The coefficient on the
existing volume of sector-specific activity in a given activity is more likely to encompass both endowments effects
and agglomeration effects. Barry et al. (2003) attempt to make this decomposition when investigating the location
of foreign firms in Ireland. They find that the coefficient on the proxy for the endowment effect is frequently
non-significant when proxies for efficiency agglomeration benefits are included in the estimated location model.

8

to face constraints on the total amount of external finance they can raise. They are therefore
likely to encourage their established foreign affiliates to be financially autonomous in order to
preserve some financial slack, notably for situations where their involvement can be mandatory, e.g. establishment of a new foreign affiliate.21 Brooke and Remmers (1978) present case
studies showing that foreign affiliates quickly acquire financial autonomy and Feinberg and
Phillips (2004) show how financially-constrained MNEs prioritise the use of their scarce financial resources within their international network. Notwithstanding these arguments, SFD
may nevertheless play a complementary role by allowing parent firms to finance the fixed costs
related to managing a more complex international production network (Yeaple, 2003).
2.3.2 Extensive and intensive margins of FDI
The existence and strength of each distinct effect of financial development can be expected to
vary across the margins of FDI. Following Mayer and Ottaviano (2008), the yearly volume of
bilateral FDI (F DIijst) between two countries i and j in a given sector s can be decomposed
into the number
of

 FDI projects (Nijst ), the extensive margin, and the average size of FDI
F DIijst
projects ( Nijst ), the intensive margin. An alternative formulation of the extensive margin
is whether FDI is greater than zero (F DIijst > 0).22
The direct positive access to external finance effect should operate at both the extensive and
intensive margins of FDI, as long as the fixed costs of FDI are not independent of the volume
of production in the foreign country. The intuition is that a large volume of production ought
to require a larger fixed investment compared to a smaller volume of production, e.g. a bigger
production facility may need to be built or acquired. In the presence of financial constraints,
some firms may not be able to engage in FDI. Other firms may choose to produce lower quantities in order to reduce the fixed costs necessary to engage in FDI because they cannot afford the
level of external finance required to produce at the optimal scale in the foreign market. For this
second group of firms, FDI will therefore occur but the size of the FDI project will be smaller
than in the absence of financial constraints.23 Conversely, with higher financial development,
more firms will be able both to engage in FDI and to afford the fixed costs consistent with their
optimal production levels, causing an increase in the probability of observing FDI as well as
21

This does not prevent parent companies from facilitating their foreign affiliates’ access to external finance by
guaranteeing the local loans made to the latter (Shapiro, 2006).
22
As surveyed in Gopinath et al. (2013), the trade literature tends to decompose exports into the number of
exporters (firm extensive margin) and the average exports per exporter (firm intensive margin). However trade
papers which do not have access to disaggregated data classifies the presence of positive exports to a country as
the extensive margin and the value of exports conditional on positive exports as the intensive margin. See for
example Egger et al. (2011).
23
Given our empirical measure of FDI, we focus on the initial fixed costs of FDI. In Buch et al. (2009), firms
wishing to engage in FDI face the same fixed cost of market entry but do not have the same liquidity constraints.
In the presence of a binding collateral constraint firms with limited internal funds have to restrict output below the
optimal level because these firms cannot fully cover the variable costs associated with greater production. See also
Manova (2013) for a very similar discussion in the context of international trade.

9

in the number and average size of FDI projects.24 As previously discussed, at the intensive
margin, the direct positive access to external finance effect of SFD is likely to be stronger than
that of DFD for greenfield FDI whereas the opposite is likely to be true for expansion FDI. In
the case of M&A, SFD and DFD may equally matter if the foreign buyer benefits from the local
banking relationships previously established by the seller.
Regarding the other effects of financial development, the existing literature shows that they
operate mainly at the extensive margin by influencing the number of firms desiring to establish
an affiliate in a given foreign location through greenfield or M&A FDI. However, based on firmlevel foreign affiliates’ sales data, the findings of Braunerhjelm and Svensson (1996) and Bilir
et al. (2014) suggest, respectively, that the DFD-induced positive indirect agglomeration effect
and negative indirect competition effect can also influence FDI at the intensive margin. For the
latter effect, this will notably be the case if the purpose of the FDI is to serve the local market.
Financial development may also have indirect effects on expansion FDI. The positive impact of
SFD on the scale of sector activity should increase the probability that at least one firm expands
its activity in a given location. In addition, expansion FDI is likely to share with greenfield FDI
the same sensibility to the DFD-induced factors shaping host countries’ attractiveness.

2.4 Expected effects of SFD and DFD on FDI flows
Overall, on the basis of this integrative literature review, we anticipate SFD and DFD to have
both direct and indirect net positive effects on FDI, with the presence and influence of these
effects varying across types and margins of FDI. Furthermore, each of the effects described
above ought to become stronger as sector-specific financial vulnerability increases: local and
foreign firms operating in sectors strongly dependent on external finance should be more sensitive to external financing conditions in source and destination countries than firms operating
in sectors less dependent on external finance. We will exploit this feature in our empirical approach to establish causality. Finally, while our description of the different effects of financial
development can be understood as a series of comparative statics analyses in which SFD and
DFD influence MNEs’ aggregate desired foreign capital stocks, we can still expect these effects
to influence FDI flows. The intuition is that a change in the fundamental determinants of FDI
stocks induces changes in the size of FDI flows outwith and within the new steady state. We
elaborate on this point in Appendix A.
24

The average size of each FDI project could fall following an increase in financial development if the number of
projects grew faster than the size of each project. For example, higher financial development could disproportionately favour the entry of relatively small firms. However, results of Manova (2013) in the context of international
trade do not support this possibility.

10

3 FDI data and econometric models
3.1 Greenfield and M&A bilateral FDI data
Our bilateral FDI data need to meet three requirements. First, they must be available for a
relatively large number of manufacturing sectors. Second, they must reflect the fixed costs
involved with the expansion of firms abroad. Third, values of these costs must be inclusive, in
the sense that all sources of funds are accounted for.
Our greenfield and expansion FDI data come from the fDi Markets database compiled by
fDi Intelligence, a division of the Financial Times.25 This database is the most comprehensive
source of firm-level information on cross-border greenfield investment available, covering all
countries and sectors worldwide since 2003. Data include the name of the country in which
the firm engaging in greenfield FDI is headquartered, the name of the destination country, the
year of investment, the recipient sector, the function (nature) of the FDI project, the type of
project (new, expansion), and the capital investment (capital expenditures) associated with the
project.26 There is no minimum investment size for a project to be included but the equity stake
of the foreign investor cannot be lower than 10%. Data are collated through daily searches of
Financial Times newswires and internal information sources, other media sources, project data
received from industry organizations and investment agencies, and data purchased from market
research and publication companies. Each project is cross-referenced against multiple sources,
with the main focus on direct company sources. fDi Markets is the primary source of greenfield
FDI data for various international organizations (UNCTAD, World Banks), consultancies (the
Economist Intelligence Unit), major corporations and over 100 governments. Given that we
do not have any parent-specific data, besides a numeric identifier, we can aggregate the firmlevel data provided by the fDi Markets database at the country-sector level without any loss of
information.27
Crucially for our study, the fDi Markets database does not make a distinction between the
different sources of foreign affiliate financing, which can be internal or external to the MNE.28
Given that we are interested in the impact of both SFD and DFD on real FDI, the absence of
25

http://www.fdimarkets.com/
Data on capital investment are based on the investment the company is making at the time of the project
announcement or opening. The data include estimates for capital investment (derived from algorithms) when
a company does not release the information. These estimates may introduce measurement error in our main
dependent variable, the sector-specific bilateral value of FDI, generating larger variances in our estimators.
27
Of course, we do not deny that MNEs are heterogeneous firms. For example, within a given sector, firms are
likely to vary in the credit constraints that they face. What we mean is that, given the FDI data that we have, we
would not obtain different results by using unit-level data (Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal, 2012).
28
Internal sources of funding are equity and debt provided by the parent company and funds from (potential)
sister subsidiaries. External sources of funding are borrowing from unrelated sources in the parent country, destination country or third-country, and local equity. This distinction of sources of funds is porous. The internal funds
provided by the parent company may have been raised externally and borrowing by the foreign subsidiary may
have been done with the guarantee of the parent company.
26

11

a distinction between internal and external financing makes the data provided by fDi Markets
database a much better measure of FDI flows than balance of payments (BOP) FDI data, which
do not take into account, among other things, that a proportion of the financing for a newlyestablished foreign affiliate can originate from unrelated parties in the destination country.29
Furthermore, contrary to BOP FDI flows, our FDI data only reflect the initial fixed costs incurred by firms engaging in FDI,30 provide information on the extensive and intensive margins
of FDI, are not distorted by ‘round-tripping’ and ‘trans-shipping’ phenomena,31 are recorded
on a gross basis32 and, finally, are available for a large number of countries and sectors. Figure
1 plots the cumulated values of outward and inward greenfield manufacturing FDI over the period 2003-2006 against economy-wide FDI flows compiled by UNCTAD on the basis of BOP
statistics. There is a strong correlation between the values of these two sources of FDI statistics.
This suggests that the greenfield FDI data that we use in this paper are not affected by gross
inconsistencies.
Figure 1: fDi Markets FDI flows vs.UNCTAD-BOP FDI flows
Inward FDI flows
USA
JPN
DEU

CHN

12

12

Outward FDI flows

0

NLD
GBR
FRA
RUS
CHE
FIN IND
CHN
CAN
ITA
LUX
SGP
ESP
SAU
AUT
SWE
AUS
NOR
HKG
MYS
BRA
EGY TUR DNK
BEL
ZAF
UKR
MEX
POL
GRC
PHL
IDN
IRN THA
KWT
CZE
IRL
PRT
ISR
VNM
CHL
HUN
PAK
SVN
BLR
ARG
HRV
KGZ
LVA EST
ISL
TUN
LTU
JOR
GUY

ZWE

IND
RUS
BRA
KOR

ln(cumulated inward greenfield FDI values )
2
4
6
8
10

ln(cumulated outward greenfield FDI values )
2
4
6
8
10

KOR

LKA
SRB SVK COL
PER
ROU VEN
BGR
SYR
CYP
LBY
JAM
ECU
KEN

MKD

USA

VNM
DEU
POL
JPNTHA
QAT
SGP
SVK
KAZ
ESP
MEX
CAN
DZA
ROU
IDN
SAU
PAK
MYS
HUN
AUS
CZE
OMN
GBR
URY
EGY
IRN
FRA
ISR
UKR
ZAF
TTO
BGR
PHL
VEN
PRT
MARCHL
JOR
TURNLD
LVA
ISL AUT
BEL
ZMB
SWE
BGD
NGA
COL ITA
LTU
SYR
ARG
TJK
TUN
EST
AZE
COD
LAO GHA
LKA
HKG
FIN CHE
KEN BLR
HRV
HNDDNK
BOL
SRB
NIC
MDG
NOR
ARMDOM
PER
ALB
SDN
KHM
AGO
GRC
GUY
MLTNZL
SWZ
UGA
SVN
CRI
MNG
TZA
LBY
YEM
LUX
GTM
MOZ
SEN
KWT
ETH
PNG MDA
SLV
GMB
MMR
ECU
MKD
BHS
GEO
MUS
ZWE
SYC
KGZ
CYP
BTN
SLE
JAM
NPL

ARM
MUS

PRY

0

TTO

−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
ln(cumulated outward UNCTAD−BOP FDI values)

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
ln(cumulated inward UNCTAD−BOP FDI values)

Note: Cumulated values over the period 2003-2006. fDi Markets FDI flows: manufacturing sectors only; UNCTAD-BOP FDI flows: all
sectors.

On the basis of these data, we therefore proxy greenfield and expansion FDI as the sectorspecific bilateral cumulated value of the capital investments made by firms to establish a new
production facility, or expand the production capacity of an existing operation, abroad. These
29

As previously mentioned, BOP FDI data only capture the portion of the funding of existing and new foreign
affiliates coming from the parent company. Feldstein (1995) illustrates how using only BOP data fails to provide
an accurate picture of the activities of U.S. MNEs abroad.
30
BOP FDI flows also include sources of funds for already established foreign affiliates, e.g. reinvested earnings.
31
‘Round-tripping’ refers to the situation where different treatments of foreign and domestic investors encourage
the latter to channel their funds into special purpose entities (SPEs) abroad in order to subsequently repatriate
them in the form of incentive-eligible FDI. With ‘trans-shipping’, funds channeled into SPEs in offshore financial
centres are redirected to other countries, leading to strong divergences between the source country of the FDI and
the ultimate beneficiary owner. The fDi Markets database reports the ultimate parent company.
32
BOP FDI flows are recorded on a net basis, i.e. funds that parent companies provide to their foreign affiliates
net of funds that affiliates provide to their parents during a given period.

12

variables should capture a large fraction of the fixed costs incurred by MNEs when engaging in
greenfield or expansion FDI.33 We will also exploit in various ways the sector-specific bilateral
cumulated number of new and expansion FDI projects.
A drawback of the fDi Markets database is that it does not cover M&A FDI flows. We remedy this issue by using the Zephyr database, a product from Bureau Van Djik, which provides
comprehensive information on cross-border M&A deals, covering all countries and sectors
worldwide since 2003.34 Data include the name of the country in which the firm engaging in
M&A FDI is located, the name of the destination country, the year of the completed transaction, the source sector, the recipient sector, the equity stake, and, sometimes, the deal value.
There is no minimum deal value and data come from different media sources (news publication, company press release, stock exchange announcement, etc...). Unfortunately, deal values
are missing for a large number of M&A transactions (about 60%).35 This explains why we
focus on the sector-specific bilateral cumulated number of horizontal cross-border M&A deals,
involving the purchase of at least a 10% equity stake in the foreign company.
The fDi Markets database provides data on the recipient sector only. Hence, while we know
in which sector the FDI project takes place, we have no information on whether the parent firm
belongs to the same sector. We must therefore assume that the main sector of activity of the
parent firm is the same sector as the sector in which the parent firm invests in the destination
country. Failure of this assumption will obviously make our identification strategy less powerful, by blurring the potential link between external dependence and financial development.
This is especially true on the source side; on the destination side, it can still be expected that
MNEs wish to invest in countries where their foreign subsidiaries in need of external finance
can acquire a large degree of financial autonomy through access to local sources of funding.
Nevertheless, given that sector-level FDI data are aggregated at a relatively high level, it is
likely that parents and foreign subsidiaries operate in the same broad manufacturing sectors.36
Furthermore, we can make use of the fact that the Zephyr database includes the primary sectors of both the acquiring and target firms to assess in a more direct manner how much the
assumption of identical source and destination sectors distorts our results.
33

Other costs to produce and sell the goods may naturally be incurred before or after these capital expenditures.
While our dependent variable does not include these costs in principle, they play a role in firms’ ability to selffinance their capital expenditures.
34
http://www.bvdinfo.com/en-gb/products/economic-and-m-a/m-a/zephyr
35
Missing data on deal values are not a specific feature of the Zephyr database. Di Giovanni (2005) reports that
only 44% of the cross-border deals recorded in the database produced by Thomson Financial Securities Data have
a value attached to them.
36
Alfaro et al. (2009) find that 70% of foreign subsidiaries operate in the same manufacturing sector as their
parent at the two-digit SIC level.

13

3.2 Econometric models
In this section, we describe in general terms the two econometric models that we estimate. We
will present in the next section our proxies for the key independent variables included in our
models.
3.2.1 Overall effects of financial development
We are interested in the causal effects of SFD and DFD on FDI. This is a complicated endeavour, notably because financial development is likely to be correlated with other country
attributes that can influence FDI, such as overall institutional quality, human capital, natural resources, capital controls liberalization, or foreign ownership restrictions. To establish causality
with more certainty, we exploit the fact that the hypothesized effects of financial development
highlighted in Section 2 should be stronger in more financially vulnerable sectors. This leads
us to estimate a difference-in-differences model, where we focus on the interactions between
SFD or DFD and a sector’s financial vulnerability (FV):
F DIijst = exp(β1 [ln(SF Dit−1 ) · F Vs ] + β2 [ln(DF Djt−1 ) · F Vs ] + αijt + αst )ǫijst (1)
where F DIijst corresponds to one of our measures of the cumulated value of the fixed costs
incurred by parent firms headquartered in source country i to engage in FDI in manufacturing
sector s of destination country j at time t, SF Dit−1 and DF Djt−1 are time-varying measures of
financial development in source and destination countries respectively, F Vs is a time-invariant
measure of sector-specific financial vulnerability, αijt are time-varying country-pair fixed effects, αst are time-varying sector fixed effects, and ǫijst is a multiplicative error term.
The theoretical and empirical literature suggest that key determinants of FDI are likely to
be market size, income level, institutional quality, restrictions on outward and inward FDI,
trade costs, and differences in factor endowments (Navaretti and Venables, 2005; Blonigen,
2005). However, as pointed out by Blonigen and Piger (2014), this list of determinants is by
no means exhaustive. Instead of trying to account explicitly for all these factors in our model,
we implicitly control for all the determinants of bilateral FDI at the country and country-pair
levels by including time-varying country-pair fixed effects in our econometric model.37 We
also include time-varying sector-specific fixed effects to control for factors and yearly shocks
which are common to sectors across countries. In this way, we limit the risk of functional form
misspecification, i.e. omitted variable bias. Furthermore, we maximize sample size because
we are not faced with the issue of including explanatory variables with heterogeneous spatialtemporal coverages.
37
Note that these fixed effects capture the country-level effects of financial development on FDI, such as the
promotion of a larger market size.

14

Identification of the overall effects of SFD and DFD on FDI is achieved through the presence of interaction terms between country-level financial development and sector-specific financial vulnerability, [ln(SF Dit−1 ) · F Vs ] and [ln(DF Djt−1 ) · F Vs ]. Precise identification of the
coefficients on these variables, β1 and β2 , is possible because the estimation of the parameters
relies on country-sector variation in FDI, which is largely unaccounted for by the country-level
fixed effects that we include in model 1.38 The absence of fixed effects at the country-sector
level also means that differences in financial development across countries can be exploited
to identify the coefficients on the interaction terms, in addition to the information provided
by changes in financial development within countries. Given the short time dimension of our
panel, being able to use the variation in financial development between countries is crucial for
a successful identification of the coefficients on the SFD-FV and DFD-FV interaction terms. A
corollary is that the proxy for financial development does not have to be time-varying.39
β1 and β2 indicate, holding other factors constant, the multiplicative change in FDI in a
given sector induced by higher financial development relative to the multiplicative change
in FDI induced by the same change in financial development in a less financially vulnerable
sector.40 β1 and β2 correspond therefore to the overall effects of financial development on
the relative volume of FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. For instance, following an increase in SFD of ∆SF D, the ratio of the factor change in FDI in a sector with high financial
vulnerability to the factor change in FDI in a sector with low financial vulnerability (FV) is
exp(β1 [F VH − F VL ] × ∆SF D). We expect β1 > 0 and β2 > 0.
3.2.2 Direct and indirect effects of financial development
In model 1, we do not control for sector-specific activity. This means that the coefficients β1
and β2 can be interpreted as capturing both the direct effects of financial development on FDI
and the indirect effects of financial development on FDI operating through the impact of financial development on overall manufacturing activity. Hence, β1 and β2 capture the total effects
of financial development on FDI. In a second stage, we would also like to know how much
these total effects can be attributed to the direct or indirect effects of financial development on
FDI. We can achieve this by including in our initial econometric model the pre-sample size of
the source and destination manufacturing sectors. By controlling for this intervening variable
in the relationship between financial development and FDI, the coefficients on the interaction
terms between country-level financial development and sector-specific financial vulnerability
will reflect the effects of financial development on FDI holding other factors fixed, including
38

Using the number of projects as our dependent variable, calculations of pseudo-R2 suggest that more than 50%
of the variation in the dependent variable remains to be explained, once the various fixed effects are controlled for.
39
For example, see Rajan and Zingales (1998) or Manova (2013) for the use of time-invariant measures of
financial development in combination with country fixed effects.
40
Given our multiplicative model, these difference-in-differences estimators correspond here to ‘ratio-in-ratios’
estimators.

15

sector-specific activity. These coefficients will therefore only capture the direct effects of financial development on FDI.41
We estimate the following augmented exponential model:
F DIijst = exp(γ1 [ln(SF Dit−1 ) · F Vs ] + γ2 [ln(DF Djt−1 ) · F Vs ]
+γ3 ln(Yis ) + γ4 ln(Yjs ) + αijt + αst )ǫijst

(2)

where Yis is pre-sample value added of sector s in source country i and Yjs is pre-sample value
added of sector s in source country j. The coefficients γ1 and γ2 capture only the direct effects
of financial development on relative bilateral FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. This implies
that we can gain some insights into the presence and relative strength of the indirect effects of
financial development on FDI by examining the signs, sizes, and statistical significance of the
differences (β1 − γ1 ) and (β2 − γ2 ). We expect these differences to be positive.
To investigate the effects of SFD and DFD at the different margins of FDI, we will reestimate model 2 with measures of the extensive and intensive margins of FDI. Our two measures of extensive margins are: i) a binary variable taking the value of one if F DIijst > 0 and
zero otherwise; (ii) the number of bilateral FDI projects Nijst. Our measure of extensive margin
F DIijst
when F DIijst > 0.
is the average size of the bilateral FDI projects F DI ijst = Nijst

4 Independent variables and estimation method
4.1 Financial development
Our main measure of financial development (SF Dit−1 ; DF Djt−1 ) is the domestic credit allocated to the private sector by banks and other financial intermediaries, normalized by GDP.
This financial development measure, which reflects the actual use of external debt financing in
the economy, has been extensively used in the growth, finance, and international trade literature (Levine, 2005). Data come from Beck et al. (2009). We lag this variable by one year to
reduce any potential simultaneity bias and we adopt a logarithmic transformation to attenuate
the influence of outlying values. The private credit to GDP ratio varies a lot across countries
with a mean value of 56% and a standard deviation of 50% over the 2003-2006 period.
41

This distinction between the direct and indirect effects of a variable is well discussed in popular textbooks,
e.g. King and Levine (1994), Murray (2006), or Wooldridge (2015). Hermes and Lensink (2003) provide an
illustration of these concepts when they investigate the impact of FDI on economic growth. They argue that FDI
can affect growth through an indirect effect on investment or a direct effect on efficiency. They attempt to isolate
the presence and strength of these two effects by first omitting and then including the investment share in GDP
in their econometric models. Another example is Betts (1995), which investigates whether high school quality
has a direct influence on subsequent earnings or an indirect influence through inducing students to acquire more
education. To assess the existence of these various channels of influence, the author runs regressions with and
without years of education.

16

We also verify that our results are robust to a time-invariant institution-based measure of financial development (F IN_INST ). This measure corresponds to the log of the average values
of two World Bank Doing Business indexes measuring the quality of financial institutions: the
strength of legal rights index, which indicates ‘the degree to which collateral and bankruptcy
laws protect the rights of borrowers and lenders,’ and the depth of credit information index,
which assesses ‘the rules and practices affecting the coverage, scope and accessibility of credit
information available through either a public credit registry or a private credit bureau’.42 Development of these financial institutions should encourage the provision of external finance by
facilitating the use of a broad range of movable assets as collateral, increasing the rights of
creditors in case of bankruptcy, and reducing informational asymmetries. The coefficient of
correlation between the log of the private credit to GDP ratio and this measure of the quality of financial institutions suggests that it is indeed the case: it is equal to 0.52, statistically
significant at the 1% level.

4.2 Measures of sector-specific financial vulnerability
Our main indicator of sector-specific financial vulnerability (F Vs ) is the Rajan and Zingales
(1998) measure of external dependence (ED). They calculated a manufacturing sector’s need
for external finance as the fraction of capital expenditures that were not financed with cash
flows from operations, for a sample of publicly traded US firms in the 1980s. For each firm,
the ratio was averaged over the 1980s and the final ED measure corresponds to the sector
median. The key assumption underlying the validity of their ED proxy is that the ranking it
generates across sectors is stable across countries because a sector’s need for external finance
is intrinsically linked to sector-specific, but country-invariant, technological characteristics. By
using U.S. data on publicly traded firms, Rajan and Zingales (1998) increase the likelihood
that they correctly identify a sector’s technological demand for external financing. Large firms
typically face fewer financing obstacles than small firms and if there is any country in which
firms’ actual use of external finance reflects their desired level, the United States is perhaps the
closest one can find, given the sophistication of its financial system.
Firms which rely on external finance to conduct their day-to-day trading operations or invest
in new growth opportunities at home can be expected to be those which need external financing
to expand abroad. The establishment or expansion of a foreign affiliate requires substantial
purchases of new (e.g. land, building, machinery) or existing foreign fixed assets. It is also
plausible that any product which entails high R&D, marketing or distribution costs at home will
similarly involve large customisation, marketing and distribution fixed costs when produced and
42

Data, definitions, and more information can be found at http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/gettingcredit/. Both indexes have been rescaled on a common 1-10 scale (worst to best). Given that data are only
available for the years 2005 and 2006, we use the average size of each index over these two years to construct our
institution-based measure.

17

sold in foreign markets (Manova, 2013). The ED measure developed by Rajan and Zingales
(1998) is based on a sample of large U.S. companies which are likely to have activities abroad.
This sample composition helps to make it a good proxy for the typical external financing needs
of MNEs in a given sector.
Table 5 in Appendix B provides the values of this measure of financial vulnerability for the
13 broad manufacturing sectors present in the fDi Markets database. Most sectors (85%) have
a positive and large dependence on external finance (ED ≥ 0.19 for 60% of them).

4.3 Measure of sector-specific manufacturing activity
Our sector-specific data on manufacturing value added come from the CEPII Trade and Production Database.43 We use information on value added in 2002 for the whole period covered
by our FDI data (2003-2006). There are two reasons for this. First, using pre-sample values
reduces a simultaneity bias between our dependent variables and manufacturing activity and
we still expect the 2002 values to reflect structural differences in sector-specific activity across
countries. Second, non-missing values are the most prevalent in this year, although our sample
is still reduced by half when we estimate model 2.

4.4 Sample and estimation method
The sample varies depending on the dependent variable used. Concerning greenfield FDI
projects, at the most disaggregated level, the underlying data that we use to estimate models 1 and 2 correspond to 7604 FDI projects in a production or processing facility made by
3919 parent companies located in 83 source (developed and developing) countries, in 13 broad
manufacturing sectors of 125 (developed and developing) destination countries during the period 2003-2006. Whichever the FDI proxy used, we restrict the sample to the period 2003-2006
because we wish to focus on the long-term effects of financial development on FDI and, therefore, we do not want our empirical analysis to be contaminated by the credit crises which started
around 2007-2008 in a large number of developed and developing countries. Some descriptive
statistics can be found in Appendix C, Table 6.
It is common in the FDI literature to model the conditional mean of ln(F DI) instead of the
conditional mean of F DI. One fundamental problem with using log-linear models is that observations for which no FDI is observed in a given sector-country pair-year would be dropped
from the sample. This truncation issue does not arise when the conditional mean of F DI is
modeled directly using an exponential function, as we have done in models 1 and 2. Consistent
estimation of the conditional mean parameters β1 and β2 can be achieved by using a Poisson
fixed effects estimator. This estimator is robust to distributional misspecification and therefore,
43

http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/TradeProd.asp

18

as long as the conditional mean function is correctly specified, this estimator is consistent even
if the dependent variable is continuous (Winkelmann, 2008; Wooldridge, 2010). We use the
Hausman et al. (1984) conditional maximum likelihood version of the Poisson fixed effects estimator, which does not involve the inclusion of a large number of dummy variables to account
for the time-varying country-pair specific effects; the fixed effects are conditioned out from the
model estimation and are therefore not treated as parameters to be estimated. Standard errors
are clustered at the country-pair level to deal with potential correlation of errors over time and
across sectors.
Other methods have been suggested in the literature to deal with zero values, e.g. estimating a regression model by ordinary least squares where the dependent variable is ln(FDI) or
ln(FDI+constant); different variants of the Tobit model. However, the Monte-Carlo simulations of Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006), Westerlund and Wilhelmsson (2011) and Gopinath
et al. (2013) indicate that all these alternative estimators to the Poisson Quasi Maximum Likelihood estimator (QMLE) perform very poorly when the sample includes zero values and heteroskedasticity is present, as in the case of our empirical application.44 On the other hand, the
Poisson QMLE is robust to various patterns of heteroskedasticity as well as to a large number
of observations for which the value of the dependent variable is equal to zero, including when
the reported absence of economic activity is due to the omission of small transactions.
For the estimation of model 2, in addition to a fixed effects logit estimator, we will also use
a Poisson fixed effects estimator to model the extensive and intensive margins of FDI.45 It is
important to note that modeling the average size of the investments conditional on the presence
of positive FDI does not result in a sample selection issue. Given that we are interested in
how financial development influences the intensive margin, the observations for which FDI is
positive form an appropriate subsample of the population of interest (Wooldridge, 2010).

4.5 Stylized facts
For our stylised facts, we focus on greenfield FDI: we have comprehensive data and we expect
this entry mode to be highly sensitive to both SFD and DFD. Figure 2 shows the unconditional
relationship between greenfield FDI and financial development, on the source and destination
sides at different margins of FDI. The five largest sources of greenfield FDI are OECD coun44

Heteroskedasticity influences the consistency of the estimators because log-linearization of multiplicative
models induces a correlation between the transformed error term and the explanatory variables. In addition,
simulations in the cited papers indicate that the Poisson QMLE does not suffer from an incidental parameters
problem.
45
We are fortunate to know the number and size of the FDI projects. In the context of international trade, some
studies without access to firm-level data, such as Manova (2013), have used the two-step approach developed by
Helpman et al. (2008) to identify the effects of financial development on average firm-level exports. Santos Silva
and Tenreyro (2015) have raised strong doubts about the robustness of this methodology, especially when heteroskedasticity is present.

19

tries while the five largest recipient countries are the BRIC countries and the United States.46
Firms located in financially developed countries tend to engage much more in FDI than those
located in less financially developed countries (upper panel) while financially developed destination countries tend to receive more FDI than less financially developed countries (lower
panel). These positive relationships between FDI and financial development, which seem
slightly weaker on the destination side, are apparent when looking at the overall value of FDI,
the number of FDI projects, or the average size of FDI projects.
Figure 2: FDI and financial development

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

USA
JPN
GER
FRAGBR
ITA
KOR
CHE
NLD
CAN
AUT
FINSWE
ESP
CHN
DNK
MYS
SGP
BEL
AUS
NORHKG
GRC
IRL
SAU
THA
BRASVN
MEX POL
PRT
ISRZAF
CZE
LUX
PHL
UKR
VNM
EGY
ARG IDN LTU
HUN
IRN
EST NZL
KWT
CHL
PER
BGR
JOR
ISL
BLR
ROMPAK
KAZ HRV
SRB
COL
LKA
SVK
LVA
KGZ MDG ECU
TUN
CYP
ARM
GEO
VEN
SYR
LBY MKD
JAM
ZWE
DOM
KEN
TTO
WSM
GUY
MUS
IND
TUR
RUS

ln(average value of FDI projects)
0
2
4
6

USA
GERJPN
KORNLD
FRAGBR
RUSIND FIN CHN
CHE
CAN
LUX
SGP
ESP
SAUITA
AUT
SWE
AUS
NOR
HKG
MYS
TUR BRA EGY
DNK
BEL ZAF
MEXUKR
POL
THA
GRC
PHL
IDN
IRNKWT
CZE
IRL
PRT
ISR
VNM
CHL
HUN
NZL
PAKWSM
SVN
BLR
ARG
HRV
KGZ
KAZ
LVA
EST
ISL
TUN
LTU
JOR
LKA
SRB
SVK
PER
COL
VEN
BGR GUY
SYRROM
CYP
ZWE
MDG
LBY JAM
ECU
KEN
DOM
GEO MKD
ARM
MUS
TTO

ln(number of FDI projects )
0
2
4
6
8

0

2

ln(FDI flows)
4 6 8

10 12

Outward FDI and source financial development (2003−2006)

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

WSM

LUX

EGY
RUS SAU
NLD
UKR
BRA KWTKOR
SGP
PAK
IND
USA
CHN
ZAF
IRN FIN
HKG
GBR
AUS
NOR
GER
CHL
CAN
BLR IDN
KGZ
JPN
CHE
TUNFRA
ESP
PHL
SWE
MEX
MYS
LVA
NZL
AUT
TUR
HRV
HUN
VEN
VNMBEL
ITA
POL
KAZ
SYR
CZE
GUY
THA
DNK
PRT
ARGZWE
ISRIRL
ISL
LKA
SRB
SVK GRC
JOR
LBY
COL
EST
CYP
JAM
SVN
MDG
PER LTU
ROM
KEN
DOM
BGR
GEO
ECU
MKD
ARM
MUS
TTO

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

ZAR

USA
RUS
IND
POL
VNM
ROMBRA
CZE
HUN
MEX
SVK
THA
GER
ESP
BGR
GBR
MYS
FRA
KOR
IDN
SGPCAN
UKR
TUR
AUS
ZAF
BEL
EGY
EST
MAR
NLD
LVA
ARG SRB
LTU
PHLHRV
KAZ
IRL
ITA
SWE
PRT
AUT
CHL
JPN
DZA
TUN
IRNSAU
NGA PAK
COL
QAT
JOR
KEN
URY
ZMB
SVN
AZE
VEN
ISR CHE
SYR
FIN
LAO
PER
BGD
AGO
BLR
LKA
OMN
GHA
HKG
DNK
GRC
NOR
UGA
ALB MDA
DOM
CRI
NZL
SDN
HND
MLT
ARM
KHM
NIC
TTO KWT
LBY
GEO
SLV
LUXISL
TZA
MDG
MOZ
TJK
PNG
ECU
ETH
SEN
MKD
MMR
YEM
KGZ SWZ
MNG
GTM
NPLBOLMUS
CYP

SLE

GMB
ZWE
BTN
JAM
PRY GUY
SYCBHS

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

ln(average vlue of FDI projects)
2
4
6

CHN

TTO
QAT
OMN
ISL
JPN
TJK PAK
URYSAUISR
DZA
KOR
KAZ
GUY
VEN
BOL
IRN
ZAR
SGP
MDG
BGD
IND
AUS
JOR
IRL
ZMB
BRA
SWZ
GER
IDN
CHN
MNG
PRT
PHL
NIC
CAN
HND
EGY AUT
ARMSYR
GHA RUS
ZAF
CHL
USA
THA
YEM
HKG
VNM
KHM
DOM
MYS
ESP
GMBCOL
LKA
SVK
GTM
LAO
BLR
AZE
TZA
MAR
SDN
DNK
NGA
NOR
ALB
SWE
UKR
BHS
FIN
MEX
LVA
GBR
NLD
ZWE
SYC
POL
MOZ
SEN
MLT
BEL
LBY
FRA
ITA
KEN
NZL
TUN
PER
ROM
GRC
HUN
LUX
CHE
MMR
TUR
ETH
CZE
AGO
LTU
UGA
PNG
ARG
BGR
CRI
BTN
EST
KWT
MUS
ECU
HRV
MKD
SLV
KGZ
CYP
MDA SVN
SLE
GEO SRB
JAM
PRY
NPL

0

0

ln(number of FDI projects )
2
4
6
8

CHN
IND
RUS
BRA
KOR USA
VNM GER
POL
JPN
QAT
SGP
THA
KAZ
SVK
ESP
MEX
CAN
DZA
ROM
IDN
SAU AUS
PAK
MYS
HUN
CZE
OMN
GBR
URY
IRL
IRN EGY
FRA
ISR
UKR
ZAF
TTO
BGR
PHL
VEN
PRT
AUT
CHL
JOR
TURBGDMAR
LVA
ISL
NLD
BEL
ZMBNGA
SWE
ITA
LTU TUN
SYR
ARG
TJK COL
EST
AZEGHA
ZAR
LAO
LKA
HKG
BLR SRB
FIN
KEN
HRV
HND
DNK
DOM
BOL
NIC
MDG
NOR CHE
ARM
ALB PER
SDN
KHM
AGO
GRC
NZL
GUY
SWZ
UGA
SVN MLT
CRI
MNG
TZA
LBY
YEM
GTM KWT LUX
MOZETH
SEN
PNG
MDA SLV
GMB
MMR
ECU
MKD
GEOZWE SYCBHS
MUS
KGZ
CYP
BTN
SLE
JAM
NPL
PRY

0

2

ln(FDI flows)
4 6 8 10 12

Inward FDI and destination financial development (2003−2006)

1
2
3
4
5
6
ln(average private credit to GDP ratio)

Note: Greenfield FDI data. Cumulated values over the period 2003-2006.

It is also informative to look at the sources of external financing of U.S. majority-owned
foreign affiliates, for which detailed data are available (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis,
2004). It can be seen in Figure 3 that the majority of external finance is raised in host countries,
mainly in the form of debt. Only one quarter of the external finance can be attributed to U.S.
parents and BOP FDI stocks would only capture this source of external funds.
These stylised facts suggest that financial development in source and destination countries
plays an important role in promoting bilateral FDI. However, they may also simply be driven
by factors not directly related to financial development. The patterns exhibited in Figure 2
could reflect the impact of good governance on FDI and the high share of local borrowing
in Figure 3 could be related to the U.S. MNEs optimising their corporate capital structures
according to the tax rates, currency risk, or political risk they face in host countries (Desai
46

The BRIC countries are Brazil, Russia, India and China.

20

0

% of total external financing
10
20
30

40

Figure 3: External financing of U.S. foreign affiliates

US parents

Other US persons

Equity

Persons in host countriesOther foreign persons

Debt

Notes: U.S. majority-owned foreign affiliates operating in the manufacturing sector, year 2004, reinvested earnings are excluded. Data from
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2004).

et al., 2004a; Lehmann et al., 2004a; Aggarwal and Kyaw, 2008). The external funds coming
from US parents may also have been generated internally in their home country. In the next
section, we investigate in depth the causal effects of financial development on FDI.

5 Results
5.1 The overall effects of financial development on greenfield FDI
Our initial results are presented in Table 1. In column (1), we estimate model 1 by pooled Poisson QMLE. We omit the time-varying country-pair fixed effects, but, in addition to the financial
development variables, we control for source and destination income and income per capita, bilateral distance, contiguity, language similarity, colonial links, time zone difference, source and
destination institutional quality, and source and destination human capital stock.47 The coefficients on the interaction terms involving country-specific financial development and sectorspecific external dependence are positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. Higher
financial development, on both source and destination sides, increases the relative volume of
FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. In column (2), we control for time-varying country-pair
fixed effects. The coefficients on the interaction terms remain positive and statistically significant, with little evidence of an omitted variable bias.48
47

Yearly data on income per capita come from PWT 7.0 (Heston et al., 2011). Data on human capital
stock in 2000 (average years of schooling for population aged 25 years and over) come from Barro and Lee
(2010). The measure of institutional quality is the yearly average value of three components of the Heritage
Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom: Investment Freedom, Property Rights, Freedom from Corruption
(http://www.heritage.org/index/explore). Other variables come from Head et al. (2010).
48
Time-varying country-pair fixed effects are always included in subsequent regressions.

21

Table 1: Financial development and greenfield FDI
Volume of bilateral greenfield FDI, by sector

S. ln(CRED/GDP)
D. ln(CRED/GDP)
S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED
D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

Pooled
estimator

FE
estimator

Other
interactions

Stock market
indicator

Financial
institutions

Asset
tangibility

Interaction
SFD & DFD

Income
groups

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.132
(0.160)
-0.067
(0.112)
1.666∗∗∗
(0.330)
1.025∗∗∗
(0.187)

1.318∗∗∗
(0.322)
1.102∗∗∗
(0.237)

1.047∗∗∗
(0.358)
0.986∗∗∗
(0.218)

0.927∗∗∗
(0.300)
0.858∗∗∗
(0.205)

1.232∗∗∗
(0.327)
0.963∗∗∗
(0.246)

1.371∗∗
(0.585)
1.169∗∗
(0.475)

0.566∗
(0.312)
0.447∗∗∗
(0.156)

S. ln(STM/GDP) X ED
D. ln(STM/GDP) X ED

1.893∗∗∗
(0.653)
1.476∗∗∗
(0.514)

S. ln(FIN_INST) X ED)
D. ln(FIN_INST) X ED)

-3.640∗∗∗
(0.850)
-2.647∗∗∗
(0.774)

S. ln(CRED/GDP) X TANG
D. ln(CRED/GDP) X TANG
S. X D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

0.575
(0.360)

S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED X S. DV

-0.302
(0.766)
-0.350
(0.520)

D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED X D. DV
Observations
536549
33618
31759
31434
35373
33618
33618
∗∗∗ p-value<0.01 ∗∗ p-value<0.05 ∗ p-value<0.10. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. S: Source. D: Destination. ED: external
dependence. TANG: asset tangibility. DV: developing country dummy variable. Time-varying country-pair fixed effects are included in
regressions (2)-(7). Regression (1) does not include time-varying country-pair fixed effects but controls for a range of monadic and dyadic
control variables (see main text). Regression (3) includes interaction terms between (i) financial development and various sector-specific
variables; (ii) the ED variable and various country-specific variables (see main text). Interactions between ED and DV are included in column
(7). Time-varying sector fixed effects are included in all regressions.

In column (3), we control for other sector-specific characteristics which may be correlated
with external dependence. We include interactions between (i) sector-specific dependence on
human capital and country-specific human capital stock; (ii) sector-specific contract-intensity
and country-specific institutional quality; (iii) sector-specific indicator of durable goods production and country-specific financial development; (iv) sector-specific indicator of capital intensity and country-specific financial development.49 We also control for other country-specific
characteristics which may be correlated with financial development. We include interactions
between sector-specific external dependence (ED) and country-specific (i) income per capita;
(ii) human capital stock; (iii) institutional quality.50 Our results remain qualitatively unchanged.
In columns (4) and (5), we investigate whether our results hold when we use other measures
of financial development. In column (4), we use the log of the stock market capitalization to
GDP ratio (STM/GDP), taken from Beck et al. (2009). While the private credit to GDP ratio
and the stock market capitalization to GDP ratio conceptually capture different sources of ex49

These measures are defined in Appendix B.
This is a fairly stringent robustness check because these country characteristics are highly correlated with
financial development and may lead to over-controlling; for example income per capita explains 50% of the variation in financial development in 2003.
50

22

33618

ternal finance (debt financing and equity financing), in practice they are likely to act as proxies
for a common ‘financial development factor’. We still find that SFD and DFD have positive
statistically significant effects on relative FDI in financially vulnerable sectors. However, use
of outcome-based measures of financial development may create a simultaneity bias. Among
other factors, the entry of foreign banks can be explained by them following their domestic
clients abroad.51 If their entry fosters DFD by increasing the efficiency of the domestic banking system, reverse causality between FDI and financial development can occur. Alternatively,
as suggested by Manova (2013), higher relative foreign demand for goods manufactured by
sectors intensive in external finance can induce more FDI in those sectors, more borrowing in
source and destination countries, and a positive relationship between the relative volume of FDI
in financially vulnerable sectors and financial development despite the absence of financial constraints. In column (5), to circumvent this issue, we use the previously defined time-invariant
institution-based measure of financial development FIN_INST, which is less likely to be influenced by FDI. Our main results are qualitatively unchanged.
In column (5), we explore the robustness of our results when we use another sector-specific
measure of financial vulnerability, asset tangibility (TANG). For a given technological need for
external finance, raising outside finance should be easier for firms in sectors structurally characterized by a high level of tangible assets (Buch et al., 2009; Manova, 2013). These assets can be
pledged as collateral,52 reducing in that way the adverse selection and moral hazard problems
that lenders face. We find that, on both source and destination sides, higher financial development increases relatively less FDI in more TANG sectors. These results provide evidence of a
causal effect of financial development on FDI which is difficult to challenge on reverse causality
grounds (Manova, 2013). As previously mentioned, it could be argued that the positive interaction between external dependence and financial development does not reflect the existence
of credit constraints but simply that higher FDI in ED sectors increases the level of borrowing
in the economy. However, if that latter interpretation were correct, we should not have uncovered a negative and statistically significant interaction between financial development and the
availability of collaterizable assets across sectors.
We have consistently found that both higher SFD and higher DFD increases relatively more
the volume of bilateral FDI in more financially vulnerable sectors. However, this does not mean
that the external funds raised in destination countries necessarily complement the external funds
raised in the source country. They may be substitutes in the sense that high DFD may matter
less when SFD is high and vice-versa. We can directly test for this by including in column (7)
a triple interaction term involving both financial development variables and the ED measure.53
The coefficient on this triple interaction term is large, positive, but not statistically significant.
51

See Clarke et al. (2003) for a survey of the literature.
Unlike intangible assets, tangible assets can be easily liquidated in case of default.
53
For ease of interpretation, we subtract the sample mean from the financial development variables before
constructing the interaction term.
52

23

These results suggest that MNEs located in countries with high SFD still benefit from easy
access to external finance in destination countries.
In the last column, we investigate whether our results vary across countries with different
levels of development. For example, developing countries’ MNEs could be less sensitive to
SFD than developed countries’ MNEs because a large number of developing countries’ MNEs
are state-owned.54 They may benefit from preferential access to external finance denied to
private firms. To test this possibility, we interact our two main interaction terms, and the ED
variable, with a developing country dummy variable.55 We do not find evidence that the effects
of SFD and DFD on the relative volume of bilateral FDI in financially vulnerable sectors differ
across country income groups.
Overall, in line with our expectations, the total effects of higher SFD and DFD on the
relative volume of greenfield FDI in financially vulnerable sectors are positive, statistically
significant, close in magnitude, and complementary.56 The economic effects are also large.
Using the estimates reported in column (2) and holding other factors constant, if the Philippines
improved its level of financial development to that of Finland, i.e. if financial development were
doubled, the multiplicative change in its outward (inward) FDI in a typically high ED sector like
Transportation Equipment (75th percentile of ED) would be about 23% (19%) larger than the
multiplicative change in its outward (inward) FDI in a typically low ED sector like Beverages
(25th percentile of ED). In addition, when we calculate the overall effects of SFD and DFD on
aggregate greenfield FDI flows, we find that doubling SFD (DFD) leads, on average, to 31%
(29%) more total FDI.57 This substantial effect reflects the fact that a large share of FDI flows
take place in sectors intensive in external finance; the investment-weighted average value of
external dependence of bilateral FDI is 0.29.
54

The World Investment Report 2006 (UNCTAD, 2006) reports that one-quarter of the 100 largest developing
countries’ MNEs were state-owned in 2004, whereas the largest developed countries’ MNEs are mostly privatelyowned.
55
Developing countries are those countries classified by the World Bank as low-income and middle-income
countries, as reported in the ‘AAA codes’ dataset available at http://graduateinstitute.ch/md4stata. Results are
qualitatively similar if we define developing countries as all countries which are not considered to be traditional
industrial countries.
56
In Appendix D, we report additional robustness checks. We show that our results are not driven by outliers,
the use of contemporaneous values of the private credit to GDP ratio, misspecification of the empirical model, or
opportunistic FDI taking advantage of a temporary improvement in external financing conditions.
57
To obtain these results, we use the estimates of column (2) and we i) run a Poisson regression model in
which the fixed effects are parameters to be estimated; ii) calculate the predicted values with the original data and
sum these values across source (destination) country-year pairs; iii) calculate the predicted values when source
(destination) countries’ credit to GDP ratio is doubled and sum these values across source (destination) countryyear pairs; calculate the overall average percentage change between these predicted values. Note that we make
the implicit assumption that financial development has no effect on FDI in sectors with ‘zero’ need for external
finance. In addition, we do not take into account indirect effects of financial development on economy-wide
determinants of FDI, e.g. total GDP.

24

5.2 Direct and indirect effects of SFD and DFD
In Table 2, we examine at different margins of FDI how much of the overall effects of financial
development on FDI can be attributed to its direct and indirect effects. As explained in Section
3.2.2, we achieve this by including in our initial econometric model the pre-sample size of the
source and destination manufacturing sectors. Once these variables are included, we expect
the coefficients on the SFD and DFD interaction terms to capture the direct effects only, with
statistical evidence for indirect effects coming from a comparison of these coefficients with
those from a regression ignoring the scale of manufacturing activity. Tests for the statistical
significance of the differences in estimates can be found at the bottom of Table 2.
The existence of indirect effects requires financial development to increase sector-specific
activity. We verify the presence of this channel of influence in column (1) by regressing sectorspecific value added in 2002 on the interaction between the private credit to GDP ratio and
the ED measure. The positive and statistically significant coefficient on the interaction term in
column (1) indicates that financially vulnerable sectors are relatively larger in more financially
developed countries. This result is in line with the findings of Rajan and Zingales (1998).
Table 2: Direct and indirect effects of SFD and DFD, at different margins of greenfield FDI
Sector-specific
activity

Greenfield FDI, bilateral and by sector

Value added
(1)

Volume

FDI presence(=0/1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

1.518∗∗∗

1.459∗∗∗

0.442∗∗∗

D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

(0.450)
1.215∗∗∗
(0.294)

(0.465)
0.890∗∗∗
(0.297)

(0.158)
0.280∗∗∗
(0.093)

ln(CRED/GDP) X ED
S. ln(VA)
D. ln(VA)

Difference S.
Difference D.

Nb. projects

Average size

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.067
(0.154)
0.100
(0.091)

0.518∗∗∗

0.257∗

1.518∗∗∗

(0.168)
0.334∗∗∗
(0.087)

(0.154)
0.175∗∗
(0.076)

(0.559)
0.724∗∗
(0.314)

1.464∗∗∗
(0.540)
0.819∗∗
(0.340)

0.490∗∗∗
(0.118)
0.608∗∗∗
(0.204)
0.415∗∗∗
(0.102)

0.809∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.445∗∗∗
(0.048)

0.758∗∗∗
(0.057)
0.363∗∗∗
(0.043)

-0.099
(0.152)
-0.185
(0.137)

0.059
(0.130)
0.325∗∗∗
(0.090)

0.375∗∗∗
(0.045)
0.181∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.262∗∗∗
(0.062)
0.159∗∗∗
(0.038)

0.054
(0.050)
-0.094
(0.076)

Observations
729
15969
15969
15959
15959
15969
15969
2103
∗∗∗ p-value<0.01 ∗∗ p-value<0.05 ∗ p-value<0.10. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. S: Source. D: Destination. ED: external
dependence. VA: value added. Time-varying country-pair fixed effects and sector fixed effects are included in all regressions. Pre-sample 2002
VA values are used for all years.

In columns (2) and (3), we investigate the direct and indirect effects of SFD and DFD on
the volume of greenfield FDI. Column (2) shows that our previous findings hold in the smaller
sample for which we have data on sector-specific manufacturing activity. In column (3), when
we introduce the sector-specific activity terms, the coefficients on the two interaction terms
remain large, positive and statistically significant, but lose size. On the destination side, the
25

2103

difference in coefficients following the introduction of the value added term is non-negligible
(27% of the initial coefficient), positive, and statistically significant. SFD and DFD appear to
have positive direct and indirect effects on the relative volume of FDI in financially vulnerable
sectors, with the latter effects being much stronger on the destination side.
In columns (4) and (5), we investigate the direct and indirect effects of SFD and DFD
on our first measure of the extensive margin, the presence of FDI. We use a binary variable
taking the value of one if positive FDI is observed in a given sector country-pair-year as the
dependent variable. A comparison of the estimates in columns (4) and (5) shows that the large,
positive, and statistically significant effects of SFD and DFD on the relative presence of FDI
in financially vulnerable sectors can be attributed, to a very large extent, to the indirect effects
of financial development on overall sector-specific activity in source and destination countries.
In column (5), the coefficients on the interaction terms are small and statistically insignificant
and the differences in coefficients reported at the bottom of Table 2 are large, positive, and
statistically significant.
In columns (6) and (7) we look at a second measure of extensive margin, the number of
FDI projects. In contrast with the previous two columns, SFD and DFD appear to have both
direct and indirect positive effects on the relative number of positive FDI projects in financially
vulnerable sectors; while the positive coefficients on the interaction terms are smaller when we
introduce the value added terms, they still remain (weakly) statistically significant.
In columns (8) and (9), we explore the effects of SFD and DFD on our measure of the
intensive margin, the average size of FDI projects. The coefficients on the interaction terms
are large, positive, statistically significant, and little affected by the introduction of the sectorspecific activity terms, indicating that the effects of financial development at this margin are
mostly of a direct nature. The fact that the coefficient on the interaction term involving DFD is
larger after introduction of the value added term can be interpreted as the presence of a weak
negative indirect competition effect of financial development on FDI.
The results in Table 2 fully support the hypotheses put forward in Section 2. SFD and DFD
have net positive effects on new greenfield FDI by directly increasing access to external finance
and indirectly increasing the number of active producers as well as generating agglomeration
economies. These positive effects of financial development dominate any potential negative
disintegration or competition effects. The estimates of column (2) and (3) suggest that the indirect effects of financial development can explain about 10-27% of the total effects of financial
development on FDI, with the remaining shares accounted for by the direct effects. In addition,
more than two-thirds of the total effects appear to occur at the intensive margin of greenfield
FDI,58 where only the direct effects seem to operate in a substantial way. Taken together, these
findings indicate that the direct positive access to external finance effect on the average size of
58

We use the estimates of columns (2) and (6) to generate relevant predicted values.

26

FDI projects is the main channel through which SFD and DFD promote greenfield FDI. These
results echo those of Manova (2013) in the context of international trade.

5.3 Expansion FDI projects
In Table 3, we examine the direct and indirect effects of financial development on the various
margins of expansion FDI.
In column (1), we use the full sample and we find that SFD and DFD have a positive and
statistically significant impact on the relative volume of expansion FDI in financially vulnerable
sectors. A comparison with the estimates of column (2) in Table 1 shows that the total effects
of financial development on expansion FDI are 25-33% smaller than those on greenfield FDI.
We find that doubling SFD or DFD leads on average to 22% more total FDI. This is possibly
because MNEs can partly rely on the reinvested earnings of the established foreign affiliate to
finance the expansion FDI (Buch et al., 2009). Columns (2)-(9) replicate the empirical analysis
reported in columns (2)-(9) of Table 2. The impact of SFD is limited to a direct effect at the
extensive margin whereas DFD has both an indirect effect at the extensive margin and a direct
effect at the intensive margin. Interestingly, in column (9), we find that the coefficient on the
interaction term involving DFD decreases when we introduce the value added term, i.e. the
opposite of what we found for new greenfield FDI projects. This may be the outcome of the
disappearance of a negative indirect competition effect once a foreign firm has established its
position in the local market. Aitken and Harrison (1999) show that, in Venezuela, the higher
productivity of foreign firms allowed them to draw demand previously met by local competitors. Furthermore, as suggested by the findings of Harrison and McMillan (2003) in financially
underdeveloped Ivory Coast, heavy local borrowing by foreign firms can weaken domestic
firms by exacerbating their credit constraints.59
We interpret the results of Table 3 in the following way. First, expanding in existing foreign locations is costly for parent companies, due to additional regulatory, organisational, or
managerial fixed costs. These costs do not seem to be included in our FDI measure. Second,
once foreign affiliates have been set-up, parents expect their foreign affiliates to be financially
autonomous in the ‘normal’ conduct of their activities, with local credit markets providing the
external funds required for expansion. Such arguments can explain why the direct effects of
SFD and DFD only occur, respectively, at the extensive and intensive margins of expansion FDI.
Third, SFD has little indirect effect on FDI because the desire and timing of a foreign expansion
are idiosyncratic to each firm and do not have strong direct links with sector-specific activity.
Fourth, the strong presence of an indirect effect of DFD at the extensive margin certainly reflects the fact that expansion FDI goes where new FDI took place and increased sector-specific
59

Harrison et al. (2004b) argue that this indirect crowding out effect is not necessarily present in more financially
developed countries.

27

Table 3: Direct and indirect effects of SFD and DFD, at various margins of expansion FDI
Expansion FDI, bilateral and by sector
Volume
(1)
S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

0.888∗

D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

(0.467)
0.836∗∗∗
(0.255)

S. ln(VA)
D. ln(VA)

Difference S.
Difference D.

FDI presence(=0/1)

Nb. projects

Average size

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1.082
(0.663)
1.102∗∗∗
(0.289)

0.960∗

0.893∗∗∗

0.751∗∗

0.807∗∗

0.696∗∗

(0.567)
0.815∗∗∗
(0.278)

(0.298)
0.416∗∗∗
(0.143)

(0.312)
0.217
(0.137)

(0.324)
0.304∗∗
(0.131)

(0.279)
0.122
(0.116)

-0.559
(0.751)
0.879∗∗∗
(0.300)

-0.529
(0.729)
0.748∗∗
(0.314)

1.228∗∗∗
(0.160)
0.659∗∗∗
(0.118)

1.049∗∗∗
(0.089)
0.605∗∗∗
(0.077)

1.020∗∗∗
(0.080)
0.561∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.325∗
(0.189)
0.340∗
(0.190)

0.122
(0.271)
0.287∗∗∗
(0.078)

0.142
(0.111)
0.200∗∗∗
(0.049)

0.111
(0.119)
0.181∗∗∗
(0.049)

-0.023
(0.158)
0.132∗
(0.070)

Observations
17121
9382
9382
9382
9382
9382
9382
1054
1054
∗∗∗ p-value<0.01 ∗∗ p-value<0.05 ∗ p-value<0.10. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. S: Source. D: Destination. ED: external
dependence. VA: value added. Time-varying country-pair fixed effects and sector fixed effects are included in all regressions. Pre-sample 2002
VA values are used for all years.

activity. Overall, the estimates of columns (2) and (3) suggest that the shares of the indirect
effects in the total effects of SFD and DFD on expansion FDI are very close to those estimated
for greenfield FDI (11-26%). On the other hand, in contrast to what we found for greenfield
FDI, the main channel of influence of SFD and DFD differs. For SFD, 75% of the total effects
appear to occur at the extensive margin of expansion FDI, whereas for DFD, 75% of the total
effects seem to operate at the intensive margin of expansion FDI.60
In line with the arguments we formulated in Section 2, SFD and DFD have direct and
indirect positive effects on the extensive and intensive margins of both greenfield and expansion FDI. However, unlike what we expected, we do not find that SFD matters relatively more
for greenfield FDI and DFD matters relatively more for expansion FDI. Two reasons can be
given for this difference. First, the results of Table 2 imply that MNEs engaging in greenfield
FDI does not necessarily suffer from a ‘liability of foreignness’ when seeking to borrow locally. New foreign firms may be perceived as relatively safe borrowers by local banks, notably
because they can benefit from guarantees provided by their parents (Lehmann et al., 2004b).
Local banks may be part of the international network of MNEs’ home banks (Clarke et al.,
2003; Buch et al., 2009), allowing in that way the international deployment of existing banking
relationships. Local banks may also be more willing to lend when a foreign financial institution
is involved in the funding of FDI since it provides implicit monitoring of the activities of the
parent company. Second, the results of Table 3 suggest that the fixed costs incurred by parent
companies to manage a more complex international production network are sizable enough to
generate a need for external finance in financially vulnerable sectors. On the other hand, in line
with our hypothesis that extensive reliance on local credit markets may be easier to achieve for
60

We use the estimates of columns (2) and (6) to generate relevant predicted values.

28

existing foreign affiliates (and desired by financially constrained parent companies), we find
that only DFD has a direct positive effect on the intensive margin of expansion FDI.

5.4 Number of cross-border M&A transactions
Finally, in Table 4, we turn to the effects of financial development on the number of cross-border
horizontal M&A, i.e. acquiring and target firms belong to the same sector.61

Table 4: Decomposition of the effects of SFD and DFD, at the extensive margin of M&A FDI
Number of cross-border M&A, bilateral and by sector
FDI presence(=0/1)

S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED
S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED
S. ln(VA)
D. ln(VA)

Difference S.
Difference D.

Nb. horizontal M&A

Nb. all M&A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.557∗∗∗
(0.199)
0.514∗∗∗
(0.151)

0.351∗
(0.204)
0.263∗
(0.145)

0.822∗∗∗
(0.194)
0.627∗∗∗
(0.150)

0.670∗∗∗
(0.203)
0.467∗∗∗
(0.153)

0.637∗∗∗
(0.149)
0.678∗∗∗
(0.125)

0.491∗∗∗
(0.149)
0.525∗∗∗
(0.120)

0.505∗∗∗
(0.080)
0.475∗∗∗
(0.072)

0.472∗∗∗
(0.075)
0.392∗∗∗
(0.082)

0.382∗∗∗
(0.053)
0.388∗∗∗
(0.061)

0.206∗∗∗
(0.057)
0.251∗∗∗
(0.054)

0.152∗∗∗
(0.066)
0.160∗∗∗
(0.067)

0.146∗∗∗
(0.053)
0.153∗∗∗
(0.049)

Observations
9274
9274
9274
9274
13120
13120
∗∗∗ p-value<0.01 ∗∗ p-value<0.05 ∗ p-value<0.10. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. S:
Source. D: Destination. ED: external dependence. VA: value added. Time-varying country-pair fixed
effects and sector fixed effects are included in all regressions. Pre-sample 2002 VA values are used for all
years.

Columns (1) to (4) show that SFD and DFD have both direct and indirect effects on the
two extensive margins of M&A FDI that we consider. The coefficients associated with the
presence of direct effects are larger than those we obtained when looking at greenfield FDI,
in absolute terms and a share of the total effects. Furthermore, when we use the estimates of
column (4), we find that a doubling of SFD (DFD) increases the total number of cross-border
M&A by 24% (17%). These total effects at the extensive margin are larger than those for
greenfield (15%; 10%) and expansion FDI (25%; 8%). These sensitivity differences may occur
because the motives of the various entry modes differ. M&A FDI have additional motivations
beyond a location advantage, e.g. acquisitions of firm-specific assets, synergies, or market
power (Chapman, 2003; Nocke and Yeaple, 2007), and purchases of precise foreign targets
may be more opportunistic, requiring easy access to external finance at short notice.
The exploitation of the greenfield and expansion FDI data led us to make the implicit assumption that a firm engaging in FDI in a given destination sector operates in the same sector.
With the help of the M&A FDI data, we can gain some insight on whether this assumption
has a major influence on our results. In column (5) and (6), instead of focusing on horizontal
61

As mentioned in Section 3.1, we do not have reliable data on the values of cross-border M&A.

29

M&A, we use a larger sample in which we do not restrict the sector of the acquiring firm to
be the same as the sector of the target firm. While the results are qualitatively similar to those
obtained in columns (3) and (4), mixing source and destination sectors seems to generate an
under-estimation of the impact of SFD on the relative number of cross-border M&A transactions in more financially vulnerable sectors. This is certainly because some firms investing in
financially vulnerable sectors also operate in relatively less financially vulnerable sectors, making them less sensitive to access to external finance than what could have been expected on the
basis of the sector in which they engage in FDI. This finding suggests that the positive effects of
SFD on relative greenfield and expansion FDI in financially vulnerable sectors may have been
underestimated too.62
To conclude, The results of this last section validates our hypothesis that both SFD and
DFD have direct and indirect influences on all types of FDI, including cross-border M&A.

6 Conclusion
We investigated in this paper the various structural effects of financial development on foreign
direct investment (FDI). We show that source and destination countries’ financial development
jointly promote FDI by directly increasing access to external finance and indirectly supporting
overall economic activity. Governments wishing to facilitate the internationalization of their
firms and to attract foreign multinational enterprises (MNEs) should thus implement measures
to improve access to external finance or maintain it during credit crises. Indeed, given the high
sensitivity of FDI to external finance availability that we have systematically found, tight credit
conditions have certainly played a role in the drastic overall decline of FDI flows during the
recent global financial crisis. Deep financial systems also matter to ensure that the ability of
domestic firms to obtain external finance does not fall as local borrowing by MNEs increases.
Such a negative crowding out effect, for which Harrison and McMillan (2003) find evidence in
financially underdeveloped Ivory Coast, would negate some of the growth benefits associated
with the presence of foreign firms. Inward FDI in financial services can help to improve host
countries’ financial conditions, at the risk of making the economy more vulnerable to international financial shocks (Goldberg, 2009; Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2010). For these reasons, a
country’s growth strategy ought to be articulated around a well-functioning and adequately regulated financial system with strong domestic foundations. This would maximise the net benefits
of financial development for local and foreign investors alike.
62

In Appendix D, we reach a similar conclusion when we explore the sensitivity of our results to the omission
of the greenfield FDI of firms which have invested in separate manufacturing sectors (or different industries) over
the period 2003-2010.

30

References
Aggarwal, R., Kyaw, N. A., 2008. Internal capital networks as a source of MNC competitive
advantage: Evidence from foreign subsidiary capital structure decisions. Research in International Business and Finance 22 (3), 409–439.
Aguiar, M., Gopinath, G., 2005. Fire-sale foreign direct investment and liquidity crises. Review
of Economics and Statistics 87 (3), 439–452.
Aitken, B., Harrison, A., 1999. Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign investment?
evidence from venezuela. American Economic Review 89 (3), 605–618.
Albuquerque, R., Loayza, N., Servén, L., 2005. World market integration through the lens of
foreign direct investors. Journal of International Economics 66 (2), 267–295.
Alfaro, L., Chanda, A., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sayek, S., 2004. FDI and economic growth: the
role of local financial markets. Journal of International Economics 64 (1), 89–112.
Alfaro, L., Chanda, A., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sayek, S., 2010. Does foreign direct investment
promote growth? exploring the role of financial markets on linkages. Journal of Development
Economics 91 (2), 242–256.
Alfaro, L., Chen, M. X., 2012. Surviving the global financial crisis: Foreign ownership and
establishment performance. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3), 30–55.
Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sayek, S., 2009. FDI, productivity and financial development.
The World Economy 32 (1), 111–135.
Amiti, M., Weinstein, D. E., 2011. Exports and financial shocks. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126 (4), 1841–1877.
Ang, J. B., 2008. Determinants of foreign direct investment in Malaysia. Journal of Policy
Modeling 30 (1), 185–189.
Antras, P., Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., 2009. Multinational firms, FDI flows, and imperfect
capital markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3), 1171–1219.
Asiedu, E., Lien, D., 2011. Democracy, foreign direct investment and natural resources. Journal
of International Economics 84 (1), 99–111.
Bacchetta Philippe, Wincoop van, E., 2000. Capital flows to emerging markets: Liberalization, overshooting, and volatility. In: Edwards, S. (Ed.), Capital Flows and the Emerging
Economies: Theory, Evidence, and Controversiess. University of Chicago Press, Ch. 3, pp.
61–98.
Baker, M., Foley, C. F., Wurgler, J., 2009. Multinationals as arbitrageurs: The effect of stock
market valuations on foreign direct investment. Review of Financial Studies 22 (1), 337–369.
Barrell, R., Pain, N., 1999. Domestic institutions, agglomerations and foreign direct investment
in europe. European Economic Review 43 (4), 925–934.
Barro, R. J., Lee, J.-W., 2010. A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950-2010,
NBER Working Paper, No. 15902.
31

Barry, F., Görg, H., Strobl, E., 2003. Foreign direct investment, agglomerations, and demonstration effects: An empirical investigation. Review of world economics 139 (4), 583–600.
Beck, T., 2002. Financial development and international trade: Is there a link? Journal of
International Economics 57 (1), 107–131.
Beck, T., 2003. Financial dependence and international trade. Review of International Economics 11 (2), 296–316.
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2009. Financial institutions and markets across countries and over time - data and analysis, Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 4943.
Bertola, G., Caballero, R. J., 1994. Irreversibility and aggregate investment. Review of Economic Studies 61 (2), 223–246.
Betts, J. R., 1995. Does school quality matter? evidence from the national longitudinal survey
of youth. The Review of Economics and Statistics 77 (2), 231–50.
Bilir, L. K., Chor, D., Manova, K., 2013. Host country financial development and MNC activity,
mimeo.
Bilir, L. K., Chor, D., Manova, K., 2014. Host country financial development and MNC activity,
mimeo; revised version, August 2014.
Blonigen, B. A., 2005. A review of the empirical literature on FDI determinants. Atlantic Economic Journal 33 (4), 383–403.
Blonigen, B. A., Piger, J., 2014. Determinants of foreign direct investment. Canadian Journal
of Economics 47 (3), 775–812.
Bobonis, G. J., Shatz, H. J., 2007. Agglomeration, adjustment, and state policies in the location
of foreign direct investment in the United States. The Review of Economics and Statistics
89 (1), 30–43.
Bond, S., Van Reenen, J., 2007. Microeconometric models of investment and employment. In:
Heckman, J. J., Leamer, E. E. (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 6, Part A. Elsevier,
pp. 4417–4498.
Boot, A. W. A., 2000. Relationship nanking: What do we know? Journal of Financial Intermediation 9 (1), 7–25.
Braun, M., 2003. Financial contractibility and assets’ hardness: Industrial composition and
growth, mimeo, University of California Los Angeles.
Braun, M., Larrain, B., 2005. Finance and the business cycle: International, inter-industry
evidence. Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1097–1128.
Braunerhjelm, P., Svensson, R., 1996. Host country characteristics and agglomeration in foreign direct investment. Applied Economics 28 (7), 833–840.
Brooke, M. Z., Remmers, H. L., 1978. Strategy of Multinational Enterprise. Pitman Publishing,
second edition.
32

Buch, C. M., Kesternich, I., Lipponer, A., Schnitzer, M., 2009. Financial constraints and the
margins of FDI, GESY Discussion Paper No. 272.
Buch, C. M., Kesternich, I., Lipponer, A., Schnitzer, M., 2010. Exports versus FDI revisited:
Does finance matter?, GESY Discussion Paper No. 340.
Caballero, R. J., 1999. Aggregate investment. In: Taylor, J. B., Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook
of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1, Part B. Elsevier, pp. 813–862.
Caves, R. E., 2007. Multinational Enterprises and Economic Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Third edition.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L. S., 2010. Global banks and international shock transmission: Evidence from the crisis. IMF Economic Review 59 (1), 41–76.
Chapman, K., 2003. Cross-border mergers/acquisitions: A review and research agenda. Journal
of Economic Geography 3 (3), 309–334.
Cheng, L. K., Kwan, Y. K., 2000. What are the determinants of the location of foreign direct
investment? the chinese experience. Journal of international economics 51 (2), 379–400.
Chor, D., Manova, K., 2012. Off the cliff and back? Credit conditions and international trade
during the global financial crisis. Journal of International Economics 87 (1), 117–133.
Clarke, G., Cull, R., Peria, M. S. M., Sanchez, S. M., 2003. Foreign bank entry: Experience,
implications for developing economies, and agenda for further research. The World Bank
Research Observer 18 (1), 25–59.
Coeurdacier, N., De Santis, R. A., Aviat, A., 2009. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions and
european integration. Economic Policy 24 (57), 55–106.
Crozet, M., Mayer, T., Mucchielli, J.-L., 2004. How do firms agglomerate? a study of FDI in
france. Regional Science and Urban Economics 34 (1), 27–4.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., Forbes, K. J., 2008. Financial constraints and growth: Multinational
and local firm responses to currency depreciations. Review of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2857–
2888.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., Hines, J. J., 2004a. The costs of shared ownership: Evidence from
international joint ventures. Journal of Financial Economics 73 (2), 323–374.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., Hines, J. R., 2004b. A multinational perspective on capital structure
choice and internal capital markets. Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2451–2487.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., Hines, J. R., 2006. Capital controls, liberalizations, and foreign
direct investment. Review of Financial Studies 19 (4), 1433–1464.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., Hines, J. R., 2009. Domestic effects of the foreign activities of us
multinationals. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1), 181–203.
Desai, M. A., Foley, F. C., Hines, J. R. J., 2005. Foreign direct investment and the domestic
capital stock. American Economic Review 95 (2), 33–38.
33

Di Giovanni, J., 2005. What drives capital flows? the case of cross-border M&A activity and
financial deepening. Journal of International Economics 65 (1), 127–149.
Dixit, A. K., Pyndick, R. S., 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton:Princeton University Press.
Dunning, J. H., Lundan, S. M., 2008. Multinational Enterprises and the Global Economy. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Egger, P., Larch, M., Staub, K. E., Winkelmann, R., 2011. The trade effects of endogenous
preferential trade agreements. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 113–143.
Egger, P., Merlo, V., 2007. The impact of bilateral investment treaties on FDI dynamics. World
Economy 30 (10), 1536–1549.
Eicher, T. S., Helfman, L., Lenkoski, A., 2012. Robust FDI determinants: Bayesian model
averaging in the presence of selection bias. Journal of Macroeconomics 34 (3), 637–651.
Feinberg, S., Phillips, G., 2004. Growth, capital market development and competition for resources within MNCs, NBER Working Paper, No. 9252.
Feldstein, M., 1995. The effects of taxation on multinational corporations. In: Feldstein, M.,
Hines, J. R., Hubbard, G. R. (Eds.), The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations.
University of Chicago Press, Ch. 2, pp. 43–66.
Fernandez-Arias, E., 1996. The new wave of private capital inflows: Push or pull? Journal of
Development Economics 48 (2), 389–418.
Foley, F. C., Manova, K., 2015. International trade, multinational activity, and corporate finance. Annual Review of Economics 7, 119–146.
Goldberg, L. S., 2009. Understanding banking sector globalization. IMF Staff Papers 56 (1),
171–197.
Gopinath, G., Helpman, E., Rogoff, K., 2013. Gravity equations: Toolkit, cookbook,
workhorse. In: Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier.
Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence
from the field. Journal of Financial economics 60 (2), 187–243.
Hamermesh, D. S., Pfann, G. A., 1996. Adjustment costs in factor demand. Journal of Economic Literature 34 (3), 1264–1292.
Harrison, A. E., Love, I., McMillan, M. S., 2004a. Global capital flows and financing constraints. Journal of Development Economics 75 (1), 269–301.
Harrison, A. E., Love, I., McMillan, M. S., 2004b. Global capital flows and financing constraints. Journal of development Economics 75 (1), 269–301.
Harrison, A. E., McMillan, M. S., 2003. Does direct foreign investment affect domestic credit
constraints? Journal of international economics 61 (1), 73–100.
Hausman, J., Hall, B. H., Griliches, Z., 1984. Econometric models for count data with an
application to the patents-r&d relationship. Econometrica 52 (4), 909–38.
34

Hausmann, R., Fernàndez-Arias, E., 2000. Foreign direct investment: Good cholesterol?, InterAmerican Development Bank Working Papers, No. 416.
Head, K., Mayer, T., Ries, J., 2010. The erosion of colonial trade linkages after independence.
Journal of International Economics 81 (1), 1–14.
Head, K., Ries, J., Swenson, D., 1995. Agglomeration benefits and location choice: Evidence
from japanese manufacturing investments in the United States. Journal of International Economics 38 (3), 223–247.
Head, K. C., Ries, J. C., 2008. FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control: Theory
and evidence. Journal of International Economics 74 (1), 2–20.
Head, K. C., Ries, J. C., Swenson, D. L., 1999. Attracting foreign manufacturing: Investment
promotion and agglomeration. Regional Science and Urban Economics 29 (2), 197–218.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M., Rubinstein, Y., 2008. Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and
trading columes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441–487.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M. J., Yeaple, S. R., 2004. Export versus FDI with heterogeneous firms.
American Economic Review, 300–316.
Hermes, N., Lensink, R., 2003. Foreign direct investment, financial development and economic
growth. Journal of Development Studies 40 (1), 142–163.
Herzer, D., 2010. Outward FDI and economic growth. Journal of Economic Studies 37 (5),
476–494.
Heston, A., Summers, R., Aten, B., 2011. Penn World Table Version 7.0. Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.
Hijzen, A., Görg, H., Manchin, M., 2008. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions and the role
of trade costs. European Economic Review 52 (5), 849–866.
Hyun, H.-J., Kim, H. H., 2010. The determinants of cross-border m&as: The role of institutions
and financial development in the gravity model. World Economy 33 (2), 292–310.
Ju, J., Wei, S.-J., 2010. Domestic institutions and the bypass effect of financial globalization.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (4), 173–204.
King, R., Levine, R., 1994. Capital fundamentalism, economic development and economic
growth. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40, 259–292.
King, R. G., Thomas, J. K., 2006. Partial adjustment without apology. International Economic
Review 47 (3), 779–809.
Kinoshita, Y., Mody, A., 2001. Private information for foreign investment in emerging
economies. Canadian Journal of Economics 34 (2), 448–464.
Klapper, L., Laeven, L., Rajan, R., 2006. Entry regulation as a barrier to entrepreneurship.
Journal of Financial Economics 82 (3), 591–629.
Klein, M. W., Peek, J., Rosengren, E. S., 2002. Troubled banks, impaired foreign direct investment: the role of relative access to credit. American Economic Review 92 (3), 664–682.
35

Kroszner, R. S., Laeven, L., Klingebiel, D., 2007. Banking crises, financial dependence, and
growth. Journal of Financial Economics 84 (1), 187–228.
Krugman, P., 2000. Fire-sale FDI. In: Edwards, S. (Ed.), Capital Flows and the Emerging
Economies: Theory, Evidence, and Controversies. University of Chicago Press, Ch. 2, pp.
43–60.
Lane, P. R., Milesi-Ferretti, G. M., 2007. The external wealth of nations mark ii: Revised
and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004. Journal of International
Economics 73 (2), 223–250.
Lehmann, A., Sayek, S., Kang, H. G., 2004a. Multinational affiliates and local financial markets, iMF Working Paper, no 04/107.
Lehmann, A., Sayek, S., Kang, H. G., 2004b. Multinational affiliates and local financial markets, iMF Working Paper, No. 02/47.
Levine, R., 2005. Finance and growth: Theory and evidence. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S. (Eds.),
Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier, Ch. 12, pp. 865–934.
Manova, K., 2013. Credit constraints, heterogeneous firms, and international trade. Review of
Economic Studies 80 (2), 711–744.
Manova, K., Wei, S.-J., Zhang, Z., 2011. Firm exports and multinational activity under credit
constraints, NBER Working Paper, No. 1905.
Mayer, T., Ottaviano, G. I., 2008. The happy few: The internationalisation of european firms.
Intereconomics 43 (3), 135–148.
Mohamed, S. E., Sidiropoulos, M. G., 2010. Another look at the determinants of foreign direct
investment in mena countries: An empirical investigation. Journal of Economic Development
35 (2), 75.
Moran, T., 2011. Foreign Direct Investment and Development: Reevaluating Policies for Developed and Developing Countries. Washington D.C.: Peterson Institute for International
Economics.
Moran, T. H., 2001. Parental Supervision: The New Paradigm for Foreign Direct Investment
and Development. Policy Analyses in International Economics 64. Washington: Institute of
International Economics.
Mudambi, R., 1999. Mne internal capital markets and subsidiary strategic independence. International Business Review 8 (2), 197–211.
Murray, M. P., 2006. Econometrics, a Modern Introduction. Boston, MA: Pearson Education.
Navaretti, G. B., Castellani, D., Disdier, A.-C., 2010. How does investing in cheap labour
countries affect performance at home? firm-level evidence from france and italy. Oxford
Economic Papers 62 (2), 234–260.
Navaretti, G. B., Venables, A. J., 2005. Multinational Firms in the World Economy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
36

Nocke, V., Yeaple, S., 2007. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions vs. greenfield foreign direct
investment: The role of firm heterogeneity. Journal of International Economics 72 (2), 336–
365.
Norbäck, P.-J., 2001. Multinational firms, technology and location. Journal of international
economics 54 (2), 449–469.
Nuun, N., 2007. Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2), 569–600.
Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 1996. Foundations of International Macroeconomics. Cambridge,
Massachusets: the MIT Press.
Ongena, S., Smith, D. C., 2000. Bank relationships: A review. In: Zenios, S. A., Harker, P.
(Eds.), Performance of Financial Institutions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
221–258.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., Skrondal, A., 2012. Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling Using Stata, Volume II. Stata Press, third edition.
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88 (3), 559–86.
Roberts, M. J., Tybout, J. R., 1997. The decision to export in colombia: An empirical model of
entry with sunk costs. American Economic Review 87 (4), 545–64.
Rosenthal, S. S., Strange, W. C., 2004. Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration
economies. In: Henderson, J. V., Thisse, J.-F. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., Tenreyro, S., 2006. The log of gravity. Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4), 641–658.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., Tenreyro, S., 2015. Trading partners and trading volumes: Implementing
the helpman-melitz-rubinstein model empirically. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 77 (1), 93–105.
Sarno, L., Taylor, M. P., 1999. Hot money, accounting labels and the permanence of capital flows to developing countries: an empirical investigation. Journal of Development Economics 59 (2), 337–364.
Sauvant, K. P., 2009. Is the United States ready for FDI from China? overview. In: Sauvant,
K. P. (Ed.), Investing in the United States.
Shapiro, A. C., 2006. Multinational Financial Management. Wiley.
Stein, J. C., 1997. Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources. Journal
of Finance 52 (1), 111–133.
UNCTAD, 2006. World Investment Report 2006: FDI from Developing and Transition
Economies: Implications for Development. New York and Geneva: United Nations.
UNCTAD, 2010. World Investment Report 2010: Investing in a Low-Carbon Economy. New
York and Geneva: United Nations.
37

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2004. U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Operations of U.S.
Parent Companies and Their Foreign Affiliates.
Westerlund, J., Wilhelmsson, F., 2011. Estimating the gravity model without gravity using panel
data. Applied Economics 43 (6), 641–649.
Winkelmann, R., 2008. Econometric Analysis of Count Data. Berlin: Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg.
Wooldridge, J. M., 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press, second edition.
Wooldridge, J. M., 2015. Introductory Econometrics. A Modern Approach. Boston MA: Cengage Learning, sixth edition.
World Economic Forum, 2012. The Financial Development Report 2012. Geneva: World Economic Forum.
Yeaple, S. R., 2003. The role of skill endowments in the structure of u.s. outward foreign direct
investment. Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (3), 726–734.

38

Appendices
A Flows and stocks of FDI
Our measures of FDI are gross flows. However, the effects that we discuss in Section 2 can
be understood as influencing the aggregate desired capital stock in manufacturing sector s of
D
destination country j at time t of MNEs headquartered in source country i (Kijst
). We can
nevertheless make a link between flows and stocks by assuming, as is frequently done in the
investment literature, that the stock of investment adjusts gradually towards its equilibrium
D
level: Kijst − Kijst−1 = F DIijst = λ(Kijst
− Kijst−1 ), with 0 < λ < 1. This process of partial
adjustment reflects the fact that capital adjustments are likely to involve costs and to take time
D
to occur.63 It can also be assumed that Kijst
is a positive function of past capital stock due to the
presence of agglomeration and information externalities (Kinoshita and Mody, 2001; Bobonis
D
and Shatz, 2007): Kijst
= αKijst−1 + xijst β + ǫijst , with x being determinants of the aggregate

desired FDI stock.
These two assumptions imply that a one-time change in any fundamental determinants of
the desired capital stock can lead to large FDI flows for a long period of time.64 Furthermore,
D
even in a steady state, gross FDI flows proportional to Kijst
can still occur at each time period.
This will be the case if there is a fixed share of foreign firms which exit the market each year, if
positive FDI flows are required to sustain steady-state economic growth in an open debtor econ-

omy (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996), or if fundamentals such as market size grow at a common
exogenous rate in every country (Fernandez-Arias, 1996; Bacchetta Philippe, 2000). Hence, fiD
nancial development, by influencing Kijst
, can be expected to have a persistent effect on gross
FDI flows.65

The positive relationship between gross FDI flows and desired capital stock, outwith and
within the steady state, can explain why FDI flows and FDI stocks tend to be used interchangeably in the literature, despite the latter being a theoretically more appropriate variable.66 One
worry may be that our estimators are biased because we cannot estimate the following dynamic
model: F DIijst = λ(α −1)Kijst−1 +xijst βλ+λǫijst, in the absence of data on Kijst−1. Indeed,
given that φ = λ(α − 1) is certainly negative, our estimators may suffer from a downward bias.
63

See Dixit and Pyndick (1994) Hamermesh and Pfann (1996), Caballero (1999), and Bond and Van Reenen
(2007) for surveys of the literature. Bertola and Caballero (1994) and King and Thomas (2006) explain how
microeconomic behaviours can be reconciled with the good performance of partial adjustment models at the aggregate level.
64
Among other studies, Cheng and Kwan (2000), Bobonis and Shatz (2007), or Egger and Merlo (2007) find
that FDI stocks adjust slowly.
65
In the case of developing countries, Fernandez-Arias (1996) Sarno and Taylor (1999) find evidence that FDI
flows have very large permanent components, possibly due to the externalities generated by the existing FDI stock.
66
Albuquerque et al. (2005), Baker et al. (2009), Coeurdacier et al. (2009), Asiedu and Lien (2011), or Eicher
et al. (2012) are recent studies which have used FDI flows as dependent variable in econometric models which
assume long-run positive flows even in the absence of changes in the fundamentals.

39

However, the fixed effects that we include in our econometric model will partly account for the
existence of past investment and, with φ likely to be small, the omitted variable bias affecting
the determinants of the desired capital stock ought to be small too.67

B Measures of financial vulnerability and matching with FDI
data
The fDi Markets database classifies the FDI projects into very broad recipient sectors, which are
loosely aligned with 1987 U.S. SIC codes. We match these broad sectors to the corresponding
three-digit ISIC codes (rev.2) reported in Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Kroszner et al. (2007);
when the fDi Markets categories covered several sectors, we used the median value of the
financial vulnerability measure for these sectors.68 Table 5 indicates how the matching was
done. We aggregate data in the same way when using the Zephyr database.
Table 5: Measures of sectors’ financial vulnerability
Broad fDi Markets Sectors

Corresponding
ISIC codes

ED

H

DUR

KL

CI

TANG

Beverages
Food & Tobacco
Textiles
Wood Products
Paper, Printing & Packaging
Alternative Energy, Biotechnology,
Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals
Rubber
Plastics
Ceramics & Glass, Building & Construction Materials
Metals
Business Machines & Equipment,
Engines & Turbines, Industrial Machinery,
Equipment & Tools, Space & Defence
Communications, Consumer Electronics,
Electric/Electronic Components, Medical Devices,
Semiconductors
Aerospace, Automotive OEM, Automotive Components,
Non-Automotive Transport OEM

313
311+314
321+322+323+324
331+332
341+342

0.08
-0.16
-0.03
0.26
0.19

1.13
1.08
0.69
0.72
1.04

0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00

53.71
25.65
8.20
15.36
27.76

0.73
0.34
0.67
0.56
0.54

0.40
0.28
0.14
0.30
0.32

352
355
356
361+362+369
371+372+381

0.22
0.23
1.14
0.06
0.09

1.21
0.99
0.83
0.95
1.10

0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00

31.08
22.46
41.09
29.96
39.35

0.52
0.60
0.45
0.44
0.34

0.27
0.36
0.38
0.42
0.32

382

0.45

1.12

1.00

21.78

0.84

0.22

383

0.77

1.06

1.00

19.53

0.82

0.21

384

0.31

1.32

1.00

19.63

0.89

0.23

0.28
0.35

1.02
0.18

0.46
0.52

27.35
12.03

0.59
0.18

0.30
0.08

Average
Standard deviation

Notes: ED: external dependence (Rajan and Zingales, 1998);1980-1989 median level of the fraction of capital
expenditures not financed with cash flows. H: human capital intensity (Braun and Larrain, 2005); 1986-1995
median of the industry’s mean wage over that of the whole manufacturing sector in the U.S. DUR: durable goods
production (Kroszner et al., 2007); binary variable indicating whether the sector produces durable goods. KL:
capital to labour ratio (Kroszner et al., 2007); 1980-1999 median level of the ratio of fixed assets over number
of employees. CI: contract intensity (Nuun, 2007); 1997 proportion of intermediate inputs that are relationshipspecific (not sold on an organized exchange or reference priced). TANG: asset tangibility (Kroszner et al., 2007);
1980-1999 median level of the ratio of fixed assets to total assets.

67

Using data for the 1970-2011 period from the External Wealth of Nations II database constructed by Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2007), we find that the elasticity of net FDI flows with respect to existing FDI stock in a simple
autoregressive model with country/time fixed effects and the log of GDP is small, as expected: -0.12.
68
We always use the ED value for the three-digit broad ISIC sectors. In some cases, these broad sectors may
not include data on subsectors, for which Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Kroszner et al. (2007) provide four-digit
level specific ED values.

40

C Summary statistics
Table 6: Summary statistics of main variables
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

1. Value of bilateral greenfield FDI (US$M)
Number of bilateral greenfield projects
Average value of bilateral greenfield projects (US$M)
2. Value of bilateral expansion FDI (US$M)
Number of bilateral expansion projects
Average value of bilateral expansion projects (US$M)
3. Number of bilateral cross-border M&A transactions
Source (S.) ln(credit/GDP)
Destination (D.) ln(credit/GDP)

21.52
0.23
90.48
14.43
0.20
73.22
0.16
4.54
3.78

189.26
0.95
279.92
89.53
0.67
156.38
0.53
0.65
0.91

Note: Samples are those used in the regressions of Tables 1-4.

D Robustness checks
In Table 7, we provide additional robustness checks. In columns (1)-(3), we account for potential influential observations by removing, in turn, the largest source of FDI (United States),
the largest recipient of FDI (China), and the two most outlying sectors in terms of external dependence (‘Food and Tobacco’: ED=-0.16; ‘Plastics’: ED=1.14). Our results are qualitatively
unchanged. In column (4), we test for potential non-linear effects of financial development by
interacting the ED variable with SFD/DFD and their squared values.69 We cannot reject the
absence of non-linear effects, given that the coefficients on these additional interaction terms
are small and not statistically significant. As another way to to rule out the possibility of a
simultaneity bias, we use the value of the private credit to GDP ratio in 1980 in column (5).
Our main results are unaltered (we lose about half of the sample due to missing data).
In column (6), we investigate the sensitivity of our results to the omission of the greenfield
FDI of firms which have invested in separate manufacturing sectors (or different industries)
over the period 2003-2010. The coefficients are larger than those in column (2) of Table 1,
notably on the source side. Hence, by not taking into account that investing firms can operate
in different sectors, we may underestimate the effect of SFD on relative FDI in financially
vulnerable sectors.
Our key hypothesis is that an industry’s need for external finance is driven by deep technological reasons, implying that sector-specific external dependence tends to be stable across time
and countries. Hence, we would not expect to see major differences in the sensitivity of a given
industry to financial development across years. However, it is possible that our results hold only
for specific years, such as the period 2005-2006, which corresponds to the peak of the lending
boom in many countries. In that case, our findings may simply reflect opportunistic FDI driven
69

For ease of interpretation, we subtract the sample mean from the financial development variables for this
regression.

41

Table 7: Financial development and greenfield FDI: robustness checks
Volume of bilateral greenfield FDI, by sector
Omission S.
largest (U.S.A.)

Omission D.
largest (China)

Omission ED
extreme values

Non
linearity

CRED/GDP
1980 values

FDI in one
sector only

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

S. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

0.853∗∗∗

1.307∗∗∗

2.131∗∗∗

1.424∗∗∗

D. ln(CRED/GDP) X ED

(0.311)
0.940∗∗∗
(0.245)

(0.327)
1.196∗∗∗
(0.254)

(0.515)
1.329∗∗∗
(0.328)

(0.405)
1.079∗∗∗
(0.193)
0.297
(0.405)
0.056
(0.249)

S. ln(CRED/GDP)2 X ED
D. ln(CRED/GDP)2 X ED

1.443∗∗∗
(0.306)
1.164∗∗∗
(0.241)

1.461∗∗∗
(0.467)
1.724∗∗∗
(0.462)

S. ln(CRED/GDP)_1980 X ED
D. ln(CRED/GDP)_1980 X ED

Observations
30706
31941
25575
33618
17914
28977
∗∗∗ p-value<0.01 ∗∗ p-value<0.05 ∗ p-value<0.10. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. S: Source. D: Destination.
ED: external dependence. Time-varying country-pair fixed effects and sector fixed effects are included in all regressions.

DFD

0

0

.5

Coefficient on ED X SFD
1
1.5
2

Coefficient on DFD X ED
.5
1
1.5

2

2.5

SFD

2003

2004

2005

2006

2003

Year

2004

2005
Year

Note: Capped spikes delimit a 95% confidence interval.

Figure 4: Time-specific coefficients on interaction terms

42

2006

by unusually good external financing conditions and not necessarily a long-term dependence
of some sectors on external finance. To test this possibility, we estimate year-specific coefficients on the interaction terms between our sector-specific measure of external dependence and
SFD/DFD. As can be seen in Figure 4, these coefficients tend to be stable across time, suggesting that we capture a genuine structural need for external finance of some firms to engage in
FDI.

43

