NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERESTIMATING THE REAL GROWTH OF GDP, PERSONAL INCOME AND
PRODUCTIVITY
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 23306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23306

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Underestimating the Real Growth of GDP, Personal Income and Productivity
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 23306
March 2017
JEL No. E01
ABSTRACT
The problems involved in estimating real output that I discuss in this paper cause the official
government statistics to underestimate of the rates of growth of real GDP, real personal income,
and productivity. That underestimation is important not just to economists trying to understand
where the economy is going but also to the broader public and to the political system.
The understatement of real growth reflects the enormous difficulty of dealing with quality change
and the even greater difficulty of measuring the value created by the introduction of new goods
and services. Despite the vast amount of attention that has been devoted to this subject in the
economic literature and by the government agencies, there remains insufficient understanding of
just how imperfect the official estimates actually are. It is important for economists to recognize
the limits of our knowledge and to adjust public statements and policies to what we can know.
This paper is not about the recent slowdown in measured productivity but that subject is
discussed briefly.

Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Underestimating the Real Growth of GDP, Personal Income, and Productivity
Martin Feldstein ∗

It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s what
you know for sure that just ain’t so.
Mark Twain
The problems involved in estimating real output that I discuss in this paper
cause the official government statistics to underestimate of the rates of growth of
real GDP, real personal income, and productivity. That underestimation is important
not just to economists trying to understand where the economy is going but also to
the broader public and to the political system.

The official figures tell us that real GDP per capita grew at an average rate of
just 1.4 percent during the past 20 years. The Economic Report of the President for
2015 (page xxx) stated that, because of changes in the distribution of income, the
real income of the median household did not rise at all between 1995 and 2013.
These figures, widely reported in the press and referred to by politicians of
both parties, shape the public’s perception of the economy’s performance. I am
struck by the difference between how people judge their own economic condition
and their view of the economy as a whole. In the most recent Federal Reserve
survey of household attitudes, two-thirds of households reported that they were
doing as well or better than they had been five years earlier and that they were
either “living comfortably” or “doing ok.” (Federal Reserve, 2014). But when asked
how the economy is doing, a majority of respondents say the country is doing
badly. 1

*Professor of Economics, Harvard University. I am grateful for extensive help with
this paper to Anna Stansbury and for comments on earlier drafts from Katherine
Abraham, Erica Groshen, Jim Stock, David Weinstein, members of the staffs of the
Council of Economic Advisers, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (especially David
Friedman) and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, as well participants at a meeting of
the Group of Thirty and at a Harvard seminar. A revised version of this paper will
appear in the Journal of Economic Perspectives

For example, a majority of respondents to a CNN-ORC poll say that the
country is “doing poorly” (CNN international 1/28/2016) or, as CNN summarized
1

1

The contrast is important. While people know something about their
personal experience, they depend on the official statistics to judge how the economy
as a whole is doing. And while the government statisticians are careful to say that
GDP doesn’t measure how well we are doing, there is the temptation on the part of
the press, the politicians, and the public to think that it measures changes in the real
standard of living.
The resulting widespread references to slow economic growth reduce the
public’s faith in the political and economic system. The low measured growth of
incomes exacerbates concerns about mobility with people worrying that they and
their children are “stuck” at low income levels. 2 I think it creates a pessimism that
contributes to political attitudes that are against free trade and critical of our
market economy more generally.

The underestimation of growth also distorts Federal Reserve policy. The
perception of slow real growth now supports a Federal Reserve policy of
exceptionally low interest rates that is contributing to potential financial instability.
Back in 1996, Fed chairman Alan Greenspan persuaded members of the Federal
Open Market Committee in 1996 that the official data underestimated productivity
growth so that maintaining strong demand would not cause a rise in inflation
(Mallaby, 2016).

Although the officially measured rates of output growth have slowed
substantially in recent years, the problem of understating real economic growth is
not a new one. 3 It reflects the enormous difficulty of dealing with quality change and
the even greater difficulty of measuring the value created by the introduction of new
goods and services. This paper is not about the recent slowdown but I return briefly
to that issue in section 4 of this paper.

The government’s calculation of real GDP growth begins with the estimation
of nominal GDP, i.e. the market value of the millions of goods and services sold in the
market to households, firms, governments and foreign buyers. The government

their poll results, “Americans give the economy a “C” grade.”(CNN international
4/18/2016)

A typical example of this is a CNN/ORC poll in which 56 percent of respondents
said they think their children will be worse off than they are. (CNN International
January 28, 2016)
3 See Fernald, et. al. (2014), Syverson (2016) and Byrne et al (2016) for a discussion
of the recent productivity slowdown. They provide convincing analysis that the
recent slowdown cannot be explained by the fact that Google and a few other things
are omitted from GDP because they are not sold at market prices but are provided
without charge and supported by the advertising revenue.
2

2

statisticians do a remarkable and prodigious job of collecting data from all of these
sources. 4

But then comes the difficult part of converting the nominal GDP to real GDP.
That requires creating an appropriate price index with which to divide the rise in
nominal quantities into a real component and an inflation component. The overall
GDP price deflator uses components based on the consumer price index (CPI) and
the producer price index (PPI), requiring estimates done by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the Department of Labor (BLS) and by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
of the Commerce Department (BEA).

Although there is widespread recognition among economists that measuring
changes in the real output of the economy is difficult because of the introduction of
new goods and services and of changes in the quality of existing goods and
services 5, there is little understanding of just how limited the existing official
estimates actually are. After studying the methods used by the U.S. government
statistical agencies as well as the extensive previous academic literature on this
subject, I have concluded that, despite the various improvements to statistical
methods that have been made through the years, the official data do not adequately
measure changes of real output and productivity. The measurement problem has
become increasingly difficult with the rising share of services that has grown from
about 50 percent of private sector GDP in 1950 to about 70 percent of private GDP

See “Summary of NIPA Methodologies,” Survey of Current Business,” November
2015, pp 1- 20 for a detailed analysis of the sources used to estimate these
purchases. Landefeld et. al (2008) provide a very useful description of how nominal
GDP and related measures are estimated from a variety of primary sources. Boskin
(2000) shows that these estimates are subject to substantial revisions, with nearly
all revisions from 1959 to 1998 in the upward direction and some quite large. As I
discuss in the final section of this paper, there are important uses of nominal GDP
that do not require conversion to real GDP.

4

More than fifty years ago the Stigler Commission (1961) wrote: “If a poll were
taken of economists and statisticians, in all probability they would designate (and by
a wide margin) the failure of price indexes to take full account of quality changes as
the most important defect of these indexes.” There is a vast literature that
comments on the effect of product innovation on the difficulty of measuring real
output, reaching back to Sidgwick (1883), Marshall (1887), Kuznets (1934, 1941)
and including among others Griliches (1992), the Boskin Commission (1996),
Nordhaus (1997), Hausman (1996, 1999, 2003) and Gordon (2016). The NBER
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth has focused attention on this issue
for more than eighty years; see Hulten (2015).
5

3

now. The official measures provide at best a lower bound on the true real growth
rate with no indication of the size of the underestimation. 6

I begin this essay by discussing the age-old question of why national income
should not be considered a measure of wellbeing. Section 2 describes what the
government statisticians actually do to in an attempt to measure improvements in
the quality of goods and services. Section 3 considers the problem of new products
and the various attempts by economists to take new products into account in
measuring overall price and output changes. The measurement of productivity and
the recent slowdown in the rate of productivity growth are the subjects of section 4.
The final section of this paper discusses how the mismeasurement of real output
and of prices might be taken into account in considering various questions of
economic policy.
1. Measuring Output or Wellbeing?

There is a long-running debate about whether national income estimates
should be designed to measure the wellbeing of the population or just of the output
of the economy. Although there is a strong temptation among economists and the
general public to interpret real GDP or real personal income as a measure of
wellbeing, it is clear that these concepts have been intentionally defined in ways
that fall far short of measuring even economic wellbeing, let alone the broader
wellbeing of individuals influenced by things like the environment and crime.

Ever since the initial work of Kuznets (1934, 1941), national output has been
defined to exclude goods and services produced within the home 7 as well as
services that are provided outside the home but not sold. 8 This has probably
become a larger omission over the years with the provision of such services as
Coyle (2014, page 125) concludes her useful history of GDP by saying that “Gross
domestic product is a measure of the economy best suited to an earlier era.” Bean
(2016), especially chapters 2 and 3, offers a variety of thoughtful comments about
the problems of measuring GDP and related aggregates in the United Kingdom.

6

An earlier National Bureau of Economic Research study by Wesley Mitchell and
others (1921) offered a “conjectural value of housewives services” equal to about 30
percent of their estimate of the more narrowly defined traditional national income.
A more recent estimate can be found in Franzis et al (2011).

7

An exception to the rule that only goods and services sold in the market are to be
counted in GDP is the inclusion of government services. Since those services are
valued in the GDP at their cost, there is no possibility of reflecting changes in
government productivity or the value created by the introduction of new
government services.

8

4

Google and Facebook and the vast expansion of public radio and television
programs, all of which are available to users without payment. 9

Similarly, national income estimates focus on the positive value of the goods
and services that households consume and not on the time and effort involved in
earning the funds to buy those goods and services. The average workweek has
declined but the number of two-earner households has increased. Working
conditions have improved as employment has moved from factories and farms to
offices. All of this affects economic wellbeing but there is by agreement no attempt
to take it into account in our measures of national income.

I mention all of these issues up front not to criticize the official definition of
national income but to stress that it is intended by design to be a measure of
national output and not as a measure of wellbeing. In practice, however, the official
measure of real GDP does not measure national output. As I have already noted and
will explain in sections 2, the official measures of changes in output would be more
accurately described as changes in input quantities. That stands in contrast to the
basic idea that any good or service that is sold to consumers should be valued by the
consumers’ willingness to pay for that good or service and not by its cost of
production.

More generally, however, the public clearly wants a description of changes in
wellbeing and inappropriately uses the official measures of real GDP and real
personal incomes for that purpose. It might be good to develop a formal array of
such well-being indictors and perhaps some form of a summary index. These
indicators might include things like the health of the population, the climate in cities,
and other things that are not produced in the market economy. 10 Alternatively,
more attention might be focused on the Federal Reserve’s Survey of the Economic
Wellbeing of U.S. Households and its frequency might be increased from an annual
survey to quarterly to increase its public saliency.
2. Measuring Quality Change

For each good and service, there are three possibilities when one compares
on year with the next: (1) It is the same good or service with the same quality as in
the previous period. (2) It is essentially the same good but of a different quality. (3)
It is a wholly new good. Each receives a different treatment in the BLS-BEA analysis.
On the general problems of reflecting the digital economy in national income,
including such things as airbnb and uber, see the extensive discussion in Bean
(2016) chapter 3.

9

For a discussion of previous attempts to provide such additional indicators, see
Coyle (2014) chapter five.
10

5

Fortunately, most goods and services fall in the first category of “no change in
quality.” For those products, it is possible to collect the number of physical units
sold and the total revenue. The percentage increase in revenue in excess of the
percentage increase in physical volume is pure inflation and the rest is the rise in
real output. When exactly the same good is not available in the second period, the
BLS tries to find a very similar good that does exist in the two successive periods
and compares the revenue growth and physical quantity growth for that good. The
BLS refers to this procedure as the “matched model method.” (ref?)
Although much of the growth in the real value of economic output reflects
quality change and the introduction of wholly new products, the official procedures
do not adequately reflect these sources of increased value. For products that
experience quality change, the official methods tell us more about the increase in the
value of inputs, in other words about the change in the cost of production, and not
much about the increased value to the consumer or other ultimate user. And this is
true for goods as well as for services, although doing it for services is even more
difficult than it is for goods.
The government statisticians divide the period-to-period increase in total
spending on each unit of product into a part due to a pure price increase
(“inflation”) and a part due to an increase in quality. The part due to the quality
increase is considered an increase in the quantity of output although, as I will
explain, it is generally a measure of the increase in the quantity of inputs.

The BLS is responsible for creating the producer price indexes and the
consumer price indexes. 11The BEA uses those indexes and other data to create the
measures of real output. 12

The key question is how the BLS estimates the change in price when there is
a change in the quality of the good or service. Hedonic regressions are used for
about one-third of the goods and services in the consumer price index, particularly

For the best description of the BLS methods, see BLS Handbook of
Methods, chapter 14 for the PPI indexes (available at http://www.bls.gov/opub
/hom/pdf/homch14.pdf) and chapter 17 for the CPI indexes (available at
http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch17.pdf.) See also “Summary of NIPA
Methodologies,” Survey of Current Business,” November 2015, pp 1- 20. In contrast
to the various CPI component indexes, many of the PPI indexes are used primarily to
deflate the prices of intermediate products rather than to deflate output for final
demand.
11

These estimates are also used for measuring the output of the nonfarm business
sector and are used by the Department of Commerce to calculate the GDP deflator
and real GDP. These figures are also used to calculate the deflator for consumer
expenditures that the Federal Reserve uses for its price stability target.
12

6

for housing. 13 When the hedonic regression is not used, the BLS uses information
about the cost of production supplied by the producer. The BLS calls this method of
“quality adjustment” the “resource cost method.”

For the “resource cost method” the BLS asks the producer of each good or
service whether there has been a change in the product made by that producer. 14 If
there has been a change in the product, the BLS asks about the “marginal cost of new
input requirements that are directly tied to changes in product quality.” The
rationale for this input cost method for defining the “quality adjustment” or,
equivalently, the measure of the increased output, is described in Triplett (1982)
when Triplett was the Assistant Commissioner of the BLS.
According to the resource cost method, the BLS concludes that there has
been a quality improvement if and only if there is such an increase in the cost of
making the product or service.

The government statisticians then use the marginal cost of the quality
improvement, measured as a percentage of the initial cost of the product, to
calculate the share of the price rise that is due to a quality improvement and that is
therefore deemed to be an increase in the output of the product. 15 The rest is
regarded as pure inflation.

This is a remarkably narrow and faulty definition of product or service
improvement. It explicitly implies that if it doesn’t cost more to produce a product
or service this year than it did last year, there has been no improvement. According
to this method, a pure technical innovation that makes the product or service better
for the consumer doesn’t count as a product improvement unless it involves an
increased cost of production!

In reality, product improvements generally occur because of new ideas about
how to redesign or modify an existing product or service. Those changes need not
involve an increased cost of production. The resource cost method can also provide
a way to deal with any decline in the quality of goods and services, treating a decline
of production cost as evidence of a decline in quality.
When the government statisticians deal with services, they generally focus
on measuring the prices of inputs. The change in the “real output” of any narrowly
distinguished type of service is defined by the BEA by dividing the total expenditure

I return below to the problem of interpreting the hedonic regression for this
purpose.
14 If there has been no change in the product, any change in its price is considered to
be pure inflation as called for in the “matched model method.”
15 As some critics have noted, this method of valuing output is similar to the oldfashioned labor theory of value.
13

7

on that service by an input price index. The true output of the service that
consumers actually value is ignored.

An important example is the health care industry which is responsible for
more than 15 percent of U.S. GDP. The official GDP statistics for the health care
industry focus on costs, ignoring the effect of the health products and services on
the health of the patient.

For example, the “output” measure for hospitals has recently shifted from a
day of inpatient care to an episode of hospital treatment for a particular condition.
Changes in the cost per episode of treatment is used to measure the quality change.
Triplett (2012, p 17), a careful analyst of the statistical health debate, concluded that
there is a “very large error in measuring output generated in the medical care
sector.”

More generally, as Triplett and Bosworth (2004) note, the official data imply
that productivity in the health industry (i.e., the ratio of output to the number of
employee hours involved in production) declined year after year between 1987 and
2001. They conclude (page 265) that such a decline in true productivity is unlikely
but that officially measured productivity declines because “the traditional price
index procedures for handling product and service improvements do not work for
most medical improvements.” More recent data show that health sector productivity
has been declining since 2001. The key point is that none of these measure of
productivity attempt to value the improved patient outcomes.

When Triplett and Bosworth (2004) wrote about the remarkable
improvement in treating cataracts – from more than a week as an immobilized
hospital inpatient to a quick outpatient procedure -- they questioned whether
reflecting medical improvements like that would cross over the traditional
“production boundary in national accounts” and asked whether “the increased value
to the patient of improvement in surgery … belongs in national accounts if no
additional charges are made.” (page 335) 16

For another example of a service, consider mutual fund management. The
BEA notes that there has been a substantial expansion over time in the types of
funds that are available (including ETFs, fund-of-funds, long-short funds, a large
number of emerging market funds, etc.) but ignores this increase in diversity of
products and focuses only on the charges based on a percentage of all assets,
concluding that “Under the current methodology, no special procedures are

The Department of Commerce is experimenting with health sector “satellite
accounts” that calculate the cost of treating a patient with a particular diagnosis for
a calendar year, including the cost of hospital care, of physicians and
pharmaceuticals. Some other studies attempt to measure the effect of the treatment
on such health outcomes as Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) or Disability
Adjusted Life years (DALYs).
16

8

necessary for adjusting for the changes in the quality of portfolio management
transactions.” (NAICS 523920, page 13)

The treatment of internet services is yet another example of the misleading
nature of the official procedure. The official estimates of real personal consumption
expenditures on internet access are reported to have declined between 2011 and
2012 (reference ?? -- FRED) despite the 45 percent increase in the number of smart
phones between those two years, the 75 percent rise in the number of active Apple
apps (to 625,000), and a more than doubling of the amount of data transmitted via
mobile connections. Fortunately, since 2012 the official estimate of real personal
consumption expenditures on internet access has been corrected to show a positive
increase in previous years.

Although the “resource cost method” may be the most common approach, it
is not the only one. For a several industries, the BLS measures real output at the
industry level by the physical quantity of services provided. These physical quantity
measures are used for measuring the growth of output and productivity for these
individual industries. 17

For example, for passenger air travel, output of the industry is simply the
number of passenger miles and productivity is defined as just passenger miles per
employee hour. The analysis of output “does not account for changes in service
quality such as flight delays and route circuitry…”(Duke and Torres, 2005)

From time to time the BLS staff reexamines its approach to a particular
industry. When the productivity program re-examined its measure of the
commercial banking industry in 2012, it revised the activities of commercial banks
and raised the estimated annual output growth from 1987 to 2010 by 58 percent,
from 2.4 percent a year to 3.8 percent a year (BLS Monthly Labor Review, July 2012,
page 7).

A third approach to measuring quality change is the “hedonic regression”
method originally developed by Griliches (1961). The basic idea, which was used
extensively for personal computers, is to regress the prices of computers in year t on
a variety of the computers’ capacity and performance measures. This gives an
implicit price for each of these features (if the linearity assumption of the model is
correct). Applying these features to a computer model in year t+1 generates a price
(say p*(t+1)) that would apply for that computer if the values of the individual
features at time t had continued to prevail. Since the actual price at time t+1 is less
than p*(t+1), the price decline can be used to value the quality change.
The BEA also uses what they call the “quantity extrapolation method” and the
“direct valuation method” for a few types of output. For example, the real quantity of
bank services is derived from volume data on consumers’ deposits and loans. See
Survey of Current Business, November 2015.
17

9

A variety of econometric studies (Chow, 1967; Baily and Gordon, 1989;
Triplett, 1989) showed that the true price of mainframe computers assessed in this
way declined at an annual rate of more than 20 percent per year during the period
from 1950 to 1980. Berndt et al (1995) found a 28 percent annual rate of decline
for personal computers during a more recent period. Hedonic regressions may have
produced the answer to Robert Solow’s comment in 1987 that computers are seen
everywhere except in the productivity statistics.

The Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Commerce Department uses hedonic
price indexes to deflate nominal output for about 20 percent of GDP. This includes
such things as apparel, software, and housing. The use of hedonics is no doubt very
difficult to apply for these products and services for which, unlike computers, there
is not a clear list of measured technical product attributes. There is also a problem
of assuming that the attributes affect willingness to pay in a linear or log-linear way.
According to the government, extensions of hedonics to even more products and
services is limited by the lack of detailed data and staff resources required to build
and maintain the hedonic models. 18
My own judgment is that, for most goods and services, the official estimate of
quality change contains very little information about the value of the output to
consumers and other final purchasers. That implies that the corresponding official
measures of total real output are underestimates and that there is a substantial but
unknown upward bias in the measure of price inflation. We don’t know what the
true values are and we don’t know how wide a margin of error there is around the
official estimates.

As the methods that I have described indicate, the official estimates of “real
output” for many of the goods and services may be closer to the value of the “real
inputs”, i.e., essentially the value of labor costs deflated by wage rates, rather than as
measures of the value to consumers.
3. Dealing with New Products

The resource cost method and other government procedures for valuing
changes in quality do not provide an approach to dealing with the value to
consumers of new goods and services. Instead, the sales of new products become
part of nominal GDP but the extra value to consumers created by the innovation is
not reflected in the output measure or the price index. New products and services
are not reflected in the price indexes until they represent a significant level of
expenditures. They are then introduced into the price index calculations and
subsequent changes in their price are taken into account in the usual way. It is only
in that way that the new product affects changes in real output.
18

See also Hausman (2003) for a discussion of the limitations of hedonic pricing.
10

An example will clarify how this works in practice. Consider statins, the
remarkable class of drugs that lowers cholesterol and reduces deaths from heart
attacks. By 2003, statins were the best-selling pharmaceutical product in history. By
then it was in the CPI price index. When patents on early versions of statins expired
and generic forms became available, their prices fell and the BLS recorded those
price declines, implying a rise in real incomes. But the BLS never estimated any
value for the improvement in health that came about as a result of the introduction
of statins.
To see the magnitude of omitting the value of that single health care
innovation here is a quick history of the impact of the statins. In 1994, researchers
published a five-year study of 4000-plus patients. They found that taking a statin
caused a 35 percent reduction in cholesterol and a 42 percent reduction in the
probability of dying of a heart attach. It didn’t take long for statins to become a bestselling product with dramatic effects on cholesterol and heart attacks. According to
the National Institute of Health (ref?), between 2000 and 2007, the percentage of
men 65 and older taking a statin doubled to about 50 percent of men over age 65.
High cholesterol levels declined by more than half among men and women over age
75 and the death rate from heart disease among those over 65 fell by one third.
Using the estimated statistical value of a human life (Schelling, 1968; Viscusi
and Aldy, 2003), Grabowski et al (2012) calculated that the combination of reduced
mortality and lower hospital costs associated with heart attacks and strokes in the
year 2008 alone was some $400 billion. None of this value is included in the
government’s estimate of increased real income.

This example of how statins have been treated in the national income
statistics indicates how all new products and services are treated. The value of to
consumers of a new good or service is ignored when the new product is introduced.
Its price is added to the consumer price index when spending on that good or
service is large enough to warrant inclusion. Subsequent declines in the price of the
product are treated as real income gains while price increases are part of
inflationary real income losses. In short, the value to the consumer of the
innovation is completely ignored.
Although there has been a substantial amount of interesting academic
research on the valuation of new products, this work has produced no practical
measure for reflecting the value of new goods and services in the measures of real
income and output.

Ignoring the introduction of new products is therefore a serious further
source of understating the real growth of output, incomes, and productivity. New
products and services are potentially valuable in themselves and are also valued by
consumers because they add to the variety of available options. In an economy in
which new goods and services are continually created, their omission in the current
method of valuing aggregate real output makes the existing measure of real output
11

even more deficient and more of a continually increasing underestimate of true
output. Hulten (2015) summarizes decades of research on dealing with new
products done by the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth with the
conclusion that “the current practice for incorporating new goods are complicated
but may miss much of the value of these innovations.” (page 2)

The introduction of new products into the official price indexes has
historically also been subject to remarkably long delays. The Boskin Commission
noted that at the time of their report in 1996 there were 36 million cellular phones
in the United States but their existence had not yet been included in the CPI. Decade
long delays were also noted for things like room air conditioners. Autos were only
introduced to the CPI in 1940 and refrigerators in 1934 (Stigler Commission, 1961).
More recently, the BLS has introduced new products more quickly but only after
they have achieved substantial scale in spending. These delays cause the price index
to miss the declines in prices that happen early in product cycles.
But these delays in the introduction of new products to the price indexes are
not the key problem. Much more important is the fact that the official statistics
ignore the very substantial direct benefit to consumers when new products and
services become available, causing an underestimate of the rate of increase in real
output and an overestimate of the corresponding price index.

Jerry Hausman (1996, 2003) showed how the value to consumers of a single
new product could be measured by estimating the value of introducing a single new
brand of breakfast cereal (Apple-Cinnamon Cheerios). His approach, following the
theory presented by Hicks (1940), was to estimate the “virtual price,” i.e., the price
that would prevail when the good is just introduced at zero quantity and the
increased consumer surplus when the new good is introduced. The consumer gains
an amount of real income when the good is introduced implied by the decline in its
price from the virtual price to the actual market price. He concluded that the CPI
component for cereals may be overstated by about 20 percent because of its neglect
of new cereal brands.

The Hausman procedure is not a practical solution to the general problem of
valuing the vast array of new goods and particularly new services that are created
each year. But if the Hausman estimate is even roughly indicative of the
overstatement of the CPI because of the failure to reflect the introduction of new
varieties of cereal brands, think how much more is the overstatement of the CPI and
the understatement of real income that result from failing to take into account new
products like antibiotics and the drugs that now successfully treat leukemia and
other cancers.
Broda and Weinstein (2010) and Redding and Weinstein (2016) extend the
Hausman approach and present a new method to value new products as well as the
value to consumers of changes in product quality. They analyze a very large set of
data on bar-coded package goods for which prices and quantities are available over
12

time. By studying these data in the framework of a demand system based on
constant elasticity of substitution utility functions, they find that the conventional
price indexes overstate inflation by as much as five percentage points because the
conventional measure ignores quality and new goods biases. While this method is
very interesting, its use is limited to goods and services for which a large amount of
bar coded price and quantity data are available. It also requires accepting a specific
theoretical demand specification like the constant elasticity of substitution for all of
the relevant products. It is hard to see how it could be extended to most services
where comparable price and quantity information is not available and where the
substitution assumptions may not hold.

The Boskin Commission (1996) was charged by the U.S. Senate with
calculating the bias in the consumer price index that was used for adjusting Social
Security benefits for changes in the cost of living. The Commission considered
several sources of bias in the existing CPI including the bias caused by changes in
quality and by the omission of new products. The Commission provided estimates of
each type of bias in the CPI.

Since the Commission was not able to do new research on the issue of quality
change and innovation bias, they drew on existing research and on their personal
perceptions. For example, for “food and beverage,” which accounts for 15 percent of
the CPI, the Commission members asked themselves how much a consumer would
be willing to pay “for the privilege of choosing from the variety of items available in
today’s supermarket instead of being constrained to the much more limited variety
available 30 years ago.” They concluded, based on pure introspection, that “a
conservative estimate … might be 10 percent for food consumed at home other than
produce, 20 percent for produce where the increased variety in winter (as well as
summer farmers’ markets) has been so notable, and 5 percent for alcoholic
beverages…” They used these numbers for 30 years and converted them to annual
average rates of change for the 30-year period. This may or may not be plausible
but there is no real basis for believing that any of these estimates is even vaguely
accurate.

Housing is the most heavily weighted component of the CPI with a weight of
34 percent. The Boskin Commission concluded that “a conservative estimate is that
the total increase in apartment quality per square foot, including the rental value of
all appliances, central air conditioning, and improved bathroom plumbing, and other
amenities amounted to 10 percent over the past 40 years, or 0.25 percent per year.”
Maybe that is right and maybe a better estimate would be one percent per year.
There is nothing in the Commission’s report to decide.
In the end, the Commission concluded that the weighted average of these
individual biases implies a total bias from product innovation and quality change in
the annual CPI inflation rate for 1996 of 0.6 percentage points. I have no idea how
much margin of error should be attached to that estimate. It served the purpose of
13

providing a politically acceptable basis for reducing the rate of increase of Social
Security benefits.

The creation of new products also means the creation of an increased variety
of choice, a possible form of quality improvement in itself, as Hausman (1996)
noted. The value to consumers of this access to a variety that allows individuals to
make choices that conform to their personal taste can be substantial. Coyle (2015)
noted that in the 30 years after 1970 the number of TV channels went from five to
185 and the number of soft drink brands went from 20 to 87.

The failure to take new products into account in a way that reflects their
value to consumers may be an even greater distortion in the estimate of real growth
than the failure to reflect changes in the quality of goods and services. There is no
way to know.
4. Productivity Change and Its Recent Slowdown

Labor productivity is defined as the ratio of real output to the number of
hours worked by all employed persons. The BLS estimates labor productivity for the
nonfarm business sector as well as for some parts of that sector using output
estimates provided by the BEA. 19
The key problem in measuring labor productivity is in the numerator, i.e., in
measuring output. The failure to measure quality changes adequately and to
incorporate the value of new products means that true output has grown faster than
measured output and therefore that the pace of productivity growth has been
underestimated.

This is a particularly difficult problem in the service industries. Triplett and
Bosworth (2000 p 6 and 2004, p 331) noted that the official data imply that
productivity declined in several of the major service industries – including health
care, hotels, education, entertainment and recreation – and concluded that this
apparent decline was “unlikely” and probably reflected measurement problems.
Greenspan also concluded that the unlikely productivity declines in the service
industries as officially measured was the reason for the low estimate of overall
productivity growth that was being used in 1996 as a rationale to raise interest
rates.

Multifactor productivity is the ratio of real output to a combination of labor and
capital input services. It is intended to measure the increase in output that is not
attributable to either labor inputs or capital inputs. A good deal of research has
been devoted to the very difficult problem of measuring the input of capital services
and to the correct way to combine labor and capital inputs.
19

14

But while the understatement of productivity growth is a chronic problem,
what is new is the very sharp decline in the officially measured rate of productivity
growth in the past few years. That sharp decline remains a puzzle that is yet to be
resolved. The papers by Fernald et. al. (2014), Byrne et. al. (2016) and Syverson
(2016) show that the recent productivity slowdown cannot be attributed to the
effects of the recession of 2008-09, to changes in the labor force demographics in
recent years, or to the growth of unmeasured internet services.

One possible explanation of the recent downturn in productivity growth may
be that the unusually rapid increase in the rate of productivity growth in the prior
few years was an anomaly and the recent productivity decline is just a return to
earlier productivity patterns. Of course, this slowdown in the official measure of
productivity growth has to be understood in the context of the overall
mismeasurement of the official estimates of output and productivity.

Looking more closely shows that the recent decline in the measure of overall
labor productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector reflects an enormous
diversity of changes of productivity in specific industry groups. For the nonfarm
business sector as a whole, the rate of productivity growth fell from 3.2 percent a
year in the decade from 1995 to 2004 to just 1.5 percent in the decade from 2004 to
2013.

This decline of 1.7 percentage points in the overall productivity change reflects
an enormous range of declines in various industries. 20 For example, even if attention
is limited to the relatively aggregate 3-digit level, the official productivity data show
that productivity in apparel manufacturing went from growth at 1 percent in the
earlier decade to a decline at 5 percent in the later period, a drop of 6 percentage
points. For manufacturing of computers and electronic products, productivity
growth fell from 15 percent to 4 percent, a fall of 11 percentage points. Some
industries experienced faster productivity growth, with productivity in the
manufacturing of wood products increasing from a 2 percent annual rise in the early
period to a 2.4 percent rise in the later period. The differences are even greater at a
more disaggregated level. For example, at the four digit level the productivity
growth increased by 5 percentage points for radio and TV broadcasting but declined
by 18 percent for semiconductors and electronic components. 21
For the real productivity data by industry, see Bureau of Labor Statistics,
“Industry Productivity: 1987-2015”. The overall productivity measure is not
calculated by combining the individual industry numbers but is estimated
separately based on a measure of real value added.
20

The deflation of output for disaggregated industries is even harder than for the
economy as a whole because nominal outputs must be deflated by quality adjusted
prices for the disaggregated industries. See Dennison (1989)
21

15

Any attempt to explain the recent decline in the estimated productivity
growth rate must attempt to understand not just the aggregate behavior for the
nonfarm business sector as a whole but also what happened at the disaggregated
level. Unfortunately, that is made difficult, perhaps impossibly difficult, by the
problems of dealing with product change and the introduction of new goods and
services.
5. Using Our Imperfect Data

What can be learned from the imperfect measures of real output and from
the corresponding changes overstatement of price inflation? How should our
understanding of the mismeasurement affect the making of monetary and fiscal
policies?
Assessing Cyclical Economic Conditions

Consider first the assessment of short-run business cycle conditions. Policy
makers and financial markets often look at short-term fluctuations of real GDP as an
indication of the state of the business cycle. Although measuring fluctuations of real
GDP is flawed by the difficulty of dealing with new products and quality changes, the
official measure of real GDP fluctuations can in principle capture the relevant shortrun changes in the pace of economic activity. To understand the state of the business
cycle, analysts can focus on the variations in estimated real economic activity
relative to the misestimated underlying trend. It is important however the recognize
the substantial uncertainty about the estimated short-run fluctuations in GDP and
the subsequent revisions. 22
The Business Cycle Dating Committee of the National Bureau of Economic
Research has traditionally looked at employment, industrial production, wholesaleretail sales, and real income. 23 The first three of these measures not only avoid the

The Federal Reserve banks of New York and Atlanta have recently begun using
official data to produce preliminary estimates of changes in real GDP even before
the corresponding quarter is over. As of the time of writing the initial draft of this
paper (April 2016) the New York Federal Reserve estimated that real GDP increased
by 1.1 percent in the recently completed first quarter of 2016 while the Atlanta
Federal Reserve estimated that the increase in the same quarter was only 0.1
percent.
22

In recent years, the NBER Committee has also looked at monthly GDP when Macro
Advisers began creating monthly estimates of GDP. The NBER never used two
quarters of decline in real GDP to define a recession.
23

16

measurement problems associated with changes in real GDP but deal with economic
activity without the large amounts of imputation (like the services of owner
occupied homes) that are involved in the estimate of GDP.
All data involve problems of interpretation in judging the state of economic
activity, but employment, industrial production, and nominal sales are relatively
free from the problem of quality adjustment and price measurement that affect
measures of real GDP. Employment data are available monthly with substantial
detail based on a large survey of employers. Industrial production is estimated by
the Federal Reserve based primarily based on data on physical production (such as
tons of steel and barrels of oil) obtained from trade associations and government
agencies, supplemented when necessary with data on production-worker hours and
for some high tech products by using nominal output and a price index. 24
Assessing Longer Term Growth and Inflation

For the longer term, the official measures of changes in real output are
misleading because they essentially ignore the value created by the introduction of
new goods and services and underestimate changes in the quality of these products.
It follows therefore that “true” real output is growing faster than the official
estimates imply and that the corresponding “true” GDP price index is rising more
slowly than the official one or is actually declining.

These official real growth estimates are clearly false and provide too
pessimistic a picture of the path of economic growth and the development of real
incomes. The economics profession should educate the general public and the policy
officials that “true” real incomes are rising faster than these official data imply. We
can also provide reassurance that the real incomes of future generations are very
unlikely to be lower than the real incomes of today. 25

One can only speculate about whether the bias in the measured pace of real
output change is greater now than in the past. One reason to think that the gap
between true output growth and measured growth is greater now than in the past is
that services are a bigger part of the economy and the degree of underestimation of
quality change and product innovation may be greater for services. In 1950, services
represented about 50 percent of private value added while today it is about 70
percent. Within services, health occupies a larger share and improvements there
may be greater than in other parts of the service sector. The internet and services
24

See Federal Reserve Board release G-17 for details.

Even if the future will not see the “epochal innovations” of the type that Kuznets
referred to or such fundamental changes as electricity and indoor plumbing that
caused jumps in living standards (as emphasized by Gordon, 2016), the current and
future generations can continue to experience rising real incomes due to
technological changes, improvements in education, and increases in health care.
25

17

through the internet which have become much more important are harder to
measure.

Trends in the overestimation of inflation and therefore in the
underestimation of real incomes may vary among demographic groups and income
groups because of differences in the mix of goods and services consumed by these
different groups. Are the goods and services bought by older people improving
relatively faster than the goods and services bought by younger households? Health
care is an obvious example, although most of the consumption of health care is
financed by government transfers.
Implications for Fiscal and Monetary Policy
When we turn to the policy implications of the mismeasurement of output,
growth, and inflation, an important point is that none of the problems associated
with converting nominal output to real output affects the usefulness of the nominal
magnitudes. So policy issues that depend on nominal measures are unaffected by
the problems discussed in this essay.

The most obvious of these is the ratio of debt to GDP since both the
numerator and the denominator are nominal values. Similarly, the rate of change of
the debt to GDP ratio depends only on the nominal value of the annual deficit and
the annual rate of nominal GDP growth. The rate of increase of the debt to GDP ratio
is equal to the difference between the nominal deficit ratio and the product of the
nominal GDP growth rate and the debt to GDP ratio. If the debt to GDP ratio is not
on an explosive path, its long-run equilibrium value is equal to the annual nominal
deficit ratio divided by the rate of nominal GDP growth.

The evidence that the true inflation rate is less than the measured inflation
rate may imply that the true inflation rate is now less than zero. Fortunately, this
does not imply that the U.S. is experiencing the traditional problem of debt deflation
(Fisher, 1933) that occurs when a declining price level reduces aggregate demand
by increasing the value of household debt relative to current incomes. The
traditional problem of debt deflation does not occur now because the nominal value
of monthly wage income is not declining and the real monthly wage is rising more
rapidly.
A negative true rate of inflation does imply that the real rate of interest is
higher that the conventionally measured rate. If households recognize that their
dollars will buy relatively more in the future, this could alter the household saving
rate – either increasing saving in response to the greater reward for saving or
decreasing saving because a given volume of assets will buy more in the future.
Because many things affect the household saving rate, it is not clear which of these
effects now dominates.
18

The uncertainty about the true rate of inflation should affect the optimal
monetary policy. There seems little point in having a precise inflation target when
the true rate of inflation is measured with a great deal of uncertainty. The goal of
price stability also takes on a new meaning if true inflation is substantially negative
while measured inflation is low but positive. Would it be better to have a target
range for measured inflation? Or to restate the inflation goal of monetary policy as
reacting when there is a rapid movement in measured inflation either up or down?

A great deal of effort and talent has been applied over the past decades to
improve the measurement of real output and the corresponding price index. The
inability to measure either output or inflation with any accuracy shows how difficult
are the problems of quality adjustment and the evaluation of new products. It is
important to recognize the limits of our knowledge and to adjust public statements
and policies to what we can know.
Cambridge, MA
October 2016

References

Baily, Martin, and Robert J. Gordon. 1989. “Measurement Issues, the Productivity
Slowdown and the Explosion of Computer Power”. CEPR Discussion Papers No. 305.
Bean, Charles. 2016. “Independent Review of UK Economic Statistics”.

Berndt, Enrst R., Zvi Griliches, and Neal J. Rappaport. 1995. “Econometric Estimates
of Price Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s”. Journal of Econometrics. 68
(1): 243-268.
Bivens, Josh, and Lawrence Mishel. 2015. “Understanding the Historic Divergence
Between Productivity and a Typical Worker’s Pay: Why It Matters and Why It’s
Real”. Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper #406.

Boskin, Michael J., Ellen R. Dulberger, Zvi Griliches, Robert J. Gordon, and Dale
Jorgensen. 1996. “Toward a more accurate measure of the cost of living”. Final
report to the Senate Finance Committee for the Advisory Commission to Study the
Consumer Price Index.
Boskin, Michael J. 2000. “Economic Measurement: Progress and Challenges”.
American Economic Review. 90 (2): 247-252.

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2010. “Product Creation and Destruction:
Evidence and Price Implications”. American Economic Review. 100 (3): 691-723.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2015. “Updated Summary of NIPA Methodologies”.
Survey of Current Business. 95 (11): 1-20.
19

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1987-2015. “Major Sector Productivity and Costs”. United
States Department of Labor. http://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/pr/ .
(accessed April 3, 2016).

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1987-2015. “Industry Productivity”. United States
Department of Labor. http://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/ip/ . (accessed
April 3, 2016).

Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Chapter 14. Producer Prices”. In Handbook of Methods.
http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch14.pdf

Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Chapter 17. The Consumer Price Index”. In Handbook of
Methods. http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homch17.pdf

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2014. “Quality Adjustment in the Producer Price Index”.
Last modified August 2014. http://www.bls.gov/ppi/qualityadjust.pdf
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. “Hedonic Models in the Producer Price Index
(PPI)”. Last modified October 21 2015. http://www.bls.gov/ppi/ppicomqa.htm

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. “Synopsis: NAICS 523920. Portfolio Management”.
Producer Price Index Program. Revised March 2 2015.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. “Synopsis: NAICS 541110. Offices of Lawyers”.
Producer Price Index Program. Revised September 6 2013.

Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United
States have a productivity slowdown or a measurement problem?”. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft, March 10-11 2016.

Chow, Gregory C. 1967. “Technological change and the demand for computers”. The
American Economic Review. 57 (5): 1117-1130.
Coyle, Diane. 2015. GDP: A brief but affectionate history. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Dennison, Edward. 1989. Estimates of Productivity Change by Industry: An Evaluation
and an Alternative. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Duke, John, and Victor Torres. 2005. “Multifactor Productivity Change in the Air
Transportation Industry.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Monthly Labor Review. March
2005: 32-45.

20

Federal Reserve Board. 2014. Report on the Economic Wellbeing of U.S. Households
in 2013.
Federal Reserve Board. “Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization – G.17”.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/current/

Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. “GDP Now”.
https://www.frbatlanta.org/cqer/research/gdpnow.aspx?panel=1. (accessed April
2016).

Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2016. “Nowcasting Report: April 8, 2016”.
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/policy/nowcast/now
cast_2016_0408.pdf?la=en
Fernald, John G. 2014. “Productivity and Potential Output Before, During and After
the Great Recession”. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
20248.

Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”.
Econometrica. 1 (4): 337-357.

Fogel, Robert William, Enid M Fogel, Mark Gulgielmo, and Nathaniel Grotte. 2013.
Political arithmetic: Simon Kuznets and the empirical tradition in economics. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Franzis, Henry and Jay Stewart (2011) “How does nonmarket production affect
measured earnings inequality,” Journal of Population Economics 24(1): 3-22

Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of
Living since the Civil War. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Grabowski, David et. al. “The Large Social Value Resulting from Use of Statins
Warrants Steps to Improve Adherence and Broader Treatment,” Health Affairs 10:
276-85
Griliches, Zvi. 1961. “Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric
Analysis of Quality Change.” In The Price Statistics of the Federal Government,
General Series 73. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Griliches, Zvi, ed. 1992. Output Measurement in the Service Sectors. National Bureau
of Economic Research Studies in Income and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
21

Hausman, Jerry A. 1996. “Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect
competition.” In The economics of new goods, ed. Timothy F. Bresnahan and Robert J.
Gordon, 207-248. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hausman, Jerry A. 1999. “Cellular telephone, new products, and the CPI”. Journal of
business & economic statistics. 17 (2): 188-194.

Hausman, Jerry A. 2003. “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer
Price Index,” Journal of Economic perspectives, 17 (1) 23-44

Hicks, John R. 1940. “The Valuation of the Social Income.” Economica.7 (26): 105124.
Hulten, Charles R. 2015. “Measuring the economy of the 21st century”. NBER
Reporter 2015 Number 4: 1-7.

Kuznets, Simon. 1934. National Income, 1929-1932. New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Kuznets, Simon, Lillian Epstein, and Elizabeth Jenks. 1941. National Income and Its
Composition, 1919-1938, Volume I. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Kuznets, Simon. 1971. “Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections”.
Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, Prize
Lecture, December 11 1971.

Landefeld, J. Steven, Eugene P. Seskin, and Barbara L. Fraumeni. 2008. “Taking the
Pulse of the Economy: Measuring GDP”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (2):
193-216.
Mallaby, Sebastian. 2016 The Man Who Knew. Bloomsbury

Mandel, Michael. 2012. “Beyond Goods and Services: The (Unmeasured) Rise of the
Data-Driven Economy”. Progressive Policy Institute Policy Memo, November 2012.
http://www.progressivepolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/10.2012Mandel_Beyond-Goods-and-Services_The-Unmeasured-Rise-of-the-Data-DrivenEconomy.pdf

Marshall, Alfred. 1987. “Remedies for Fluctuations of General Prices,” in Memorials
of Alfred Marshall.” A.C. Pigou (ed.) 1887
Mitchell, Wesley Clair, Wilford Isbell King, and Frederick R. Macaulay. 1921. Income
in the United States: Its Amount and Distribution, 1909-1919, Volume 1: Summary.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
22

Nordhaus, William D. 1997. “Traditional Productivity Estimates Are Asleep at the
(Technological) Switch”. The Economic Journal. 107 (444): 1548-1559.

Redding, Stephen J., and David E. Weinstein. 2016. “A Unified Approach to
Estimating Demand and Welfare”.
http://www.columbia.edu/~dew35/Papers/Estimating-Demand-and-Welfare.pdf

Royster, Sara E. 2012. “Improved Measures of Commercial Banking Output and
Productivity”. Bureau of Labor Statistics Monthly Labor Review. July 2012: 3-12.
Schelling, Thomas. 1968. “The Life You Save May Be Your Own”. In Problems in
Public Expenditure Analysis, ed. Samuel B. Chase, 143-144. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Sidgwick, Henry. The Principles of Political Economy., 1883

Solow, Robert. 2015. “The Future of Work: Why Wages Aren’t Keeping Up.” Pacific
Standard, August 11 2015. https://psmag.com/the-future-of-work-why-wagesaren-t-keeping-up-6fcfac468e4#.m7mg6zsz9

Stigler, George, ed. 1961. “The Price Statistics of the Federal Government.” Report to
the Office of Statistical Standards, Bureau of the Budget. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Syverson, Chad. 2016. “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S.
Productivity Slowdown”. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
21974.

Triplett, Jack E. (1982) “Concepts of Quality in Input and Output Price Measures: A
Resolution of the User-Value Resource-Cost Debate,” in Murray Foss (ed) The U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts: Selected Topics. University of Chicago
Press.

Triplett, Jack E. 1989. "Price and Technological Change in a Capital Good: A survey of
research on computers." In Technology and Capital Formation, ed. Dale W. Jorgenson
and Ralph Landau, 127-213. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Triplett, Jack E. 2012. “Health System Productivity”. In The Oxford Handbook of
Health Economics, ed. Sherry Glied and Peter C. Smith, Chapter 30. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199238828.001.
0001/oxfordhb-9780199238828
Triplett, Jack E., and Barry Bosworth. 2000. “Numbers Matter: The US Statistical
System and a Rapidly Changing Economy”. Brookings Policy Brief #63.
23

Triplett, Jack E., and Barry Bosworth. 2004. Productivity in the US Services Sector:
New Sources of Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

United States. 2015. Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress.
Washington: G.P.O.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2016. “New Residential
Construction in March 2016”.
http://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/pdf/newresconst.pdf

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy. 2003. “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical
Review of Market Estimates throughout the World.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.
27 (1): 5–76.

24

