                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE FORMATION OF EXPECTATIONS, INFLATION AND THE PHILLIPS CURVE

                                         Olivier Coibion
                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                          Rupal Kamdar

                                        Working Paper 23304
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23304


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2017, Revised November 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23304.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Formation of Expectations, Inflation and the Phillips Curve
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar
NBER Working Paper No. 23304
March 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. E3,E4,E5

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper argues for a careful (re)consideration of the expectations formation process and a
more systematic inclusion of real-time expectations through survey data in macroeconomic
analyses. While the rational expectations revolution has allowed for great leaps in
macroeconomic modeling, the surveyed empirical micro-evidence appears increasingly at odds
with the full-information rational expectation assumption. We explore models of expectation
formation that can potentially explain why and how survey data deviate from full-information
rational expectations. Using the New Keynesian Phillips curve as an extensive case study, we
demonstrate how incorporating survey data on inflation expectations can address a number of
otherwise puzzling shortcomings that arise under the assumption of full-information rational
expectations.

Olivier Coibion                                 Rupal Kamdar
2225 Speedway                                   Department of Economics
Economics Depatment                             530 Evans Hall
University of Texas at Austin                   University of California, Berkeley
Austin, TX 78712                                Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                        rupal.kamdar@econ.berkeley.edu
ocoibion@gmail.com

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
                The Formation of Expectations, Inflation and the Phillips Curve

        Olivier Coibion                   Yuriy Gorodnichenko                    Rupal Kamdar
       UT Austin & NBER                   UC Berkeley & NBER                     UC Berkeley


                                           November 13th, 2017

                                                Abstract

                 This paper argues for a careful (re)consideration of the expectations
                 formation process and a more systematic inclusion of real-time
                 expectations through survey data in macroeconomic analyses. While the
                 rational expectations revolution has allowed for great leaps in
                 macroeconomic modeling, the surveyed empirical micro-evidence appears
                 increasingly at odds with the full-information rational expectation
                 assumption. We explore models of expectation formation that can
                 potentially explain why and how survey data deviate from full-information
                 rational expectations. Using the New Keynesian Phillips curve as an
                 extensive case study, we demonstrate how incorporating survey data on
                 inflation expectations can address a number of otherwise puzzling
                 shortcomings that arise under the assumption of full-information rational
                 expectations.


                 Keywords: Expectations, Inflation, Surveys
                 JEL Codes: E3, E4, E5



1. Introduction

Macroeconomists have long recognized the central role played by expectations: nearly all economic
decisions contain an intertemporal dimension such that contemporaneous choices depend on agents’
perceptions about future economic outcomes. How agents form those expectations should therefore play a
central role in macroeconomic dynamics and policy-making. While full-information rational expectations
(FIRE) have provided the workhorse approach for modeling expectations for the past few decades, the
increasing availability of detailed micro-level survey-based data on subjective expectations of individuals
has revealed that expectations deviate from FIRE in systematic and quantitatively important ways including
forecast-error predictability and bias.




                                                    1
        How should we interpret these results from survey data? In this paper, we tackle this question by
first reviewing the rise of the FIRE assumption and some of the successes that it has achieved. We then
discuss the literature testing the FIRE assumption, focusing particularly on more recent work exploiting
detailed micro-level survey data that has become increasingly available. This growing body of work
documents pervasive departures from the FIRE assumption, especially when looking at the beliefs of
households or managers. Given these differences between the traditional assumption of FIRE and the
empirical evidence on how agents form their expectations, we then review the range of theoretical models
that have been proposed to account for the observed deviations from FIRE, as well as some of the empirical
evidence specifically testing these models.
        We focus in particular on inflation expectations and their role in the Phillips curve. Our emphasis
on inflation expectations rather than expectations of other macroeconomic variables reflects both their
greater availability in survey data as well as their unique importance in macroeconomics. The crucial role
played by inflation expectations on aggregate outcomes and policy decisions was highlighted by Fed
Chairman Greenspan,1 “I am not saying what [inflation expectations] is a function of. We know it’s a very
difficult issue, but that is the key variable. It’s important, but just because we can’t make a judgment as to
what these driving forces are in an econometric sense doesn’t mean that it’s not real.” [italics added]
        The role of expectations in the context of the Phillips curve has of course long been emphasized,
going back to Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967). While the Phillips curve began as an empirical
correlation between wage inflation and unemployment in Phillips (1958), today the workhorse version of
the relationship is the micro-founded New Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC) that characterizes current
inflation as a function of firms’ expectations about future inflation and economic slack. Over the years,
research on the NKPC has identified a number of shortcomings such as the need for ad-hoc lags in
estimation to generate persistence in inflation, instability or a flattening of the curve, missing disinflation
during the Great Recession, inferior forecasting relative to naïve alternatives, and sensitivity to the slack
variable employed; see Mavroeidis et al. (2014) for a recent survey. These puzzles have resulted in
declarations of the death of the Phillips curve (e.g., Hall 2013).
        However, the prognosis for the Phillips curve may be less grim after allowing for deviations from
FIRE. That is, employing subjective expectations gathered from surveys in the estimation of expectations-
augmented Phillips curve alleviates many of the previously identified puzzles.2
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section will discuss the development of
FIRE from Muth (1961), the rational expectations “revolution”, and the assumption’s current proliferation


1
 The Federal Open Market Committee meeting transcript from 7/5-6/1994.
2
 Crump et al. (2015) similarly note that conditioning on survey data of households’ inflation expectations helps
address puzzles associated with typical estimates of consumption Euler equations.


                                                       2
both inside and outside of macroeconomics. Section 3 reviews evidence that tests the null of FIRE using
survey data. In Section 4, models of expectation formation are discussed that may account for the deviations
between survey expectations and rational expectations. Section 5 provides a detailed case study on the
importance of careful consideration of the expectation formation in the case of the Phillips curve. We
discuss the strengths and empirical limitations of the FIRE-based Phillips curve. Then wide-ranging
evidence, inclusive of our own empirical analysis, is presented to demonstrate how conditioning on the
real-time expectations of economic agents (based on survey measures) can address many of the documented
limitations of the Phillips curve. We conclude in Section 6 with a call for careful consideration of
expectation formation processes, additional measurement of expectations to address the shortcomings of
currently available survey data, and an increase in usage of survey data in future research.


2. Let There Be FIRE

The expectations of agents are of integral importance in many macroeconomic models and have been
emphasized as far back as Keynes’ General Theory, where he provided a motivation for how and why
expectations may affect macroeconomic variables. Over the years, economists have continued to
incorporate expectations into their models and early attempts to model the expectation formation process
yielded alternatives such as adaptive expectations (expectations based on lagged experience) and rational
expectations (expectations are ‘model-consistent’). Today, the workhorse expectation process assumed by
macroeconomists is that of FIRE.
        Muth (1961) was the first to suggest that expectations are the same as the appropriate economic
theory, or ‘model-consistent’. Muth’s proposal was not met with great excitement, and many continued to
use adaptive expectations. It was not until a decade later that the rational expectations ‘revolution’ began.
        Keynesian models of the 1960s typically implied that policies could forever be used to achieve
lower unemployment and higher output at the cost of higher inflation. The stagflation experience of the
1970s, however, led many to conclude that a complete rethinking of macroeconomic models was needed.
Lucas was at the forefront of this task and the rational expectation revolution. He began with Lucas (1972)
in which an islands model was proposed where policy makers are unable to systematically exploit the
Phillips curve relationship to control the real economy. Then, Lucas (1976) developed what is now known
as the “Lucas critique”: using Keynesian models with parameters calibrated to past experience is an invalid
way to evaluate changes in government policy. In particular, if policy is altered, the way expectations are
formed changes, and if expectations affect economic outcomes then outcomes estimated using a model
calibrated with a different policy regime are inaccurate. Finally, Lucas and Sargent (1979) forcefully argued
that Keynesian economic models should be abandoned in favor of equilibrium models characterized by




                                                      3
agents with rational expectations, reacting to policy changes in a way that optimizes their personal interests
so that analysis is not subject to the Lucas critique.
         From relative obscurity, the rational expectations assumption has become ubiquitous in
macroeconomic models. Examples include the efficient markets hypothesis, the permanent income theory
of consumption, and housing investment and price appreciation models. Furthermore, policy makers have
often relied on versions of rational expectations in modeling expectations. For instance, variants of
macroeconomic models employed at the Federal Reserve Board, Bank of Canada, and the International
Monetary Fund have used rational expectations (Brayton et al. 1997, Dorich et al. 2013).3
         One early and enduring use of rational expectations has been in the Phillips curve that summarizes
a relationship between nominal and real quantities in the economy.4 The curve is a central ingredient in
macroeconomic models used by researchers and policymakers. In general, models with short-run tradeoffs
implied by the Phillips curve help generate monetary non-neutralities as documented in the empirical
literature (e.g., Christiano et. al 1999; Romer and Romer 1989; Romer and Romer 2004; Velde 2009).
Sargent (1999) provides a history of how policy makers have modeled expectations in the context of the
Phillips curve.
         The development of the curve began with Phillips (1958), which described an empirical relationship
between wage rates and unemployment in the United Kingdom. Samuelson and Solow (1960), soon after
Phillips, documented a similar finding for the Unites States. The relationship was later extended to the more
general, overall price level, and other slack variables were employed (e.g., output gap, labor income share).
         The Phillips curve tradeoff was assumed to be continuously exploitable by many; however, others
were unconvinced. Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967) both argued for the natural rate hypothesis
suggesting a vertical long-run Phillips curve relationship. Their analyses highlighted the importance of
expectations in the Phillips curve. If agents are not surprised, monetary expansion may have no real effects.
Solow (1969) and Gordon (1970) set out to empirically assess if the Phillips curve allowed for long-run
tradeoffs. They estimated expectations-augmented Phillips curves under the assumption of adaptive
expectations. Their findings suggested that although policies that maintain low unemployment lead to
higher inflation and inflation expectations, these policies could be sustainable. It was not until the stagflation
of the 1970s and the Lucas (1972) and Sargent (1971) critiques of the Solow and Gordon tests, that the long-
run tradeoff beliefs were abandoned and the importance of inflation expectations accepted.

3
  There are also variants of these macroeconomic models that employ other expectation formation processes. The
FRB/US used by the Federal Reserve can either use rational expectations or expectations formed using a small VAR
(Brayton et al. 1997). The Bank of Canada’s Terms-of-Trade Economic Model (ToTEM) originally modeled firms
and households as rational. In 2011, the Bank of Canada updated to ToTEM II which allows for rule of thumb firms
and households (Dorich et al. 2013).
4
  For a thorough history of the Phillips curve see King (2008) and Gordon (2011). The former focuses on the use of
the Phillips curve in policy and the latter highlights the different schools of thought on the Phillips curve post-1975.


                                                           4
        After Lucas (1972), which relied on imperfect information, macroeconomists set out to incorporate
sticky prices and wages into rational expectation models.5 Some assumed prices or wages were set in a prior
period and chosen so that the expectation of demand equaled the expectation of supply. Fischer (1977), Gray
(1976), and Phelps and Taylor (1977) take this expected market clearing approach. A shortcoming of this
method—as well as Lucas’ island model—is that the persistence of macroeconomic shocks could only be as
long as the longest lead at which prices or wages were being set. Others utilized staggered contract models
that better capture the stylized facts of firm price-setting behavior (price and wage setting is staggered with
not all firms changing simultaneously, and prices and wages are fixed for long periods of time). Taylor (1979,
1980) developed the staggered pricing model with fixed duration. Firms in his models pick their prices for
N>1 periods, also known as the contract period. In each period, 1/N firms pick their new price, a function of
past and future price choices of other firms. The backward-looking component of the price choice of firms is
able to generate persistence. As an alternative to constant duration staggered pricing, Calvo (1983) introduced
random duration staggered pricing. He assumed that a firm faced a constant probability of being allowed to
change prices in a given period. This results in i.i.d. contract lengths across firms, greatly simplifying the
algebra required in staggered price-setting models.6
        As a result of these theoretical efforts, the purely forward-looking NKPC emerged as the dominant
framework. It is microfounded from the optimization problem of monopolistically competitive firms subject
to a friction limiting their price changing ability. The most common friction imposed today is that of time-
dependent sticky prices as in Calvo (1983); however, other pricing frictions such as fixed duration contracts
also suffice. Similar to earlier versions of expectations-augmented Phillips curves, the NKPC underscores the
prominent role of inflation expectations in determining current inflation. However, in contrast to the earlier
work, the canonical NKPC traces the coefficients in the Phillips curve to structural parameters—hence making
the NKPC immune to the Lucas critique—and enshrines the FIRE framework thus completing the research
agenda laid out in the 1970s. Given the prominence of the NKPC as an application of rational expectations,
we use it as the primary example in our discussion henceforth.


3. Measuring Expectations: From Skepticism to Increasing Acceptance

The proliferation and dominance of FIRE in macroeconomic models is due in large part to the fact that it
allows for policy analysis not subject to the Lucas critique as well as relative ease of optimization in


5
  For a thorough review of the modeling of price and wage setting behavior see Taylor (1999).
6
  Research has also explored state-dependent pricing where firms can change prices whenever desired but to do so
must pay a fixed cost. This approach leads to Ss pricing decisions, which are generally difficult to aggregate (e.g.,
Golosov and Lucas 2007). Gertler and Leahy (2008) analytically develop a state-dependent pricing model with
idiosyncratic shocks to firm productivity. The resulting Phillips curve is a variant of the one derived under Calvo
pricing, with the main variation being the parameterization of the coefficient on output.


                                                         5
comparison to more complicated expectation formation processes. However, are rational expectations
consistent with micro-level evidence provided by survey data? There is a vast literature that tests the null
hypothesis of FIRE using a number of different procedures and data sets.7 In this section we focus on
findings related to inflation expectations in order to guide our analyses on the Phillips curve.
         Although surveys can provide valuable information to answer this question, many
macroeconomists have been uncomfortable with relying on these data to inform their choice or calibration
of models. Skepticism toward survey expectations can be traced back to papers from the 1940s to 1960s
that critique survey methodologies (e.g., Machlup 1946) and found survey data not useful in predicting
individual behavior (e.g., National Bureau of Economic Research 1960; Juster 1964).8 Others argued that
only theories, not assumptions, could be empirically tested. Prescott (1977) forcefully expressed this view:
“Like utility, expectations are not observed, and surveys cannot be used to test the rational expectations
hypothesis. One can only test if some theory, whether it incorporates rational expectations or, for the matter,
irrational expectations, is or is not consistent with observations” [underlining his]. Thus, it was
commonplace for economists to view the use of survey expectations as suspect.
         This perspective has become increasingly uncommon, however. Zarnowitz (1984) and Lovell (1986)
argued against the premise that assumptions should not be tested using micro data. Manski (2004) concluded
that the hostility towards surveys is based on meager evidence and suggested that survey expectations provide a
viable way to test models of the expectation formation process. If survey evidence consistently and forcefully
rejects FIRE, one may be more inclined to discount models relying on the assumption.
         A number of papers have used a battery of econometric tests to investigate if survey-based expectations
are in line with FIRE.9 The literature consistently finds survey-based expectations deviate from FIRE. Jonung
and Laidler (1988) exploit a Swedish survey on contemporaneous inflation perceptions, i.e. agents’ beliefs about
current or past inflation rates, to assess rationality. In contrast to inflation expectations (which are about the
future), inflation perceptions are not subject to the “Peso problem”.10 They find, that although unbiased, errors
made by households are serially correlated. Roberts (1998) suggests that inflation expectations from the


7
  For a thorough review, see Pesaran and Weale (2006).
8
  See Dominitz and Manski (1997) and Manski (2004) for a history of the controversy surrounding the use of surveys
as a measure for expectations.
9
  As reviewed in Sheffrin (1996), there are four popular tests of rationality: (1) Unbiasedness: surveys should provide
an unbiased predictor of the relevant variable; (2) Efficiency: the survey expectation should use past observations of
the variable in the same way that the variable actually evolves over time; (3) Forecast-error unpredictability: the
difference between the survey expectations and actual realizations should be uncorrelated with all information
available at the time of forecast; (4) Consistency: given forecasts made at different times for some variable in the
future, these two forecasts should be consistent with one another.
10
   Suppose one is forming expectations about the value of the Mexican Peso to the U.S. Dollar, and there is a positive
probability of a Peso devaluation. FIRE agents would incorporate the devaluation probability into their expectations.
Assume the devaluation does not occur. Then ex-post, the ex-ante inflation expectations would appear to have a
systematic error despite agents having FIRE.


                                                          6
Livingston Survey and the Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC) have an “intermediate” level of rationality,
that is they are neither rational nor do they follow a simple autoregressive model. Croushore (1998) notes that,
over time with longer time series of survey data, survey expectations have become more in line with the
predictions of rational expectations; however, expectations still do not pass all tests for optimality and at times
are biased. Mankiw et al. (2003) use inflation expectations gathered from various surveys and demonstrate that
each survey meets and fails some of the requirements of rationality. Croushore (1993, 1997) provide an overview
of rationality tests that have used the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and Livingston data.
        In addition to the canonical econometric tests, one can also assess if FIRE hold in subsamples of
the population. Of course, while this does not invalidate the possibility that FIRE may hold in the aggregate,
it does provide qualitative evidence that agents may not be fully informed. Some have noted the existence
of demographic biases in inflation expectations. Bryan and Venkatu (2001) note that women tend to have
higher inflation expectations even after controlling for race, education, marital status, income, and age.
Souleles (2004) finds consumer demographics are correlated with inflation forecast errors in the MSC.
Bruine de Bruin et al. (2010) highlight how inflation expectations are higher among those with lower
financial literacy. Similarly, experiences, and therefore age, may also affect inflation expectations.
Malmendier and Nagel (2016) document that learning from experience, that is overweighting the inflation
experienced during one’s own lifetime, appears to occur in the MSC.
        One striking feature of survey data is that it reveals dramatic differences across individuals in terms
of their perceived (past) inflation rates. For example, Jonung (1981) found in a survey of Swedish
households that differences in households’ perceptions about recent inflation were almost as large as
differences in their expectations of future inflation, and that households’ beliefs about recent inflation were
a strong predictor about their beliefs over future inflation. Kumar et al. (2015) document similar patterns
for households and firms managers in New Zealand. Large differences in perceptions of recent inflation
across economic agents are striking because they are strongly at odds with the common assumption of fully-
informed agents. Subsequent work has documented properties of inflation perceptions and how these relate
to differences in inflation expectations.
        Building on Jonung’s (1981) finding that women had a higher perceived past inflation rate than
men in 1977 because women purchased a larger share of food and food price inflation in 1977 was higher
than that of general inflation, others have shown that an individual’s consumption basket affects his or her
perception of inflation. Georganas et al. (2014) conduct a financially incentivized experiment amongst
consumers and find that perceived inflation rates are biased towards goods frequently bought. Ranyard et
al. (2008) note that the expenditure-weighting in the CPI calculation results in measured inflation being a
better representation of inflation experienced by households in the upper percentiles of the expenditure
distribution than those that are less wealthy. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a) find that households in



                                                        7
groups that purchase gasoline more frequently adjust their inflation forecasts by more when oil prices
change than do other households. Cavalho et al. (2016) document that consumers use their memories of
supermarket prices when forming their inflation expectations. Johannsen (2014) finds that low-income
households experience more dispersion in changes of their cost-of-living and also display more
heterogeneity in their inflation forecasts.
         Others have discussed how the accuracy and dispersion of inflation expectations may vary over
time. Some have noted that the accuracy of inflation expectations varies with the business cycle. Carvalho
and Nechio (2014) find that many households form their forecasts in a way that is consistent with a Taylor
rule on the part of monetary policymakers, but that this is primarily true during downturns. Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2015b) also find that deviations from FIRE in the U.S. decline during downturns, as do
Loungani et al. (2013) in a much wider cross-section of countries. Others have empirically demonstrated
and modeled how the amount of disagreement in inflation expectations may vary over time. Cukierman and
Wachtel (1979) and Mankiw et al. (2003) empirically demonstrate that a high dispersion of inflation
expectations is positively correlated with a high level of inflation and with a high variance in recent
inflation.11


Recap: Early suspicion of directly measuring expectations has subsided over the years, and economists are
increasingly conducting surveys and relying on survey data. Survey-based expectations have been used to
test the assumption of FIRE, and the literature consistently finds deviations from FIRE. Surveys reveal
demographic biases across gender and age; perceived inflation is affected by an individual’s consumption
basket; and the accuracy and dispersion of expectations may vary systematically over time. These
characteristics suggest that assuming agents hold FIRE may be too strong. At the same time, Croushore
(2010) finds that while departures from rational expectations over short periods of time can be frequent and
large, these departures tend to dissipate over longer periods. Thus, expectations appear to converge to FIRE
over time. Coming to grips with these different empirical findings requires developing models of the
expectations formation process that go beyond FIRE.12
4. Alternatives to FIRE

11
   Capistrán and Timmerman (2009) offer an alternative explanation within the FIRE framework. They develop a
model of asymmetric costs to over- and under-predicting, heterogeneous loss functions amongst agents, and a constant
loss component to try to fit the observed characteristics of SPF inflation forecasts without deviating from FIRE.
However, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) show that this type of model makes counterfactual predictions for the
dynamic responses of forecast errors to shocks.
12
   The evidence discussed in this section need not invalidate the usage of FIRE in all cases when one is interested in
aggregate outcomes and arbitrage opportunities are not costly. For example, consider financial markets where some
traders are rational while others are not. With sufficient resources and an appropriate institutional environment,
rational agents could arbitrage away market outcomes that are not rational resulting in the aggregates being effectively
set using FIRE.


                                                           8
As documented in the previous section, the empirical evidence generally rejects the FIRE assumption. How
should one interpret these deviations? Do they imply that expectations are irrational? Or do they reflect
constraints on the information processing capacity of economic agents? Does it matter? And, importantly,
how should we model the expectation formation process? As Shiller (1978) noted early in the rational
expectations revolution, “Even when we do have survey data or other data which purport to represent
expectations, if these expectations are endogenous in our model then we still must model the determination
of these expectations.”
        Most recent work in this direction has emphasized possible deviations from full-information due to
information rigidities while maintaining the assumption of rational expectations. One such approach is the
sticky information approach of Mankiw and Reis (2002), in which agents update their information sets
infrequently but when they do so, they acquire FIRE. Carroll (2003) helps rationalize the sticky information
approach by suggesting that information is transferred from professional forecasters to consumers over time
via the news. An alternative approach, often called noisy information or rational inattention, is motived by
information processing constraints of agents. The information constraints are modeled as agents either
receiving noisy signals (agents observe the true values with some error) or agents rationally choosing what
information to pay attention to subject to some information constraint. Woodford (2002) takes the first
approach and Sims (2003) and Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2009) take the latter.
        Sticky information, noisy information, and rational inattention models make some common
predictions. First, the mean forecast across agents of a macroeconomic variable will under-respond relative to
the actual response of the variable after a macroeconomic shock. For example, if a shock raises inflation for
a number of periods, the mean forecast of inflation in both models will not rise by as much as actual inflation.
In sticky information, this is because some agents will be unaware that the shock has occurred and will not
change their forecast at all. In noisy information models, agents will receive signals pointing to higher inflation
but they will adjust their forecasts only gradually because of their initial uncertainty as to whether the higher
signals represent noise or true innovations. In rational inattention models, some agents will not be paying
complete attention to incoming inflation data and will not sufficiently increase their forecasts. Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012) document that, consistent with models of information rigidities, survey forecasts of
inflation under-respond to different macroeconomic shocks. These results obtain for a variety of surveys,
including the SPF, the Livingston Survey, FOMC member forecasts, and the MSC. Furthermore, the implied
levels of information rigidity are economically large, pointing to important deviations from FIRE.
        Another common prediction from these models is that mean ex-post forecast errors across agents
will be predictable on average using ex-ante revisions in mean forecasts, in contrast to the prediction from
FIRE that ex-post forecast errors should be unpredictable. In sticky information, this reflects the fact that



                                                        9
some agents do not update their information and so their forecasts remain unchanged, anchoring the mean
forecast to the previous period’s mean forecast. In noisy information, agents update their forecasts only
gradually because of the noise in the signal, again anchoring current forecasts to previous forecasts. In
rational inattention models, current mean forecasts will be anchored to past mean forecasts because some
agents will not be paying complete attention to the relevant variable. These mechanisms imply a gradual
adjustment in mean forecasts and therefore predictability in mean forecast errors. Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2015b) test this prediction and find robust evidence for predictability of ex-post forecast
errors from ex-ante mean forecast revisions, consistent with these models of information rigidity. Once
again, the implied deviations from FIRE are economically large and can be found in a variety of different
surveys, such as the SPF, the MSC, financial market forecasts, and Consensus Economics forecasts for
different countries.
        In addition to models that emphasize information rigidities, research has considered an array of other
possible departures from FIRE. These models fall broadly into two, sometimes overlapping, categories. One
such alternative is bounded rationality, where agents are “bounded” by model misspecification yet are
“rational” in their use of least squares (Sargent, 1999). Gabaix (2014) proposes and analyzes a “sparse max”
operator in which agents build a simplified model of the world, paying attention to only some of the relevant
variables as attention bears a positive cost in the model. This approach is motivated by the limited capacity of
agents to follow and relate macroeconomic variables. Gabaix continues by analyzing the results of consumer
demand and competitive equilibrium when agents use a sparse max operator. Of particular relevance is his
analysis of a Phillips curve in the Edgeworth Box. He shows that under a sparse max operator, each
equilibrium price level corresponds to a different real equilibrium, similar to a Phillips curve. Natural
expectations in Fuster et al. (2010) is a related concept in the sense that it is a middle ground between rational
expectations and naïve intuitive expectations. Agents with natural expectations use simple, misspecified
models to forecast a complex reality.
        A similar approach where agents have misspecified models is that of diagnostic expectations. This
type of expectations is motivated by Kahneman and Tversky’s (1972) representativeness heuristic that
characterizes our non-Bayesian tendency to overestimate the probability of a trait in a group when that trait
is representative or diagnostic to that group (e.g., red hair among the Irish). Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010)
and Bordalo et al. (2016) take this behavioral intuition and formalize it into diagnostic expectations. Agents
with diagnostic expectations overweight future outcomes that become more likely with incoming data.
Bordalo et al. (2016) show that diagnostic expectations in a model of credit cycles can account for stylized
facts on credit spreads such as their excess volatility, predictable reversals, and an over-reaction to news.
        The second approach is to use models of learning. The most common formulation of learning is
adaptive learning where the agent acts as an econometrician in each period and uses observed outcomes to



                                                       10
estimate a perceived law of motion. From the perceived law of motion, which is not necessarily the actual
law of motion, the agent forms expectations and maximizes subject to those expectations. Evans and
Honkapohja (1999, 2012) provide an extensive review of the adaptive learning literature as well as discuss
other learning approaches. In these models, agents often observe shocks (and so in this dimension their
information is full) and have full rationality but do not know parameters governing dynamics in the
economy.
        Models of learning have been used to study inflation and inflation expectations. On the theoretical
side, Orphanides and Williams (2005) demonstrate that in a model where agents use a model of finite-
memory, least squares, perpetual learning to form inflation expectations, significant and persistent
deviations of inflation expectations from those implied by rational expectations may arise. On the empirical
front, models of learning have done well matching observed inflation persistence and inflation expectation
survey data (e.g., Milani, 2007; Branch and Evans, 2006a). These empirical successes suggest learning
models may capture important deviations from FIRE.
        A closely related body of work emphasizes the possibility that agents switch across different
forecasting processes over time. Branch and Evans (2006b), for example, model agents as choosing from a
list of misspecified models (parameters however are formed optimally) based on prior forecast performance.
This formulation is able to give rise to intrinsic heterogeneous expectations under suitable conditions. In
particular, with high intensities of choice (intensity of choice parameterizes the agent’s bounded rationality
and as it approaches infinity the agents approach full optimization), expectations must influence actual
outcomes. Pfajfar and Žakelj (2014) use an inflation forecasting experiment to assess the process of forecast
formation and the extent to which agents switch forecasting rules. They find that expectations are
heterogeneous with some subjects behaving in line with rational expectations while others appear to adhere
to methods of adaptive learning or trend extrapolation with frequent switching between forecasting models.
Forecast switching behavior has also been modeled as a result of social dynamics as in Hachem and Wu
(2017). Agents have pairwise meetings where they compare their recent forecast errors, and the agent with
the larger error earns a “strike”. After a threshold level of strikes, an agent will switch their forecasting rule.


Recap: There are a variety of alternatives to FIRE that can explain why we observe pronounced and persistent
deviations from FIRE in survey data. Options include sticky information, noisy information, rational inattention,
bounded rationality, diagnostic expectations, and learning. Identifying which approach can best characterize the
expectations formation process of different agents should be a key area of future research.

5. Application: The Phillips Curve




                                                        11
As discussed above, FIRE often appears at odds with real-time survey-based expectations. This section
demonstrates that in a prominent and important application, the Phillips curve, incorporating real-time
expectations into the analysis can address a number of otherwise puzzling shortcomings of the NKPC that
arise under the FIRE assumption.
        Of course, the NKPC was derived under the assumption of FIRE, and including subjective inflation
expectations is a deviation from this assumption. However, Adam and Padula (2011) show that one can use
survey expectations in the Phillips curve as long as economic agents respect the law of iterated expectations
(LIE), a weaker assumption than FIRE. This constraint is satisfied e.g. when agents are rational but not
sufficiently informed. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015b) and others report evidence consistent
with this condition being satisfied.
        We begin with a discussion of the early successes of the NKPC and then move to the failures and
puzzles generated by the formulation. Then, survey-based expectation data availability is explored and the
literature using survey-based expectations is reviewed and shown to have solved some of the puzzles
associated with the NKPC. Our own empirical analysis confirms the importance of the inclusion of survey-
based inflation expectations in the estimation of the Phillips curve.


5.A. Successes of the Full-Information Rational Expectations Phillips Curve

The expectations-augmented Phillips curve combined with the assumption that expectations are rational
and fully-informed experienced early theoretical and empirical successes.

Theoretical Success: The workhorse framework with rational expectations codified in Clarida et al. (1999)
and Woodford (2003) has been instrumental in guiding empirical analyses to link the nominal and real sides
of the economy. For example, the framework can help answer such questions as what measure of slack
(e.g., output gap, unit labor costs, unemployment) and expected inflation (e.g., one-year or one-quarter
ahead inflation, lagged or future) should be used in the Phillips curve. The framework can also provide a
benchmark to evaluate empirical estimates of Phillips curve parameters. The baseline formulation of the
curve takes the following form:
                                                                                                    (1)
where     is the rate of inflation at time ,        is the mathematical (FIRE) expectation of inflation at
time     1 given information available at time ,        is the discount factor,    is the output gap (more
generally, a measure of slack in the economy),     measures the slope of the Phillips curve and is a function




                                                     12
of structural parameters,            is a “cost-push” shock.13 Note that this formulation nests the expectations-
augmented Phillips curve advocated by Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967).

Empirical Success: Galí and Gertler (1999) and others, estimate the NKPC after imposing FIRE. Using
labor’s share of income as the forcing variable in the Phillips curve, Galí and Gertler find estimated
coefficients that conform closely to those predicted by the theory. Galí and Gertler also present a model
where some firms are forward-looking (set prices as in Calvo pricing) and some firms are backward-looking
(set prices equal to the average price set in the previous period with a correction for inflation). With these
assumptions, a hybrid Phillips curve is developed in terms of structural parameters. An estimation of the
curve is then conducted using real unit labor costs as the slack variable. The backward-looking component
is statistically significant but smaller than the forward-looking component.14 The authors conclude that the
NKPC is a reasonable approximation of inflation dynamics.


5.B. Limitations of the Full-Information Rational Expectations Phillips Curve

Next, we review the empirical limitations of the Phillips curve when estimated under the assumption of
FIRE. The literature has documented the following shortcomings.

Ad-hoc lags, instability, and structural breaks: The micro-foundation of the NKPC suggests a purely
forward-looking inflation dynamics model. However, to incorporate the persistence observed in inflation
data, authors have relied on ad-hoc, backward-looking terms and estimated a “hybrid” NKPC. Fuhrer and
Moore (1995), Fuhrer (1997), Lindé (2005) and Rudd and Whelan (2005) argue that these backward-
looking components can be very important. A potential reason why this may be occurring is structural
breaks. That is, the traditional NKPC is a linearization around a zero steady state inflation rate, and it ignores
the possibility of changes in the steady state inflation rate. By doing so, the lagged terms of inflation will
spuriously capture these changes (e.g., Kozicki and Tinsley 2002; Cogley and Sbordone 2008). Mavroeidis
et al. (2014), in an earlier survey of the literature, extensively review the empirics of the NKPC with special
attention to weak identification. They conclude that estimation of the NKPC is fraught with uncertainty as
small changes in specifications can lead to large variation in point estimates due to weak identification.




13
   The most common formulation of the NKPC relates inflation to expected inflation and marginal costs. However,
because the latter are not directly measurable, there has been considerable debate about what the relevant forcing term
should be in the NKPC in empirical applications, as we discuss in more detail in sections 5.B and 5.C.
14
   Sheedy (2010) provides another justification for the presence of backward-looking terms. If prices that have not
changed for longer periods are more likely to be changed than those set recently, the Phillips curve will have backward-
looking terms even though all pricing decisions are entirely forward-looking.


                                                          13
Missing (dis)inflation: Several researchers have argued that inflation should have fallen much more in the
U.S. and other advanced economies during the Great Recession given the amount of slack in the economy
(e.g., Hall 2013; IMF 2013). Similarly, a missing inflation puzzle arose in real-time during the late 1990s.
Amidst a booming economy with unemployment falling below estimates of the non-accelerating inflation
rate of unemployment (NAIRU), policymakers disagreed about why inflation had yet to be triggered
(Meyer, 2004).15

Low out-of-sample predictive power: Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) contend that Phillips curve-based
inflation forecasts have been no more accurate than those of a naïve model where inflation next year equals
inflation in the prior year. The Phillips curve-based methods shown to be inferior are: the textbook NAIRU
Phillips curve, the Stock and Watson NAIRU model (lagged values of inflation and the slack variable are
included in this specification), and the Greenbook forecasts. Stock and Watson (2007) also find that gap-
based backward-looking Phillips curves are less successful in forecasting inflation relative to simple
univariate models after 1984.

Sensitivity to the slack variable employed: Since traditional measures of economic slack such as
unemployment and output gap yield the puzzles just described, authors have proposed the use of other slack
variables, such as the labor share of income. Overall, the results reveal sensitivity in the slope of the Phillips
curve to which slack variable is used.
         Galí and Gertler (1999) argue that real unit labor cost (ulc), commonly measured by labor’s share
of income, is the superior forcing variable because of a strong contemporaneous correlation with inflation,
unlike the output gap which leads inflation. Furthermore, when estimating the Phillips curve with the output
gap as a measure of real economic conditions, the coefficient obtained is counterfactually negative and
significant, while labor’s share of income yields a positive and significant coefficient. Similarly, Woodford
(2001) and Sbordone (2002) contend unit labor cost is the best proxy for marginal costs using different
approaches. However, Rudd and Whelan (2005a) argue that neither detrended real GDP nor real unit labor


15
  Ball and Mazumder (2011), IMF (2013), Goodfriend (2004) and others argue that missing (dis)inflation could be
explained by “anchored expectations.” Dräger and Lamla (2013) document that inflation expectations have become
less sensitive to shocks (i.e., “anchored”) after the late 1980s. However, anchored expectations do not necessarily
account for the missing (dis)inflation episodes. In the NKPC, the effect of economic slack on inflation, controlled by
the coefficient κ, endures regardless of anchored expectations. Furthermore, to account for the stability of recent
inflation, this approach uses long-horizon (5-10 year ahead) inflation expectations in the Phillips curve, rather than
the short-horizon expectations dictated by theory. In the standard New Keynesian model, for example, long-run
inflation expectations are fully anchored since inflation always returns to its steady-state and agents incorporate this
feature into their beliefs. But inflation dynamics in the model still tend to be volatile despite fully anchored
expectations since inflation depends primarily on the expectation of inflation in the next period and not over a long
horizon. So anchored expectations by themselves are insufficient to explain periods of stable inflation dynamics and
the puzzle of missing (dis)inflation remains even if expectations are anchored.


                                                          14
costs allow the NKPC to fit the data well. In addition, King and Watson (2012) find that since 1999, the
behavior of real unit labor costs should have implied a decline in inflation of fifteen percentage points. In
reality, actual inflation stayed relatively unchanged, allowing King and Watson to conclude, “conventional
unit labor cost measure is no longer a useful construction for inflation dynamics and has not been at least
since the early 2000s.” Elsby et al. (2013) further document that labor’s share of income is subject to a
number of measurement issues which can make it a poor measure of marginal costs.
        Another measure proposed was the unemployment recession gap, the difference between the
current unemployment rate and the minimum unemployment rate over the current and previous eleven
quarters. Stock and Watson (2010) show that the empirical regularity of U.S. recessions being accompanied
by declines in inflation can be explained by a model where the unemployment recession gap explains the
deviation of core inflation from its trend.

Recap: The Phillips curve, as derived under FIRE, has encountered several empirical shortcomings: the
lack of persistence has led to ad-hoc backwards-looking terms; periods of missing (dis)inflation are
puzzling; Phillips-curve based forecasts have low out-of-sample predictive power in comparison to naïve
forecasts; and there is sensitivity to the slack variable used.


5.C. Real-Time Expectations and the Phillips Curve

Bernanke (2007) summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of FIRE in the context of the NKPC with, “The
traditional rational-expectations model of inflation and inflation expectations has been a useful workhorse
for thinking about issues of credibility and institutional design, but, to my mind, it is less helpful for thinking
about economies in which (1) the structure of the economy is constantly evolving in ways that are
imperfectly understood by both the public and policymakers and (2) the policymakers’ objective function
is not fully known by private agents.” In light of this assessment, survey expectations may provide an
appealing alternative to FIRE in the estimation of the Phillips curve and their use does appear to help solve
many of the aforementioned puzzles and limitations associated with the Phillips curve in recent years.

Ad-hoc lags, instability, and structural breaks: As emphasized by Bernanke (2007) and many others, using
traditional rational-expectations model of inflation and inflation expectations may be problematic when the
structure of the economy is constantly evolving. Survey expectations can adapt and thus lead to a more robust
Phillips curve. Roberts (1995), for example, finds that when using survey measures of inflation and either
detrended output or the unemployment rate as the slack variable, the NKPC is stable over the two subsamples
tested. In contrast, “McCallum’s approach”, which utilizes the actual future inflation rate and instrumental
variables (i.e., this approach builds on FIRE), yields qualitatively unstable coefficients.




                                                        15
        Brissimis and Magginas (2008) utilize SPF inflation forecasts, Greenbook inflation forecasts and
final data on future inflation to estimate both a forward-looking and a hybrid Phillips curve. Their findings
suggest once one allows for deviations from rationality (i.e., by using surveys), the pure NKPC provides a
reasonable description of inflation dynamics in the United States during the 1968–2006 period. In
particular, notice from Table 1 (their Table 2) that the use of inflation expectations from the Greenbook and
the SPF moves more weight to the expectation term rather than the lagged term in a hybrid Phillips curve
specification (                                              ). The lagged term is no longer significant with the
inclusion of the surveys. Furthermore the dominance of the forward-looking component remains in
subsamples as shown in Table 2 (their Table 5).
        Others have assessed that changes in the inflation trend and target are well captured by survey
measures. Cecchetti et al. (2007) provide evidence that survey inflation expectations from the Fed, the SPF,
and the MSC are correlated with future inflation. They conclude that “(1) Signals from several survey
measures of U.S. inflation expectations anticipate future movements in the U.S. inflation trend; and (2)
when the inflation trend changes, survey measures of expectations are likely to follow.” Del Negro and
Eusepi (2011) find that time-variation in the inflation target is important in explaining inflation
expectations. These results based on survey measures of expectations are consistent with other studies (e.g.,
Cogley and Sbordone 2008; Kim and Kim 2008; Zhang et al. 2008) that emphasize structural breaks in
explaining away the importance of backward-looking components of the Phillips curve.
        Survey measures have also been shown to generate the persistence that ad-hoc lags have otherwise
frequently been used to capture. Fuhrer (2015b) analyzes the implications of using survey data in three key
building blocks of standard DSGE models: a price-setting Euler equation, an IS curve, and a forward-looking
policy rule. Fuhrer finds that using survey expectations eliminates the need for ad-hoc lags. What formerly
appeared to be a need for ad-hoc lags of endogenous variables is better represented as inertia in inflation
expectations. In addition, he finds that in a horse-race test, survey expectations dominate rational expectations
in DSGE models. This finding leads to the question: why are inflation expectations persistent? Fuhrer (2015a)
empirically demonstrates that individual forecasters in the SPF and the MSC tend to revise their forecasts
towards the lagged central tendency of expectations. If agents had FIRE, one would not expect this behavior.
Rather it is suggestive of not fully-informed agents using lagged central tendencies as a way to average out some
of the agent’s own idiosyncratic error, and thus building in persistence in inflation expectations.
        Furthermore, agents may change how they forecast inflation over time, for example, due to
information costs. Using survey expectations will help capture any such possible changes. Evans and Ramey
(1992, 1998) and Brock and Hommes (1997, 1998) demonstrate theoretically that agents facing information
costs may rationally choose not to use rational expectations as their expectation formation process. Branch
(2004) presents evidence that dynamic switching appears to occur in survey data. With MSC data, he finds



                                                        16
evidence of heterogeneous expectations in which agents dynamically switch predictors based on relative mean
squared errors of the predictor functions and the costs associated with each.

Missing disinflation: Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a) suggest that the missing deflation during the Great
Recession, documented in Figure 1 (their Figures 5 and 6), can be explained by the rise of household inflation
expectations (assuming firm expectations match those of households) from 2009 to 2011. Panel C of Figure
1 shows the increase in inflation expectations of consumers during the Great Recession and demonstrates that
the missing disinflation is alleviated with the use of consumer expectations. The increase in expectations was
attributed to rising oil prices, which consumers appear to perceive as salient indicators of inflation.16 In a
related work, Friedrich (2014) investigates the “twin puzzle” across advanced countries of higher-than-
expected inflation despite economic slack from 2009 to 2012 and weakening inflation despite economic
recovery post 2012. He estimates a global Phillips curve for 1995 to 2013 using survey-based inflation
expectations and finds that these measures of inflation expectations account for the “twin puzzle”.

Low out-of-sample predictive power: Stock and Watson (2007) and others document that it has been
increasingly difficult to nowcast or forecast inflation in recent periods. As a result, (semi)structural
approaches based on a Phillips curve have also become less successful in accounting for observed inflation.
At the same time, Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007), Croushore (2010) and others find that survey-based
forecasts of inflation continue to have better root mean squared forecast error (RMSFE) than ARIMA
models and other popular alternatives. Furthermore, as we show below, Phillips curves using survey
measures of inflation expectations tend to have better in-sample fit in the post-1978 period and better out-
of-sample fit during the Great Recession and its aftermath. Thus, although Phillips curves do not yield
consistently superior forecasts, employing survey expectations of inflation in a Phillips curve tends to
improve our ability to rationalize and forecast inflation dynamics.

Sensitivity to the slack variable employed: The issue of sensitivity to the slack variable arose after traditional
measures failed to deliver anticipated results and a search for alternative measures ensued. If using surveys
allows traditional measures to deliver anticipated and significant coefficients and stability, then the use of
alternative slack measures would be unnecessary. Adam and Padula (2011) demonstrate that using either
the output gap or unit labor costs as a proxy for marginal costs yields the expected signs in the slope of the
Phillips curve when survey measures are used for inflation expectations. In a similar spirit, Roberts (1995)



16
  Del Negro et al. (2014) provide an alternative explanation for the missing disinflation during the Great Recession.
They demonstrate that a DSGE model with FIRE for short-term inflation and survey-based 10-year inflation expectations
can predict a decline in output without a decline in inflation. The insight behind this finding offered by the authors is that
inflation is more dependent on expected future marginal costs than on current macroeconomic activity.


                                                             17
considers two approaches to the treatment of expectations in the Phillips curve. The first approach is to use
surveys to construct a measure of expectations. The second approach is to impose FIRE as in McCallum
(1976). These two approaches amount to running the following regressions:
Expectation approach:
        Δ              Δ                         Δ              Δ                                       (2)
McCallum approach:
        Δ          Δ                         Δ             Δ                    Δ         Δ             (3)
        Δ          Δ                         Δ             Δ                                            (4)
where Δ       is the inflation rate,   Δ      is a survey-based measure of inflation expectations,   is a measure
of slack, Δ            is the percent change in the real price of oil,   and   are the error terms. Roberts finds
that regardless of the slack proxy (detrended output or unemployment rate), the coefficient on the slack
measure is in the correct direction and statistically significant when the expectation approach is used. The
McCallum approach on the other hand yields insignificant slack coefficients and a poor R2. See his
specifications and estimation results in Table 3 (his Table 1) below.

Survey measures are empirically preferred to the rational expectations assumption in Phillips curves: In
addition to addressing most of the weaknesses of the FIRE-based NKPC, using survey measures of
expectations often empirically dominates rational expectations Phillips curves. For example, Roberts
(1995) estimates the Phillips curve using both survey expectations (Livingston Survey and MSC) and
rational expectations. Similar coefficients are found on the slack variable with both approaches, but only
with survey expectations is the coefficient statistically significant. He suggests, “One explanation for the
larger standard error is that actual future inflation is a worse proxy for inflation expectations than are the
surveys.” Subsequent work has largely confirmed this finding.
        Fuhrer and Olivei (2010) document that, over the preceding three decades, rational expectations
have had little effect on inflation whereas survey measures have played a considerable role. The influence
of survey measures in some models was found to have even increased in recent years. Fuhrer et al. (2012)
similarly find that U.S. inflation from 1990 to 2010 is not well modeled by a forward-looking, rational
expectations Phillips curve but rather is well described by a model that uses a survey-based, one-year ahead
inflation expectation term and lagged inflation terms; see Table 4 (their Table 5). Panel A shows the
importance of survey expectations in the inflation process and Panel B demonstrates that a rational
expectations term has no impact and a lagged inflation term has little effect on inflation, once a one-year
ahead survey expectation term is included. Fuhrer (2012) estimates a Phillips curve with both a rational
expectations term and a survey expectations term using maximum likelihood (with three variants on trend
inflation) and GMM (with two variants on the weight matrix: “standard” and “optimal” weights). He finds



                                                           18
in all specifications but one, survey expectations play a dominant role and rational expectations are
insignificant.17


Recap: Incorporating real-time survey data in the estimation of the Phillips curve addresses many of the
puzzles that arose under FIRE. Various studies suggest that survey-based inflation expectations tend to
yield a stable, forward-looking Phillips curve.


5.D. LIE (Law of Iterated Expectations) Detector for the Phillips Curve

Studies using survey-based expectations conventionally replace FIRE expectations in specification (1) with
the average (or median) expectations. One may be concerned that this mechanical approach leads to a
misspecification as an alternative expectations formation process can yield a different Phillips curve.
Indeed, Table 5 demonstrates that the specific formulation of the Phillips curve depends on assumptions
about the information structure and other elements of the employed models: there is variation in how
expectations should be defined, what should be used as a measure of slack, whether a lagged inflation or
the nominal interest rate should be included.18 At the same time, the listed specifications have a number of
common elements: expected inflation, a forcing term like output gap, etc. Furthermore, using average
values of inflation expectations reported in a survey can be appropriate under certain conditions.
           Specifically, Adam and Padula (2011), whose derivation is outlined in the appendix, show that the
Phillips curve given in equation (1) can be derived with expectations other than FIRE. Let firm ∈ 0,1
have subjective expectations        ,    for variable    in an other standard New Keynesian model with Calvo
                                                                     ∗
pricing. Optimal price-setting requires that the reset price          ,   for firm obeys
            ∗
             ,         1      ∑            ,        .                                                         (5)
where      is the probability that a firm is unable to adjust its price in a given period,          is a time discount

factor, and            is the nominal marginal cost. Let           ≡          ,     be the average expectation for
variable        in the economy. Then, if agents are unable to predict revisions in their own or other agents’
forecasts (Condition 1 in Adam and Padula (2011)), one has

            ,      ,                ,              0 ∀ , ,                0



17
   The one specification that yields a dominant role for rational expectations is GMM with standard weights. This is the
same specification as that used in Nunes (2010), the sole paper arguing that rational expectations in the NKPC outperform
survey measures. Fuhrer (2012) argues that this simple GMM approach likely suffers from weak instruments that are
unable to identify the effects of both lagged inflation and inflation expectations on current inflation.
18
   There are also a number of hybrid models which generate similar specifications. For example, Dupor et al. (2010)
combine sticky prices and sticky information and derive the associated Phillips curve.


                                                           19
and, after standard steps in the derivation of the New Keynesian FIRE Phillips curve (see Galí (2008)), one
obtains

                                               .                                                        (6)

Following the standard derivation, one can replace the marginal cost with output gap        and, thus arrive at a
specification that resembles specification (1). “Condition 1” is essential for applying LIE to equation (5).
          To the extent real-time measures of expectations may not satisfy this requirement, the estimation
of the Phillips curve with the cross-sectional average of survey-based inflation expectations may no longer
be microfounded. Despite a large literature using subjective expectations in the estimation of the Phillips
curve, to our knowledge, the current literature has not evaluated whether the cross-sectional average
operator satisfies LIE or if “Condition 1” holds.
          There is, however, a straightforward test of whether expectations in surveys satisfy the LIE, at least
when applied to the NKPC. Recall that before applying the LIE, one operates with the following expectation:
                1        1         ∑                        1    ∑                                      (7)
where          denotes date-t forecast for variable    at time       . The LIE allows us to collapse equation
(7) to the Phillips curve:
                               .                                                                        (8)
If the law of iterated expectations holds, then inflation forecast         is a sufficient statistic for forecasts
of macroeconomic variables in periods          1,     2, …. As a result, adding future output gaps or forecasts
of longer horizon inflation expectations to equation (8) should not be significant in estimation.
          We use this insight for two surveys where forecasts are available for multiple horizons: Michigan
Survey of Consumers and Survey of Professional Forecasters. Table 6 demonstrates that the additional
future output gap and inflation terms are not statistically significant and generally only marginally increase
the fit relative to specification (8). The results fail to detect deviations from LIE and allow us to use mean
survey expectations in the estimation of the NKPC


Recap: Prior work has often replaced the expectations term in the NKPC with non-FIRE, survey-based
expectations; however, one may be concerned that non-FIRE expectations may lead to an entirely different
specification. Table 5 shows how different assumptions change the specification of the Phillips curve but
there are many commonalities. Furthermore, Adam and Padula (2011) demonstrate that if agents are unable
to predict revisions in their own or other agents’ forecasts, the LIE can be applied, and a Phillips curve can
be derived resembling specification (1). We present evidence that in the context of the NKPC, surveys
appear to satisfy LIE.


5.E. Challenges in Using Market and Survey Measures of Expectations


                                                       20
What measures of inflation expectations are available in the U.S., which should we use, and what are the potential
challenges with each? There are several surveys of U.S. inflation expectations varying in composition and
construction including Blue Chip Economic Indicators, Business Inflation Expectations (Atlanta Fed), Federal
Reserve’s Greenbook forecasts, FOMC member forecasts, Livingston Survey, Michigan Survey of Consumers
(MSC), Survey of Consumer Expectations (NY Fed), Consensus Economics forecasts, and the Survey of
Professional Forecasters (SPF). Table 7 provides a summary of key characteristics of the surveys. Financial
markets can also provide real-time forecasts as an alternative to surveys.
         A key limitation of the currently available market and survey measures is that none provides a
direct historical measure of firms’ inflation expectations, which are the relevant ones from the perspective
of estimating Phillips curves.19,20 Indeed, the NKPC is derived from the firm's optimization problem, and
the expectation term in the canonical relationship is therefore that of the firm. Without a national U.S. firm
survey, authors who have utilized survey measures in estimation of the Phillips curve have had to assume
consumer or professional expectations are in line with those of firms.

Market-based measures: There are two primary approaches for deducing inflation expectations from
financial markets. The first uses the difference in yields between Treasury inflation-protected securities
(TIPS) and nominal Treasuries of the same maturity, and the second uses inflation swap data. A notable
strength of using these market-based measures is their high-frequency nature that cannot be matched by
surveys. However, there are shortcomings of both bond-market and swap-market inflation expectation
measures, taken in turn below.
         First, the breakeven inflation rate, or the difference between yields on nominal and real U.S. debt
of similar maturities, is often quoted as a measure of inflation expectations. However, the breakeven
inflation rate is a measure of inflation expectations confounded with the inflation risk premium and the
difference in liquidity premiums between TIPS and nominal debt (e.g., Christensen et al. 2010; D’Amico
et al. 2014; Gürkaynak et al. 2010), thus posing a dilemma for researchers who want to use a TIPS-based
measure of inflation expectations. 21 Furthermore TIPS began trading in 1997. Analyses where longer




19
   The Federal Reserve of Atlanta does conduct a survey of firm expectations. Unfortunately, it only surveys
businesses in the sixth district and only began in 2011. Coibion et al. (2014) conduct a firm expectation survey;
however, it was taken in New Zealand and is a single cross-section. The New Zealand survey, a cross-section, cannot
be used to estimate the Phillips curve, a time series object.
20
   Research on topics that require firm expectations of variables other than inflation have been able to utilize surveys.
For example, Gennaioli et al. (2015) use the Duke University’s quarterly survey of Chief Financial Officers
expectations of earning growth to document their effect on firm investment plans.
21
   Another issue in the use TIPS inflation expectations, often ignored, arises from TIPS payments being tied to the
CPI three months prior to the payment date. TIPS are thus not fully protected from inflation.


                                                           21
horizons are needed will be constrained using TIPS-based measures. Many surveys, in contrast, provide a
longer history of inflation expectations (see Table 7).
        Second, inflation swap data has been used to determine expected inflation rates. In an inflation
swap, two counter parties exchange payments. One party pays fixed payments, while the other pays variable
payments that depend on the realized inflation rate. For both parties to be willing to engage in the inflation
swap, the fixed payment must be roughly the amount of expected inflation. Like when using bond-market
data, one must account for inflation risk premium, posing some difficulty. Furthermore the inflation swap
market is relatively new with meaningful trading volumes beginning only in 2003.

Professional forecasts: While expectations of professional forecasters have been the primary type of survey
data employed, these surveys may suffer from respondents not revealing their true beliefs for a variety of
reasons. Papers have demonstrated this potential both theoretically and empirically. Ottaviani and Sørensen
(2006), for example, propose and analyze a cheap talk game in the context of forecasters. The primary finding
is that truth telling could be an unlikely equilibrium. Laster et al. (1999) suggest a model where forecasters
are fully knowledgeable about the true probability distribution of outcomes and the forecaster who makes the
best forecast in a given period gains publicity for his firm and is rewarded. Forecasters in this model are
willing to compromise accuracy to gain publicity, thus the distribution of the forecasts will reflect the true
probability distribution function as well as this tradeoff. Empirically, forecaster deviations from consensus, in
the Blue Chip survey, are correlated with the type of firm the forecaster works for (i.e., non-financial
corporations may value accuracy for planning, but advisory firms may value publicity to attract clients).
Ehrbeck and Waldmann (1996) show that when making forecasts is a repeated game, the pattern of forecasts
can reveal private information about the forecaster, so that rational forecasters will choose to compromise
between minimizing errors and imitating the patterns of more able forecasters.

Consumer expectations: Another approach to deal with the absence of direct measures of firm expectations is
to use consumer expectations in their place. There are several reasons why one might think consumer
expectations are likely to be a better proxy for firm expectations than professional forecasts.
        First, incentives to provide non-truthful forecasts for profit-based reasons are smaller for
consumers. Armantier et al. (2015) conduct an experiment to assess if consumer surveys suffer from cheap
talk and if consumers act on their inflation beliefs. They find a respondent’s inflation expectation gathered
in a survey strongly correlates with the respondent’s response in a financially incentivized experiment.
Arnold et al. (2014) similarly find, using a German survey of households, differences in households’ beliefs
about inflation expectations parlay into their portfolio decisions.
        Second, consumer forecasts appear to fit the Phillips curve better than professional forecasts, both
before the Great Recession and after. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a) document this feature of the


                                                       22
data. Hence, consumers’ inflation expectations may be a better historical proxy for firms’ expectations than
professional forecasts.
        Third, surveys of firms’ inflation forecasts from New Zealand indicate that first and second moments
of firms’ forecasts are much more aligned with those of households than professionals. For example, Coibion
et al. (2014) find that the average forecast of firms in the fourth quarter of 2013 was over 5%, much closer to
the average forecast of around 4% for consumers than the average forecast of 1.5% from professionals.
Similarly, there was tremendous disagreement among firms about future inflation, a well-noted characteristic
of consumer forecasts that stands in sharp contrast to the very limited disagreement observed among
professionals. Thus, along both metrics, firm forecasts do seem to resemble household forecasts much more
closely than those of professional forecasters. Kumar et al. (2015) further document that most firm managers
rely primarily on their personal shopping experience to inform them about price changes and use their inflation
expectations primarily for their personal decisions, providing an additional justification for why the forecasts
of firm managers so closely resemble those of households.
        Finally, some have suggested household expectations may inform firm price-setting behavior, thus
household expectations may play an even more direct role in the Phillips curve. The seminal behavioral
findings in Kahneman et al. (1986) have motivated this literature. They find in a survey that consumers
regard it as unfair for firms to raise prices in response to shifts in demand but acceptable to raise prices in
response to increasing costs. Additionally, consumers were willing to punish firms for unfairness (e.g.,
drive 5 extra minutes to another drugstore if the closest one had increased prices when its competitor was
temporarily forced to close). Building on these behavioral findings, Rotemberg (2005, 2010, 2011) and
Eyster et al. (2015) develop theoretical models where consumer perceptions of firm fairness and feelings
of regret arise from paying more than expected or in excess of marginal cost. Firms thus engage in price-
setting behavior so as to not upset the firm’s consumers and, as a result, consumer expectations may be
used in price setting.22
        Despite the aforementioned reasons why consumer expectations may be a good proxy for firm
expectations, they are not firm expectations and possible shortcomings remain. Sensitivity to survey
language appears to differ between households and firm managers. Households have been shown to have
higher and more dispersed expectations when asked about “overall price changes” rather than “inflation
rates” (e.g., Bruine de Bruin et al. 2012; Dräger and Fritsche 2013). This sensitivity to language is not
observed among managers (Coibion et al. 2014). Furthermore, a firm may be more incentivized to track
economic developments and have informed inflation expectations.



22
  Alternatively, one can follow Carroll (2003). In his model, a consumer (or a firm) has a constant probability of
updating his inflation forecast each period toward the views of professional forecasters.


                                                       23
Additional limitations of survey data: There are several other concerns that arise with the use of survey data
that will need to be addressed in the literature going forward. One is how to reliably aggregate expectations,
if at all. As Figlewski and Wachtel (1981) highlight, aggregation of expectations rather than using the full
set of individual expectations may lead to biased results in tests of rationality in survey data. However,
when testing models, most models imply that mean expectations are the relevant metric when focusing on
inflation or other macroeconomic dynamics. But it is common to rely on median measures of expectations
in survey data (e.g., Fuhrer and Olivei 2010; Malmendier and Nagel 2016; Trehan 2015). The latter can
introduce more stability when the composition of respondents is changing over time, but can also mask
significant variation over time when respondents frequently provide integer responses (such as in the MSC).
         A second consideration is whether to treat survey expectations as given (predetermined) or not.
Zhang et al. (2009) suggest that survey expectations may contain information correlated with the
contemporaneous error term if forecasts are collected in the middle of the current period as done, for
example, with SPF forecasts. If survey measures are believed to be endogenous with respect to
contemporaneous economic conditions, an instrumental variables approach could be taken. Finding valid
and strong instruments for survey expectations without imposing ad hoc assumptions on dynamics is a
challenge as using instrumental variables requires assumptions about how inflation expectations are formed,
an area of active research and heated debates. Mavroeidis et al. (2014) contend that when using survey
measures endogeneity should be considered. Others have assumed exogenous survey expectations and
utilized OLS in estimation of the Phillips curve (e.g., Roberts 1995; Rudebusch 2002; and Adam and Padula
2011).
         A third issue is whether we should use point predictions and/or subjective probability distributions.
Historically surveys have tended to collect point predictions; however, subjective probability distributions
are increasingly being elicited (Armantier et al., 2013). Point predictions of an agent are often in line with
the central tendencies of his or her subjective probability distribution (e.g., Engelberg et al. 2009; Coibion
et al. 2014). However, when deviations arise they appear systematic. For example, point predictions may
be rounded to the nearest “five” (Binder, 2015) or be more optimistic than the subjective probability
distribution would imply (Engelberg et al., 2009).


Recap: The U.S. and many other countries currently lack a long historical measure of firm inflation expectations.
As a result, researchers who wish to measure expectations and estimate the Phillips curve must rely on other
measures of expectations. There are two types of expectation measures available: market-based and survey-
based. Market measures of expectations offer high-frequency data, but suffer from confounding factors and a
relatively short history. Survey measures with long time series are available for professional forecasters and
consumers. Professional forecasts offer long time series, but professionals may not reveal their true beliefs.



                                                       24
Consumer expectations do not suffer from cheap talk, and are empirically similar to firm expectations in New
Zealand; however, they suffer from sensitivity to survey language and consumers may not have a strong
incentive to track economic developments. These market-based or survey-based measures can be used as a direct
measure of firm expectations, or one can attempt to infer firm expectations by assuming either (i) firms have a
constant probability of updating their beliefs towards professionals, or (ii) consumer expectations influence firm
price-setting behavior.

5.F. Illustration

In this section, we attempt to synthesize previous studies to highlight the differences arising from using
FIRE- and survey-based inflation expectations in the Phillips curve. Specifically, we investigate the stability
of the Phillips curve across various measures of inflation expectations, run a series of horserace regressions
to identify inflation forecast measures with the best predictive power, and explore how using various
measures of inflation expectations translates in matching the dynamics of inflation during the Great
Recession and its aftermath. These exercises are not meant to go over an exhaustive list of specifications
considered in the literature. Instead, the objective is to illustrate the effect of using non-FIRE expectations
in the standard framework given by equation (1).
         In the first exercise, we run the standard forward-looking, expectations-augmented Phillips curve:
                                                             ,                                          (9)
where      is the actual q-o-q inflation rate (CPI, annualized),           is one-year ahead inflation forecast
(CPI),      is the unemployment rate,         is the natural rate of unemployment (CBO’s NAIRU). Table 8
presents OLS estimates of specification (9) for various measures of inflation expectations over different
periods. When we use the mean inflation forecast from the MSC (Panel A), we observe a stable, strong
relationship between inflation and unemployment. A one percentage point deviation of the unemployment
rate above NAIRU is associated with a 0.2 percentage point decline in inflation. While R2 is high for the
full sample and early part of the sample (1978-1989), the magnitude of R2 gradually declines with time.
This reduced predictability of inflation has been documented in previous studies (e.g., Stock and Watson
2007) for a variety of models and, hence, it should not be interpreted as increasing obsolescence of the
Phillips curve relative to other forecasting methods. When we use the Binder (2015) approach to identify
households who are more confident in their beliefs about inflation and are more likely to represent beliefs
of firm managers (Panel B), the sensitivity of inflation to the unemployment gap varies somewhat but
remains significant for the 2000-2014 period.
         Panel C presents results for the case of naïve expectations as in Atkeson and Ohanian (2001), i.e.
treating expectations of future inflation as equal to average inflation over the previous four quarters. Apart
from large variation in the estimated slope of the Phillips curve from -0.747 for 1978-1989 to -0.216 for the


                                                       25
full sample, we observe that the estimated coefficient on expected inflation turns negative for 2000-2014.
Furthermore, the Phillips curve with naïve expectations has little predictive power during this recent period
(R2=0.075). In general, this version of the Phillips curve has an R2 consistently below that in Panel A. These
results suggest that modelling inflation expectations as backward-looking can lead to “puzzles” and inferior
forecasting properties of the Phillips curve.
         In Panels D, E, and F, we use inflation projections from the SPF, Greenbooks (reports prepared by
the Fed staff for FOMC meetings), and financial markets (measured according to the method of Haubrich
et al. 2012). Arguably, these projections are closer to FIRE than expectations of households. In a pattern
common across these projections, the estimated slope of the Phillips curve gets smaller over time and
becomes insignificantly different from zero for the 2000-2014 period. This pattern is consistent with
previous studies documenting the flattening of the Phillips curve with FIRE. Interesting, using MSC
inflation expectations tends to yield a higher R2 than what one could obtain with these presumably more
rational expectations.
         For the second exercise, we augment specification (9) to include expectations from multiple sources:
                                                                                   ,                              (10)
where            and            are inflation expectations from sources X and Y. This exercise can help identify
the type of agents whose expectations have the most predictive power in the Phillips curve framework.
Consistent with results in Table 8, we find that household expectations dominate expectations from other
sources (see Table 9). For example, column (2) in Table 9 illustrates that adding naïve expectations does
not change the estimate of the slope of the Phillips curve or the sensitivity of inflation to inflation
expectations. When we control for expectations of SPF, Greenbooks, or financial markets (columns 3
through 5), the coefficient on household expectations is reduced but it remains large and the slope of the
Phillips curve is stable. Similarly, controlling for long-term inflation expectations (column 6) does not alter
results materially. Finally, household expectations continue to be a strong predictor of inflation even when
we include all sources of expectations in specification (10). In short, household expectations appear to play
a special role in making the Phillips curve stable and inflation predictable.23
         In the third exercise, we estimate Phillips curves with various sources of expectations on the pre-
Great Recession period and then use the estimated relationships to predict inflation for the 2009-2011
period, i.e. the “missing disinflation” period. Table 10 summarizes our findings. Although households
expected inflation to be higher than other agents did, the Phillips curve based on household expectations


23
   The dominance of household survey measures remains after accounting for the direct effect of oil prices on inflation.
Higher oil prices could have a direct effect on inflation due to higher input costs and an indirect effect through inflation
expectations. Estimates suggest the direct, short-run effect of oil prices on inflation is approximately 1-2 percent,
while the direct long-run effect is close to 4 percent. Controlling for the direct effect of the price of oil, household
survey measures remain dominant over other survey measures.


                                                            26
has the second smallest absolute mean forecast error. The smallest absolute mean forecast error was found
using Binder’s (2015) household expectation measure. In contrast, professional forecasters, financial
markets, and the staff of the Federal Reserve had larger absolute mean forecast errors and under-predicted
inflation.24
         These results suggest that, using household expectations appears to yield a stable relationship between
nominal and real variables so that the Phillips curve is useful even in times of crisis. Why household
expectations work better in the context of the Phillips curve than other sources of expectations is a fruitful
area for future research. Preliminary evidence (e.g., Kumar et al. 2015) suggests that ordinary consumers and
firm managers are remarkably similar in how they form and use their inflation expectations. Consumers and
firms may similarly depart from employing FIRE, whereas professional forecasters, economists, and financial
markets may be closer to FIRE. To be clear, not all departures from FIRE will be helpful, but rather departures
from FIRE that are consistent with firms’ expectation formation.
         Additional results presented in the Appendix assess the robustness of our findings. Using output
gap, constrained specification, or lags of employment gap does not affect results materially. Likewise, using
current and lagged changes of oil prices as additional controls does not influence results. The greatest
sensitivity is to which measure of inflation one uses as the dependent variable in the Phillips curve. With
core CPI, PCE or GDP deflator, we fail to find a stable, downward-sloping Phillips curve. This finding
suggests that consumers may form their expectations based on CPI rather than other price indexes and
therefore MSC can provide an inappropriate measure of expected inflation for Phillips curves based on
price indexes other than CPI. This observation underscores the need for further research on the matter as
well as better measurement of inflation expectations.


Recap: Relative to a number of popular alternative measures of inflation expectations (lagged inflation,
professional surveys, Greenbook expectations, and the Cleveland Fed expectations), consumer expectations
yield the most stable Phillips curve (CPI-based) and provide the best fit during recent years. In a horse-race
of inflation expectations, consumer expectations remain a strong predictor of inflation. Furthermore, a
Phillips curve based on consumer expectations has a lower absolute forecast error than NKPCs based on
other expectation measures. Overall, the evidence suggests that survey-based consumer expectations can
play an important role in the Phillips curve.


6. Conclusion



24
  Because Greenbook projections are available with a five-year delay, we have only four observations to evaluate the
Phillips curve based on Greenbook expectations.


                                                        27
Full-information rational expectations have proven to be a useful theoretical framework that has allowed
economists across fields to incorporate expectations into models in a meaningful manner while maintaining
tractability. In a prominent application of full-information rational expectations, the New Keynesian
Phillips curve connecting real and nominal variables has emerged as a cornerstone of mainstream
macroeconomic models used in policy and research.
        However, pronounced deviations from full-information rational expectations in the short-run have
now been well-documented in empirical work. These findings should give one pause before relying on the
commonly used full-information rational expectation assumption and highlight the need for using alternative
frameworks (e.g., sticky information, noisy information, bounded rationality, models of learning) in
describing how expectations are formed, since these alternatives can significantly improve the ability of
macroeconomic models to fit the data and change policy prescriptions.
        To illustrate the potential of this approach, we reviewed recent work that incorporates the real-time
expectations of economic agents as observed in surveys into expectations-augmented Phillips curves. This
approach can address a number of otherwise puzzling features of full-information rational expectations
Phillips curves (e.g., the need for ad hoc lags, instability, missing disinflation during the Great Recession,
sensitivity to the slack variable used). This supports the notion that agents may not be rational or face
pervasive information rigidities, and accounting for these can help reconcile theory and data.
        But the use of survey data does face a number of shortcomings. First and most practically, we lack
direct empirical evidence on the real-time beliefs of firms, those agents whose expectations play a central
role in price-setting, hiring, and investment decisions. Second, there are many possible explanations for the
observed deviations from full-information rational expectations. Distinguishing between these, and
identifying a tractable model for the expectations formation process, should therefore be a prominent area
of future research.
        While our empirical work focused exclusively on the role of real-time expectations data in the
Phillips curve, the issue is much broader. For example, controlling for the real-time expectations of
monetary policy-makers plays an important role in the identification of monetary policy shocks (Romer
and Romer 2004) and the response function of central banks (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2011). Crump
et al. (2015) find that controlling for the real-time expectations of households helps in the estimation of
consumption Euler decisions. However, little attention has yet been devoted to how real-time expectations
might matter along other dimensions, such as wage bargaining between employees and firms, or the
employment and investment decisions of firms.




                                                     28
References
Adam, Klaus, and Mario Padula. 2011. “Inflation Dynamics and Subjective Expectations in the United
        States.” Economic Inquiry 49 (1): 13-25.
Afrouzi, Hassan and Choongryul Yang. 2016. “Dynamic Inattention, the Phillips Curve, and Forward
        Guidance” Working Paper.
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei. 2007. “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or Surveys
        Forecast Inflation Better?” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (4): 1163-1212.
Armantier, Olivier, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Simon Potter, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit
        Zafar. 2013. “Measuring Inflation Expectations.” Annual Review of Economics 5 (1): 273-301.
Armantier, Olivier, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert Klaauw, and Basit Zafar. 2015.
        “Inflation Expectations and Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act on their Beliefs?” International
        Economic Review 56 (2): 505-536.
Arnold, Eva, Lena Dräger, and Ulrich Fritsche. 2014. “Evaluating the Link between Consumers' Savings
        Portfolio Decisions, their Inflation Expectations and Economic News.” Universität Hamburg, DEP
        (Socioeconomics) Discussion Paper, Macroeconomics and Finance Series.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Lee E. Ohanian. 2001. “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
        Inflation?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25 (1): 2-11.
Ball, Laurence, and Sandeep Mazumder. 2011. “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession.” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity (1): 337-381.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2007. “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting.” Speech at the Monetary Economics
        Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA, July 10.
Binder, Carola. 2015. “Consumer Inflation Uncertainty and the Macroeconomy: Evidence from a New
        Micro-Level Measure”. Working Paper.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2016. “Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 22266.
Branch, William A. 2004. “The Theory of Rationally Heterogeneous Expectations: Evidence from Survey
        Data on Inflation Expectations.” The Economic Journal 114 (497): 592-621.
Branch, William A., and George W. Evans. 2006a. "A Simple Recursive Forecasting Model." Economics
        Letters 91 (2): 158-166.
Branch, William A., and George W. Evans. 2006b. “Intrinsic Heterogeneity in Expectation Formation.”
        Journal of Economic Theory 127 (1): 264-295.
Brayton, Flint, Eileen Mauskopf, David Reifschneider, Peter Tinsley, and John Williams, 1997. "The Role
        of Expectations in the FRB/US Macroeconomic Model." Federal Reserve Bulletin, Board of
        Governors of the Federal Reserve System (April): 227-245.
Brissimis, Sophocles N., and Nicholas S. Magginas. 2008. “Inflation Forecasts and the New Keynesian
        Phillips Curve.” International Journal of Central Banking 4 (2): 1-22.
Brock, William A., and Cars H. Hommes. 1997. “A Rational Route to Randomness.” Econometrica 65 (5):
        1059-1095.
Brock, William A., and Cars H. Hommes. 1998. “Heterogeneous Beliefs and Routes to Chaos in a Simple
        Asset Pricing Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22 (8): 1235-1274.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Wilbert Vanderklaauw, Julie S. Downs, Baruch Fischhoff, Giorgio Topa, and
        Olivier Armantier. 2010. “Expectations of Inflation: The Role of Demographic Variables,
        Expectation Formation, and Financial Literacy.” Journal of Consumer Affairs 44 (2): 381-402.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Wilbert Van der Klaauw, Giorgio Topa, Julie S. Downs, Baruch Fischhoff, and
        Olivier Armantier. 2012. “The Effect of Question Wording on Consumers’ Reported Inflation
        Expectations." Journal of Economic Psychology 33 (4): 749-757.
Bryan, Michael F., and Guhan Venkatu. 2001. “The Curiously Different Inflation Perspectives of Men and
        Women.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Commentary Series.




                                                    29
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 12 (3): 383-398.
Capistrán, Carlos, and Allan Timmermann. 2009. “Disagreement and Biases in Inflation
        Expectations.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (2-3): 365-396.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2003. “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional
        Forecasters.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 269-298.
Carvalho, Carlos, and Fernanda Nechio. 2014. “Do People Understand Monetary Policy?” Journal of
        Monetary Economics 66: 108-123.
Cavalho, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2016. “Inflation Expectations, Learning
        and Supermarket Prices.” Forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W. Watson.
        2007. “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process.” US Monetary Policy Forum, Vol. 8.
Christensen, Jens H.E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2010. “Inflation Expectations and Risk
        Premiums in an Arbitrage‐Free Model of Nominal and Real Bond Yields.” Journal of Money,
        Credit and Banking 42 (supplement 1): 143-178.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 1999. “Monetary Policy Shocks: What
        Have We Learned and to What End?” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, edited by J. B.
        Taylor and M. Woodford, 65-148.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. 1999. "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian
        Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature 37(4), 1661-1707.
Cogley, Timothy, and Argia M. Sbordone. 2008. “Trend Inflation, Indexation, and Inflation Persistence in
        the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” The American Economic Review 98 (5): 2101-2126.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the Great
        Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” American Economic Review 101 (1): 341-370.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Information
        Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy 120 (1): 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015a. “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
        Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation.” American Economic Journal:
        Macroeconomics 7 (1), 197-232.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015b. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
        Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts,” American Economic Review 105 (8), 2644–2678.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, 2014. “How Do Firms Form Their
        Expectations? New Survey Evidence” NBER Working Paper No. 21092.
Croushore, Dean D. 1993. “Introducing: The Survey of Professional Forecasters.” Business Review-Federal
        Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (November/December): 3-15.
Croushore, Dean D. 1997. “The Livingston Survey: Still Useful After all These Years.” Business Review-
        Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (March/April): 1-12.
Croushore, Dean. 1998. “Evaluating Inflation Forecasts.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working
        Paper No. 98–14.
Croushore, Dean. 2010. “An Evaluation of Inflation Forecasts from Surveys Using Real-Time Data.” B.E.
        Journal of Macroeconomics 10 (1): 1-30.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Topa. 2015. “Subjective Intertemporal
        Substitution,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 2015-734.
Cukierman, Alex, and Paul Wachtel. 1979. “Differential Inflationary Expectations and the Variability of
        the Rate of Inflation: Theory and Evidence." The American Economic Review 69 (4): 595-609.
D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei. 2014. “Tips from TIPS: the Informational Content of
        Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices.” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics
        Discussion Series.
Del Negro, Marco, and Stefano Eusepi. 2011. “Fitting Observed Inflation Expectations.” Journal of
        Economic Dynamics and Control 35 (12): 2105-2131.



                                                  30
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide. 2014. “Inflation in the Great Recession and
        New Keynesian Models.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski. 1997. “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income
        Expectations.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (439): 855-867.
Dorich, José, Michael Johnston, Rhys Mendes, Stephen Murchison, and Yang Zhang. 2013. “ToTEM II:
        An Updated Version of the Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model.” Bank of Canada
        Technical Report No. 100.
Dräger, Lena and Michael J. Lamla. 2013. “Anchoring of Consumers’ Inflation Expectations: Evidence
        from Microdata.” Universität Hamburg, DEP (Socioeconomics) Discussion Paper,
        Macroeconomics and Finance Series.
Dräger, Lena, and Ulrich Fritsche. 2013. “Don't Worry, Be Right! Survey Wording Effects on Inflation
        Perceptions and Expectations.” DEP Discussion Papers, Macroeconomics and Finance Series.
Dupor, Bill, Tomiyuki Kitamura, and Takayuki Tsuruga. 2010. “Integrating Sticky Prices and Sticky
        Information.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (3): 657-669.
Ehrbeck, Tilman, and Robert Waldmann. 1996. “Why are Professional Forecasters Biased? Agency Versus
        Behavioral Explanations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1): 21-40.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor
        Share.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2): 1-63.
Engelberg, Joseph, Charles F. Manski, and Jared Williams. 2009. “Comparing the Point Predictions and
        Subjective Probability Distributions of Professional Forecasters.” Journal of Business & Economic
        Statistics 27 (1): 30-41.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. 1999. “Learning Dynamics.” Handbook of Macroeconomics 1:
        449-542.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. 2012. Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.
        Princeton University Press.
Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey. 1992. “Expectation Calculation and Macroeconomic Dynamics.”
        The American Economic Review 82 (1): 207-224.
Evans, George W., and Garey Ramey. 1998. “Calculation, Adaptation and Rational Expectations.”
        Macroeconomic Dynamics 2 (02): 156-182.
Eyster, Erik, Kristof Madarasz, and Pascal Michaillat. 2015. “Preferences for Fair Prices, Cursed
        Inferences, and the Nonneutrality of Money.” Working Paper.
Figlewski, Stephen, and Paul Wachtel. 1981. “The Formation of Inflationary Expectations.” The Review of
        Economics and Statistics 63 (1): 1-10.
Fischer, Stanley 1977. “Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money Supply
        Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (1): 191-205.
Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review 58 (1): 1–17.
Friedrich, Christian. 2014. “Global Inflation Dynamics in the Post-Crisis Period: What Explains the Twin
        Puzzle?” Working Paper.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 1997. “The (Un) Importance of Forward-Looking Behavior in Price
        Specifications.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29 (3): 338-350.
Fuhrer, Jeff. 2012. “The Role of Expectations in Inflation Dynamics.” International Journal of Central
        Banking 8 (1): 137-165.
Fuhrer, Jeff. 2015a. “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: An Exploration of Firms' and
        Households' Expectation Formation.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No. 15-5.
Fuhrer, Jeff. 2015b. “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: Evidence from Survey
        Expectations in Dynamic Macro Models.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No. 12-19.
Fuhrer, Jeff, and George Moore. 1995. “Inflation Persistence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110
        (1): 127-159.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and Giovanni Olivei. 2010. “The Role of Expectations and Output in the Inflation
        Process: An Empirical Assessment.” Federal Reserve of Boston Public Policy Brief No. 10-2.



                                                   31
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., Giovanni P. Olivei, and Geoffrey Tootell. 2012. “Inflation Dynamics When Inflation is
        Near Zero.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (Supplement 1): 83-122.
Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel. 2010. “Natural Expectations and Macroeconomic
        Fluctuations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (4): 67-84.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, forthcoming.
Galí, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
        Keynesian Framework. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis.” Journal of
        Monetary Economics 44 (2): 195-222.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2015. “Expectations and Investment.” NBER
        Macroeconomics Annual 30 (1): 379-431.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “What Comes to Mind.” The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 125 (4): 1399-1433.
Georganas, Sotiris, Paul J. Healy, and Nan Li. 2014. “Frequency Bias in Consumers‫ ׳‬Perceptions of
        Inflation: An Experimental Study.” European Economic Review 67: 144-158.
Gertler, Mark, and John Leahy. 2008. “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation.” Journal of Political
        Economy 116 (3): 533-572.
Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas Jr. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal of Political
        Economy 115 (2): 171-199.
Goodfriend, Marvin. 2004. “Inflation Targeting in the United States?” In The Inflation-Targeting Debate,
        editors Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, 311-352.
Gordon, Robert J. 1970. “The Recent Acceleration of Inflation and Its Lessons for the Future.” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity 1: 8-47.
Gordon, Robert J. 2011. “The History of the Phillips Curve: Consensus and Bifurcation.” Economica 78
        (309): 10-50.
Gray, JoAnna. 1976. “Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics
        2: 221-235.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2010. “The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation
        Compensation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (1): 70-92.
Hachem, Kinda, and Jing C. Wu. 2017. “Inflation Announcements and Social Dynamics.” National Bureau
        of Economic Research Working Paper 20161.
Hall, Robert E. 2013. “The Routes Into and Out of the Zero Lower Bound.” Prepared for the Federal
        Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium, Global Dimensions of Unconventional
        Monetary Policy, August 23.
Haubrich, Joseph, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken. 2012. “Inflation Expectations, Real Rates, and
        Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps.” Review of Financial Studies 25 (5): 1588-1629.
IMF. 2013. “The Dog that Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or was it Just Sleeping?” World
        Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, 1-17.
Johannsen, Benjamin K. 2014. “Inflation Experience and Inflation Expectations: Dispersion and
        Disagreement Within Demographic Groups.” Working paper.
Jonung, Lars. 1981. “Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden.” American Economic
        Review 71 (5): 961-968.
Jonung, Lars, and David Laidler. 1988. “Are Perceptions of Inflation Rational? Some Evidence for
        Sweden.” The American Economic Review 78 (5): 1080-1087.
Juster, Thomas F. 1964. Anticipations and Purchases: An Analysis of Consumer Behavior. Princeton
        University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986. “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking:
        Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review 76 (4): 728-741.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1972. “Subjective Probability: A Judgment of
        Representativeness.” Cognitive Psychology 3 (3): 430-454.


                                                   32
Kim, Chang-Jin, and Yunmi Kim. 2008. “Is the Backward-Looking Component Important in a New
        Keynesian Phillips Curve?” Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 12 (3): 1-18.
King, Robert G. 2008. “The Phillips Curve and US Macroeconomic Policy: Snapshots, 1958-
        1996.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 94 (4): 311-359.
King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson. 2012. “Inflation and Unit Labor Cost.” Journal of Money, Credit
        and Banking 44 (Supplement 2): 111-149.
Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter A. Tinsley. 2002. “Alternative Sources of the Lag Dynamics of Inflation.” FRB
        Kansas City Research Working Paper 02-12.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. "Inflation Targeting
        Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand," manuscript.
Laster, David, Paul Bennett, and In Sun Geoum. 1999. “Rational Bias in Macroeconomic
        Forecasts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 293-318.
Lindé, Jesper. 2005. “Estimating New-Keynesian Phillips Curves: A Full Information Maximum
        Likelihood Approach.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (6): 1135-1149.
Loungani, Prakash, Herman Stekler, and Natalia Tamirisa. 2013. “Information Rigidity in Growth
        Forecasts: Some Cross-Country Evidence,” International Journal of Forecasting 29 (4): 605-621.
Lovell, Michael C. 1986. “Tests of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis.” The American Economic
        Review 76 (1): 110-124.
Lucas, Robert E. 1972. “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money.” Journal of Economic Theory 4 (2):
        103-124.
Lucas, Robert E. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
        Series on Public Policy 1: 19-46.
Lucas, Robert, and Thomas Sargent. 1979. “After Keynesian Economics” Federal Reserve Bank of
        Minneapolis Quarterly Review 3 (2): 1-16.
Machlup, Fritz. 1946. “Marginal Analysis and Empirical Research.” The American Economic Review 36
        (4): 519-554.
Maćkowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention.” The
        American Economic Review 99 (3): 769-803.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2016. “Learning from Inflation Experiences.” The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 131 (1): 53-87.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
        Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1295-1328.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2003. “Disagreement about Inflation
        Expectations.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual Vol. 18: 209-248.
Manski, Charles F. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1329-1376.
Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock. 2014. “Empirical Evidence on
        Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Journal of Economic Literature 52
        (1): 124-188.
McCallum, Bennett T. 1976. “Rational Expectations and the Natural Rate Hypothesis: Some Consistent
        Estimates.” Econometrica 44 (1): 43-52.
Meyer, Laurence H. 2004. A Term at the Fed: An Insider’s View. HarperCollins e-books.
Milani, Fabio. 2005. “Adaptive Learning and Inflation Persistence.” Working Paper.
Milani, Fabio. 2007. “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 54 (7): 2065-2082.
Muth, John F. 1961. “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements.” Econometrica: Journal
        of the Econometric Society: 315-335.
National Bureau of Economic Research. 1960. The Quality and Economic Significance of Anticipations
        Data. Princeton University Press.
Nunes, Ricardo. 2010. “Inflation Dynamics: The Role of Expectations.” Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking 42 (6): 1161-1172.



                                                  33
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2005. “Inflation Scares and Forecast-Based Monetary
         Policy.” Review of Economic Dynamics 8 (2): 498-527.
Ottaviani, Marco, and Peter Norman Sørensen. 2006. “Reputational Cheap Talk.” RAND Journal of
         Economics 37 (1): 155-175.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Martin Weale. 2006. “Survey Expectations.” In Handbook of Economic
         Forecasting, Volume 1, edited by Graham Elliott, Clive W. J. Granger and Allan Timmermann,
         715-776.
Pfajfar, Damjan, and Blaž Žakelj. 2014. “Experimental Evidence on Inflation Expectation
         Formation.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 44: 147-168.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1967. “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment Over
         Time.” Economica 34 (135): 254-281.
Phelps, Edmund S. and John B. Taylor. 1977. “Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy under Rational
         Expectations,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (1): 163-190.
Phillips, A. W. 1958. “The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wage
         Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957.” Economica 25 (100): 283-299.
Prescott, Edward. 1977. “Should Control Theory be Used for Economic Stabilization?” in Karl Brunner
         and Alan Meltzer, eds., Optimal Policies, Control Theory, and Technological Exports, Vol. 7,
         Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics: 13-38.
Ranyard, Rob, Fabio Del Missier, Nicolao Bonini, Darren Duxbury, and Barbara Summers. 2008.
         “Perceptions and Expectations of Price Changes and Inflation: A Review and Conceptual
         Framework.” Journal of Economic Psychology 29 (4): 378-400.
Roberts, John M. 1995. “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit
         and Banking 27 (4): 975-984.
Roberts, John M. 1998. “Inflation Expectations and the Transmission of Monetary Policy”. Federal Reserve
         Board.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1989. “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit
         of Friedman and Schwartz.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 4, 121-184.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
         Implications.” American Economic Review 94 (4): 1055-1084.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 2005. “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency of Price
         Adjustment and Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (4): 829-852.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 2010. “Altruistic Dynamic Pricing with Customer Regret.” Scandinavian Journal of
         Economics 112 (4): 646-672.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 2011. “Fair Pricing.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (5): 952-981.
Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan. 2005. “New Tests of the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Journal of
         Monetary Economics 52 (6): 1167-1181.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2002. “Assessing Nominal Income Rules for Monetary Policy with Model and Data
         Uncertainty.” Economic Journal 112 (479): 402-432.
Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow. 1960. “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy.” The
         American Economic Review 50 (2): 177-194.
Sargent, Thomas J. 1971. “A Note on the Accelerationist Controversy.” Journal of Money, Credit and
         Banking 3 (3): 721–25.
Sargent, Thomas. 1999. The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University Press.
Sbordone, Argia M. 2002. “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness.” Journal of
         Monetary Economics 49 (2): 265-292.
Sheedy, Kevin. 2010. “Intrinsic Inflation Persistence.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(8): 1049-1061.
Sheffrin, Steve M. 1996. Rational Expectations. Cambridge University Press.
Shiller, Robert J. 1978. “Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure of Macroeconomic Models: A
         Critical Review.” Journal of Monetary Economics 4 (1): 1-44.
Sims, Christoper A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3):
         665-690.


                                                  34
Solow, Robert M. 1969. Price Expectations and the Behavior of the Price Level. Manchester University Press.
Souleles, Nicholas S. 2004. “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption: Micro
        Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys.” Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking 36 (1): 39-72.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to
        Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (Supplement 1): 3-33.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2010. “Modeling Inflation after the Crisis.” National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper 16488.
Taylor, John B. 1979. “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
        Expectations.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society 47 (5): 1267-1286.
Taylor, John B. 1980. “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 88
        (1): 1-23.
Taylor, John B. 1999. “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics.” Handbook of
        Macroeconomics 1B: 1009-1050.
Trehan, Bharat. 2015. “Survey Measures of Expected Inflation and the Inflation Process." Journal of
        Money, Credit and Banking 47 (1): 207-222.
Velde, François R. 2009. “Chronicle of a Deflation Unforetold.” Journal of Political Economy 117 (4):
        591-634.
Woodford, Michael. 2001. “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy.” American Economic
        Review 91 (2): 232-237.
Woodford, Michael. 2002. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.” In Knowledge,
        Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, editors P.
        Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
        University Press.
Zarnowitz, Victor. 1984. “Business Cycle Analysis and Expectational Survey Data.” National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper 1378.
Zhang, Chengsi, Denise R. Osborn, and Dong Heon Kim. 2008. “The New Keynesian Phillips Curve: From
        Sticky Inflation to Sticky Prices.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40 (4): 667-699.
Zhang, Chengsi, Denise R. Osborn, and Dong Heon Kim. 2009. “Observed Inflation Forecasts and the New
        Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 71 (3): 375-398.




                                                    35
                    Table 1. Hybrid Phillips Curve (1968:Q4–2000:Q4), Brissimis and Magginas (2008).

                                                                                  ulct           R2          J-test
                                              (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)


 Specification with                           0.84                0.18           0.04
                                                                                                0.85         0.68
   Greenbook Forecast                        (4.30)              (1.03)         (5.06)

 Specification with                           0.86                0.21           0.05
                                                                                                0.86         0.59
   SPF Forecast                              (5.03)              (1.51)         (5.25)

 Specification with Final                     0.61                0.38           0.01
                                                                                                0.83         0.65
   Data on Future Inflation                  (6.19)              (3.98)         (0.28)

Notes: The table reproduces Table 2 in Brissimis and Magginas (2008).                  denotes inflation expected by the
private sector for period t+1, expressed in terms of the annualized rate of change in the GDP deflator;              is the
lagged value of the annualized rate of change of the GDP deflator; and               is real unit labor cost. Numbers in
parentheses are t-statistics, and the last column shows the p-values associated with a test of the model’s overidentifying
restrictions (Hansen’s J-test). The instrument set includes two lags of real unit labor cost, the output gap, and nominal
wage growth and three lags of inflation.




                                                            36
    Table 2. Subsample Estimates of the Forecast-Based Specifications of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve, Brissimis and
                                                     Magginas (2008).

                                                                                 ulct            R2             J-test
                                           (1)                 (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)


   1968:Q4–1979:Q2 (Pre-Volcker Period)
     Greenbook-Based             0.86                         0.17              0.05
                                                                                                0.59            0.54
     Specification              (4.16)                       (1.08)            (4.17)

   1979:Q3–2000:Q4 (Volcker-Greenspan Period)
     Greenbook-Based            0.78           0.29                             0.02
                                                                                                0.67            0.69
     Specification             (3.91)         (1.77)                           (2.35)

   1968:Q4–1979:Q2 (Pre-Volcker Period)
     SPF-Based                   1.09                        -0.001             0.03
                                                                                                0.57            0.55
     Specification              (4.88)                      (-0.006)           (2.13)

   1979:Q3–2000:Q4 (Volcker-Greenspan Period)
     SPF-Based                  0.75           0.27                             0.02
                                                                                                0.89            0.67
     Specification             (5.33)         (1.96)                           (3.30)

Notes: The table reproduces Table 5 in Brissimis and Magginas (2008).                   denotes inflation expected by the
private sector for period t+1, expressed in terms of the annualized rate of change in the GDP deflator; πt−1 is the lagged
value of the annualized rate of change of the GDP deflator; and          is real unit labor cost. Numbers in parentheses
are t-statistics, and the last column shows the p-values associated with a test of the model’s overidentifying restrictions
(Hansen’s J-test). The instrument set includes two lags of real unit labor cost, the output gap, nominal wage growth
and inflation.




                                                            37
                     Table 3. Estimates of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve, 1949 to 1990, Roberts (1995).

                              Detrended Output                                          Unemployment Rate
                       Proxy for Inflation Expectations                            Proxy for Inflation Expectations
                 Livingston       Michigan         McCallum                  Livingston       Michigan         McCallum
                     (1)              (2)             (3)                        (4)              (5)             (6)
Constant            0.765*             0.141              -0.292               3.05*               1.53         1.42
                   (0.255)            (0.290)             (0.523)             (0.63)              (0.90)       (1.92)

 γ (slack)          0.337*             0.249*              0.355              -0.401*             -0.244*      -0.299
                   (0.081)            (0.077)             (0.226)             (0.095)             (0.127)      (0.384)

c1 (current         0.050*             0.041*              0.041*              0.059*              0.048*       0.053*
 oil price
 change)           (0.012)            (0.014)             (0.012)             (0.012)             (0.013)      (0.004)

c2 (lagged          0.027*             0.019*              0.064*              0.026*              0.017*       0.060*
 oil price
 change)           (0.008)            (0.009)             (0.028)             (0.007)             (0.009)      (0.026)
    R2               0.48               0.27                -0.02                0.66                0.31        0.13

   Notes: The table reproduces Table 1 in Roberts (1995). Columns (1), (2), (4) and (5) use specification (2). Columns
   (3) and (6) use specification (3)-(4). * indicates significance at 5 percent level.




                                                              38
                                   Table 4. Phillips Curve Estimates, Fuhrer et al. (2012).

                                                        Estimate                     St. Error             p-value
                                                           (1)                           (2)                 (3)

                         Panel A: The U.S. Phillips Curve with Survey Expectations
                                   1                        and          ∑                 ∑
                                                                         Core Inflation Equation
     Survey expectation (a)                               0.70                 0.12                          0.00
     Lagged inflation (1-a)                               0.30                 0.12                          0.013
     Marginal costs (c)                                   0.053                0.028                         0.071
     Intercept (c0)                                      -0.22                 0.093                         0.022
     R2= 0.69
     Standard error of the regression: 0.58
                                                                One-Year Expectation Equation
     Current and lagged inflation (Σd)                    0.66           0.032 (20.4)a                       0.00 b
     Current and lagged output gap (Σe)                   0.036          0.032 (1.1) a                       0.00 b
     Intercept (e0)                                       0.94          0.087                                0.00
     R2= 0.84
     Standard error of the regression: 0.26


                       Panel B: A Hybrid Phillips Curve Model for the United States
                                       1                             and             ∑           ∑
                                       and       ∑             and         ∑     Γ
                                                                               Inflation Equation
     Rational expectation (a)                             0.00                    0.018                      0.056
     Survey expectation (b)                               0.74                    0.13                       5.6
     Lagged inflation (1-a-b)                             0.26                    0.034                      7.7
     Marginal costs (c)                                   0.048                   0.039                      1.2
     Intercept (c0)                                      -0.19                    0.060                     -3.2

                                                                One-Year Expectation Equation
     Current and lagged inflation (Σd)                    0.69           0.047 (14.6) a                      0.00 b
     Current and lagged output gap (Σe)                   0.056          0.038 (1.5) a                       0.00 b
     Intercept (e0)                                       0.89          0.99                                 0.90
     Log-likelihood: 254.94

Notes: The table reproduces Table 5 in Fuhrer et al. (2012). The dependent variable is core CPI inflation. The data
frequency is quarterly, and the sample period is 1990:Q1 to 2010:Q2. The parameters in the top panel are estimated
via ordinary least squares, and standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. The parameters
in the bottom panel are estimated via full information maximum likelihood, and the standard errors are computed via
a BHHH algorithm. Panel B jointly estimates the VAR coefficients B and Γ with the other parameters. X is the vector
of variables in the two-lag VAR (inflation, output gap, marginal costs). a indicates t-statistic for the sum of coefficients.
b
  indicates p-value for joint significance of contemporaneous and lagged values.



                                                             39
                                    Table 5. Information structure and Phillips curve

Information structure                                                                   Phillips Curve

Full-information rational expectations with time-
dependent pricing (Calvo 1983)

Full-information rational expectations with time-
dependent pricing (Gertler and Leahy 2008)

Sticky prices and backwards rule of thumb firms                                1
(Galí and Gertler 1999)

Sticky information (Mankiw and Reis 2002)

Adaptive learning (Milani 2005)

Rational inattention (Afrouzi and Yang 2016)




 Notes: the table shows Phillips curves derived under various assumption about how economic agents form
 expectations. Coefficients “b” vary across specifications and depend on structural parameters and details of
 information structure. is inflation,       is output gap, is output, is the nominal interest rate. denotes full-
 information rational expectations given information available at time t.         denotes average expectations (not
 necessarily full information, but rationality is preserved) across agents.    denotes expectations when agents use
 information up to period t to learn about structural parameters in the economy.




                                                           40
                                                                          Table 6. LIE Test

             Dep. var.:                   Michigan Survey of Consumers                            Survey of Professional Forecasters
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)                      (4)         (5)             (6)            (7)
                                       -0.229***    -0.267***    -0.319***                -0.177*     -1.102         -0.119          -0.107
                                       (0.087)      (0.090)      (0.118)                  (0.103)     (0.628)        (0.108)         (0.652)
                                        1.432***     1.402***     1.181***                 0.729***    0.748***       0.333*         -0.484
                                       (0.072)      (0.079)      (0.182)                  (0.116)     (0.111)        (0.177)         (1.086)
                                                    -0.361       -0.551                                0.920                         -0.133
                                                    (0.394)      (0.472)                              (0.650)                        (0.616)
                                                                  0.222                                                               0.937
                                                                 (0.160)                                                             (1.242)
             Observations                 146          146          118                      132         132             91             91
             R-squared                   0.773        0.774        0.655                    0.265       0.276          0.041           0.049
             Sample period            78Q1:14Q3    78Q1:14Q3 79Q1:14Q3                   81Q3:14Q5   81Q3:14Q3      91Q4:14Q3 91Q4:14Q3

Notes: The table reports the slope of the Phillips curve in modified specification (8) where an additional control is employment gap over the next year,             .
The baseline specification (8) is reported in columns (1), (4), and (6). The modified specification (8) is reported in columns (2), (5), and (7). In columns (5) and
(7),            is measured as the average projected unemployment rate over the next four quarters minus the current NAIRU rate from the CBO. In columns (2)
and(3),             is measured as the average value of responses to “Now turning to business conditions in the country as a whole--do you think that during the
next 12 months we'll have good times financially, or bad times, or what?”. Possible responses are “good times” (coded as -1), “good with qualifications (coded as
-0.5)”, “pro-con” (coded as 0), “bad with qualifications” (coded as +0.5), and “bad times” (coded as +1).                       is the difference between the actual
unemployment rate and the CBO’s NAIRU.                 is one-year-ahead inflation forecast (CPI).            is the five year ahead inflation forecast. Note that the
number of observations is lower in column (3) relative to column (2) because 5-year-ahead inflation forecast was not collected in every survey wave in the early
part of the survey. Newey-West robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                 41
                                                                 Table 7. U.S. Surveys of Inflation Expectations.

                     Michigan               Survey of                                                                    Survey of              Blue Chip              Federal
                                                                      Livingston               Business Inflation
                       Survey              Professional                                                                  Consumer               Economic               Reserve
                                                                       Survey                    Expectations
                   of Consumers            Forecasters                                                                  Expectations            Indicators           Greenbook
                         (1)                   (2)                         (3)                          (4)                 (5)                    (6)                   (7)
                                                                                                   Businesses of                                                Research staff
                                                                   Economists from
  Survey                                    Professional                                           various sizes                                Business        at the Federal
                     Consumers                                   industry, government,                                   Consumers
Respondents                                 Forecasters                                        headquartered within                            economists       Reserve Board
                                                                 banking and academia
                                                                                                 the Sixth District                                             of Governors
Number of
                                        Varies by survey. ≈       Varies by survey. ≈
 Surveys                ≈ 500                                                                         ≈ 300                ≈ 1,300                 ≈ 50                     1
                                        40 in recent surveys.     30 in recent surveys.
Collected
   Price                                CPI, core CPI, GDP                                                                                                         GDP deflator,
                                                                                                 Each firm’s unit                             CPI, GDP price
 Inflation         Prices in general     price index, PCE,              CPI, PPI                                           Inflation                               CPI, core CPI,
                                                                                                      costs                                   index, PPI, PCE
Measure(s)                                   core PCE                                                                                                              PCE, core PCE
Frequency             Monthly                Quarterly               Semi-annually                  Monthly                Monthly               Monthly            8-12 per year
                  Survey Research
 Survey                                                                                                                                                               Federal
                    Center at the        Federal Reserve of       Federal Reserve of            Federal Reserve of    Federal Reserve of          Aspen
Conducted                                                                                                                                                          Reserve Board
                   University of            Philadelphia             Philadelphia                    Atlanta             New York               Publishers
   By                                                                                                                                                              of Governors
                     Michigan
Year of First
                        1978 1                 1968                      1946                         2011                   2013                  1976                 1969
  Survey
                                                                   - Current month
                                        - Current and next 4
                                                                        (value)                                                                                     - Current and
                                               quarters                                                                                        - Current year
Short Term          - Next 1 year                                   - Next 6 and 12               - Next 1 year          - Next 1 year                             next 8 quarters
                                          (Q/Q annualized)                                                                                     and next year
 Forecast              (annual)                                     months (value)                   (annual)               (annual)                                    (Q/Q
                                        - Current and next 2                                                                                     (annually)
                                                                     - Next 3 years                                                                                  annualized)
                                           years (annually)
                                                                   (value, annually)
                                                                                                                      - Rate 3 years from     - Next 7 years
                    - Next 5 to 10        - Next 5 and 10
Long Term                                                            - Next 10 years           - Next 5 to 10 years     now (rate from          (annually)
                    years (annual          years (annual                                                                                                                    N
 Forecast                                                           (annual average)             (annual average)       now+2 years to        - Next 5 years
                       average)              average)
                                                                                                                         now+3 years)        (annual average)
   Point
                          Y                      Y                         Y                            N                     Y                      Y                      Y
 Prediction
Probability
                          N                      Y                         N                            Y                     Y                      N                      N
Distribution

      Notes: The monthly Michigan Survey of Consumers began in 1978; however, earlier data is available at lower frequencies. The Survey of Professional Forecasters
      has changed their questionnaire over the years; the status of the survey as of 2014:Q1 is reported in the table. The Sixth District in column (4) includes Alabama,
      Florida, Georgia, and parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Greenbook forecasts for CPI became reported in 1979 Other inflation measures were
      introduced after that.



                                                                                          42
                                              Table 8. Stability of the Phillips Curve.
 Dep. var.:          1978-2014       1978-1989       1990-1999                                2000-2014                p-value
                         (1)             (2)             (3)                                     (4)                     (5)
 Panel A: Michigan Survey of Consumers, 78Q1:14Q3
                      -0.229***       -0.233*         -0.210                                    -0.249**               0.989
                      (0.087)         (0.128)         (0.278)                                   (0.110)
                       1.432***        1.500***        1.388***                                  0.828***
                      (0.072)         (0.090)         (0.387)                                   (0.184)
 Observations            146             48              40                                        58
 R-squared             0.773           0.843           0.516                                     0.218
 Panel B: Binder (2015), 78Q1:14Q2
                      -0.333***       -0.568***       -0.145                                    -0.237*                0.105
                      (0.102)         (0.130)         (0.217)                                   (0.112)
                       1.592***        1.519***        2.053***                                  1.495***
                      (0.068)         (0.093)         (0.474)                                   (0.276)
 Observations            145             48              40                                        57
 R-squared             0.764           0.814           0.534                                     0.234
 Panel C: Naïve, 78Q1:14Q3
                      -0.216          -0.747***       -0.217                                    -0.370**               0.348
                      (0.158)         (0.264)         (0.238)                                   (0.155)
                       0.818***        0.856***        0.706***                                 -0.187
                      (0.111)         (0.097)         (0.217)                                   (0.198)
 Observations            146             48              40                                        58
 R-squared             0.598           0.709           0.328                                     0.075
 Panel D: Survey of Professional Forecasters, 81Q3:14Q3
                      -0.177*         -0.374***       -0.462**                                  -0.157                 0.520
                      (0.103)         (0.122)         (0.226)                                   (0.192)
                       0.729***        1.182***        1.731***                                  0.732
                      (0.116)         (0.222)         (0.336)                                   (1.188)
 Observations            132             34              40                                        58
 R-squared             0.265           0.348           0.520                                     0.070
 Panel E: Greenbook, 79Q4:09Q4
                      -0.348**        -0.495***       -0.365                                    -0.174*                0.185
                      (0.164)         (0.149)         (0.267)                                   (0.098)
                       0.954***        1.265***        1.459***                                  0.371
                      (0.128)         (0.125)         (0.338)                                   (0.506)
 Observations            120             41              40                                        39
 R-squared             0.592           0.752           0.498                                     0.038
 Panel F: Financial markets (Cleveland Fed), 82Q1:14Q3
                      -0.141          -0.492***       -0.063                                    -0.041                 0.036
                      (0.100)         (0.135)         (0.205)                                   (0.184)
                       0.613***        1.105***        1.626***                                  1.068***
                      (0.105)         (0.312)         (0.310)                                   (0.379)
 Observations            130             32              40                                        58
 R-squared             0.205           0.216           0.460                                     0.125
Notes: The dependent variable in specification (9) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). In all panels (except Panel C),
        is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). In panel C,            is the average inflation rate over the previous four
quarters. The top row indicates estimation samples.          is the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the CBO’s
NAIRU. All data are final-vintage. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses. The last column reports p-
values for the null hypothesis that the slopes are equal over the time periods listed in columns (2)-(4). The estimation sample
excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.



                                                                 43
                                                                   Table 9. Horserace Regressions.

 Dep. var.:                       (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                              -0.229***        -0.227***       -0.222**         -0.180           -0.207**        -0.252**        -0.244***        -0.193**
                              (0.087)          (0.087)         (0.091)          (0.139)          (0.087)         (0.108)         (0.083)          (0.090)
 Expected inflation,

    MSC                        1.432***         1.396***        1.003***         1.311***         0.957***        1.276***        1.306***         1.527***
                              (0.072)          (0.131)         (0.192)          (0.153)          (0.200)         (0.162)         (0.251)          (0.237)
    Naïve                                      -0.027                                                                            -0.508***        -0.505***
                                               (0.116)                                                                           (0.124)          (0.122)
    SPF                                                         0.228                                                             0.005            0.462
                                                               (0.147)                                                           (0.526)          (0.615)
    Greenbook                                                                    0.122                                                            -0.206
                                                                                (0.118)                                                           (0.277)
    Financial markets                                                                             0.197                           0.574            0.038
                                                                                                 (0.142)                         (0.403)          (0.437)
    MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                            0.164          -0.132           -0.065
                                                                                                                 (0.151)         (0.281)          (0.299)

 Observations                    146             146              132             120              130             118              113              94
 R-squared                      0.773           0.773            0.386           0.721            0.339           0.653            0.377           0.406
 Sample period                78Q1:14Q3       78Q1:14Q3        81Q3:14Q3       79Q4:09Q4        82Q1:14Q3       79Q1:14Q3        82Q1:14Q3       82Q1:09Q4

Notes: The dependent variable in specification (10) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). For all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve
expectations and the MSC 5 year ahead case),           is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations case,    is the average inflation
rate over the previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated on the largest possible sample that covers 1978-2014. The number of observations varies across
columns because some measures of expectations are available for fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan Survey of Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of
Professional Forecasters.            is the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the CBO’s NAIRU. All data are final-vintage. The estimation
sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                 44
                             Table 10. Prediction Errors of the Phillips curve during the Great Recession.

                                                                   N. Obs             Mean                   Std. Dev.
               Source of inflation expectations
                                                                      (1)               (2)                     (3)
               Michigan Survey of Consumers                           12              -0.34                    1.33
               Binder (2015)                                          12               0.22                    1.30
               Survey of Professional Forecasters                     12               0.73                    1.48
               Naïve                                                  12               0.75                    1.53
               Greenbook                                               4               0.92                    1.20
               Financial markets (Cleveland Fed)                      12               0.60                    1.39

Notes: The table reports moments of the prediction error of the Phillips curve during the Great Recession. Each Phillips curve is
estimated during the pre-Great Recession period: 1995-2007. The left column of the table shows which measure of inflation
expectations was used. For all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve expectations case),          is the one-year ahead
inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations case,         is the average inflation rate over the previous four quarters.
The estimated Phillips curve is used to predict the rate of inflation (CPI, annualized) for 2009-2011 (times of the missing
disinflation). Moments for the resulting prediction errors are shown. Note that the Greenbook case has only four observations
because Greenbooks are released with a five-year delay.




                                                                  45
                                 Figure 1. Time Variation in the Slope of the Phillips Curve, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a).

               Panel A. Phillips Curve with Naïve Expectations                                                                                Panel B. Phillips Curve with SPF Expectations
                                                                                                          09Q4
                                                                                                        09Q3                                                                                                            1960Q1-1984Q4




                                                                                                                                   4
          4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1985Q1-2007Q3
                                                                                       11Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007Q3-2013Q1
                                       07Q4                                            11Q2
                                                                                                      09Q2
          2




                                                            08Q3                                    10Q4




                                                                                                                             , GDP deflator
                                               08Q2




                                                                                                                                       2
                                        08Q1                            12Q4
                                                                           12Q3
          0
   BACK




                                                                    13Q1               11Q3    10Q3
                                                                                                  10Q1                                                                                                                  11Q3
                                                                           12Q1
     t-Et




                                                                                                                                                                                                         12Q3           11Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                              08Q3
                                                                           12Q2                                                                                                                                         11Q1    10Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10Q3
    -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                             12Q1




                                                                                                                            SPF
                                                                              11Q4                                                                                                08Q1 08Q2                                    10Q2
                                                                                                10Q2                                                                                                                             10Q1




                                                                                                                            t-Et
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09Q1       09Q4
                                                                                                                                                                               07Q4                          12Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     13Q1
          -4




                                                                                        09Q1                                                                                                                                       09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      12Q4

                     1960Q1-1984Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               11Q4
                     1985Q1-2007Q3
          -6




                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   09Q2
                     2007Q3-2013Q1

                -3       -2     -1      0      1       2                           3                4            5                            -3      -2           -1             0      1       2                  3          4           5
                                        Unemployment gap                                                                                                                          Unemployment gap


                                                  C. Phillips Curve with Household Inflation Expectations
                                                             4




                                                                                                                                                           1960Q1-1984Q4
                                                                                                                                                           1985Q1-2007Q3
                                                                                                                                                           2007Q3-2013Q1
                                                             2




                                                                                                           07Q4             08Q3
                                                                                                                                                                         09Q3
                                                                                                             08Q1                                                          09Q4
                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                           11Q1
                                                                                                                                                           11Q2
                                                      MSC




                                                                                                                                                                     10Q4
                                                        t-Et




                                                                                                                     08Q2
                                                                                                                                                         11Q3          09Q2
                                                                                                                                               12Q412Q1            10Q3
                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                  12Q3
                                                                                                                                                      11Q4
                                                                                                                                              13Q1 12Q2                 10Q1


                                                                                                                                                                    10Q2
                                                             -4




                                                                                                                                                            09Q1
                                                             -6




                                                                   -3         -2               -1            0      1       2                          3            4             5
                                                                                                             Unemployment gap


Notes: The figure reproduces Figures 5 and 6 in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a). Panels A through C show changes in the slope
of the Phillips curve over time. Panels A and C use CPI inflation rate. Panel B uses GDP deflator inflation rate.




                                                                                                                     46
Appendix A. Additional results
                                                         Appendix Table 1. Horserace Regressions, output gap.

  Dep. var.:                          (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)
                                   0.140***        0.139***         0.130**          0.098            0.119**        0.157**          0.126***        0.086**
                                  (0.051)         (0.050)          (0.052)          (0.076)          (0.049)        (0.062)          (0.046)         (0.049)
  Expected inflation,

     MSC                           1.440***        1.398***         1.044***         1.344***         1.000***       1.318***         1.340***        1.560***
                                  (0.074)         (0.130)          (0.201)          (0.154)          (0.208)        (0.167)          (0.254)         (0.240)
     Naïve                                        -0.032                                                                             -0.489***       -0.474***
                                                  (0.1115)                                                                           (0.121)         (0.110)
     SPF                                                            0.202                                                             0.112           0.493
                                                                   (0.149)                                                           (0.535)         (0.615)
     Greenbook                                                                       0.102                                                           -0.166
                                                                                    (0.116)                                                          (0.280)
     Financial markets                                                                                0.167                           0.531          -0.015
                                                                                                     (0.143)                         (0.412)         (0.454)
     MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                              0.130           -0.225          -0.153
                                                                                                                    (0.151)          (0.314)         (0.325)

  Observations                      146              146             132              120              130             118             113               94
  R-squared                        0.775            0.775           0.387            0.721            0.339           0.658           0.372            0.403
  Sample period                  78Q1:14Q3        78Q1:14Q3       81Q3:14Q3        79Q4:09Q4        82Q1:14Q3       79Q1:14Q3       82Q1:14Q3        82Q1:09Q4

Notes: The dependent variable in specification (10) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). For all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve
expectations and the MSC 5 year ahead case),           is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations case,    is the average inflation
rate over the previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated on the largest possible sample that covers 1978-2014. The number of observations varies across
columns because some measures of expectations are available for fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan Survey of Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of
Professional Forecasters.            is the difference between the actual output rate and the CBO’s potential output. All data are final-vintage. The estimation
sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance
at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                 47
                                                   Appendix Table 2. Horserace Regressions, trend-inflation specification.

Dep. var.:                          (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                   (6)         (7)                (8)
                                -0.178*           -0.344***          -0.562***         -0.013           -0.077               -0.177*     -0.540***           -0.475
                                (0.097)           (0.115)            (0.150)           (0.108)          (0.190)              (0.094)     (0.245)             (0.302)
Expected inflation,

  MSC                             0.795***         1.086***           1.001***          1.120***         0.759***             0.843***    1.246***            1.568***
                                 (0.182)          (0.273)            (0.194)           (0.139)          (0.209)              (0.187)     (0.332)             (0.308)
  Naïve                                           -0.497***                                                                              -0.463***           -0.534**
                                                  (0.187)                                                                                (0.207)             (0.250)
  SPF                                                                -2.781***                                                           -2.828***           -1.656*
                                                                     (0.756)                                                             (0.704)             (0.964)
  Greenbook                                                                            -0.563*                                                               -0.379
                                                                                       (0.219)                                                               (0.353)
  Financial markets                                                                                     -0.352                            0.627              -0.047
                                                                                                        (0.590)                          (0.586)             (0.787)
  MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                                         -0.608      -0.425              -0.252
                                                                                                                             (0.436)     (0.592)             (0.482)

Observations                       91                91                91                72                91                   91           91                72
R-squared                         0.211             0.274             0.284             0.335            0.216                 0.221        0.362             0.436
Sample period                   91Q4:14Q3         91Q4:14Q3         91Q4:14Q3         91Q4:09Q4        91Q4:14Q3             91Q4:14Q3    91Q4:14Q3         91Q4:09Q4

 Notes: The dependent variable in specification (10) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized) where inflation and inflation expectations are detrended with
         , the 10-year-ahead inflation forecast from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. For all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve expectations and
 the MSC 5 year ahead case),             is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations case,        is the average inflation rate over the
 previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated on the largest possible sample that covers 1978-2014. The number of observations varies across columns
 because some measures of expectations are available for fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan Survey of Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of
 Professional Forecasters.             is the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the CBO’s NAIRU. All data are final-vintage. The estimation
 sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance
 at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                     48
                                                    Appendix Table 3. Horserace Regressions, constrained specification.

 Dep. var.:                            (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)            (7)             (8)
                                   -0.281***        -0.257**         -0.209**            -0.192          -0.202**         -0.235**       -0.229***       -0.155*
                                   (0.096)          (0.100)          (0.081)             (0.121)         (0.081)          (0.090)        (0.078)         (0.084)
 Expected inflation,

     MSC                            1.000            0.774***         0.775***            0.676***        0.818***         1.030***      1.117***         1.359***
                                                    (0.162)          (0.167)             (0.196)         (0.150)          (0.179)       (0.179)          (0.172)
     Naïve                                           0.226                                                                              -0.447***        -0.424***
                                                    (0.162)                                                                             (0.118)          (0.110)
     SPF                                                              0.225                                                             -0.242           -0.060
                                                                     (0.167)                                                            (0.460)          (0.557)
     Greenbook                                                                            0.324*                                                         -0.034
                                                                                         (0.196)                                                         (0.321)
     Financial markets                                                                                    0.182                          0.644*           0.098
                                                                                                         (0.150)                        (0.376)          (0.417)
     MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                                   -0.030        -0.072           -0.059
                                                                                                                          (0.179)       (0.280)          (0.305)

 Observations                         146             146               132              120               130               118           113               94
 R-squared                           0.057           0.097             0.063            0.056             0.064             0.046         0.153            0.115
 Sample period                     78Q1:14Q3       78Q1:14Q3         81Q3:14Q3        79Q4:09Q4         82Q1:14Q3         79Q1:14Q3     82Q1:14Q3        82Q1:09Q4

Notes: The dependent variable in constrained specification (10) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). The constraint is that the sum of coefficients on
expected inflation is equal to one. For all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve expectations and the MSC 5 year ahead case),                 is the one-year
ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations case,           is the average inflation rate over the previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated
on the largest possible sample that covers 1978-2014. The number of observations varies across columns because some measures of expectations are available for
fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan Survey of Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of Professional Forecasters.                     is the difference between the
actual output rate and the CBO’s potential output. All data are final-vintage. The estimation sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West
robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                    49
                                              Appendix Table 4. Horserace Regressions, distributed lag for unemployment gap.

 Dep. var.:                            (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)
 sum                               -0.242***        -0.238***        -0.231***          -0.166          -0.214***        -0.254**        -0.270***       -0.194
                                   (0.083)          (0.081)          (0.087)            (0.124)         (0.082)          (0.101)         (0.091)         (0.139)
 Expected inflation,

     MSC                            1.426***         1.395***         1.014***           1.324***        0.967***         1.276***        1.376***        1.531***
                                   (0.074)          (0.166)          (0.189)            (0.149)         (0.199)          (0.156)         (0.248)         (0.233)
     Naïve                                           0.024                                                                               -0.560***       -0.531***
                                                    (0.145)                                                                              (0.119)         (0.141)
     SPF                                                              0.229                                                              -0.073           0.439
                                                                     (0.147)                                                             (0.547)         (0.641)
     Greenbook                                                                           0.114                                                           -0.199
                                                                                        (0.114)                                                          (0.314)
     Financial markets                                                                                   0.192                            0.618           0.093
                                                                                                        (0.143)                          (0.397)         (0.461)
     MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                                   0.163          -0.085          -0.072
                                                                                                                         (0.151)         (0.293)         (0.315)

 Observations                         144             144               132              120              130              118             113               94
 R-squared                           0.766           0.766             0.389            0.722            0.340            0.653           0.387            0.409
 Sample period                     78Q3:14Q3       78Q3:14Q3         81Q3:14Q3        79Q4:09Q4        82Q1:14Q3        79Q1:14Q3       82Q1:14Q3        82Q1:09Q4

Notes: This table reports results for specification (10) modified as follows:                                              ∑                                  . The table
shows reports results for ∑         in the first row. The dependent variable in specification (6) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). For all measures of
expected inflation (except the naïve expectations and the MSC 5 year ahead case),             is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the naïve expectations
case,         is the average inflation rate over the previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated on the largest possible sample that covers 1978-2014. The
number of observations varies across columns because some measures of expectations are available for fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan Survey of
Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of Professional Forecasters.                 is the difference between the actual output rate and the CBO’s potential output. All
data are final-vintage. The estimation sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses.
***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                   50
                                                  Appendix Table 5. Horserace Regressions, control for oil price shocks.

 Dep. var.:                            (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)          (7)             (8)
                                   -0.201***        -0.180**         -0.161**           -0.165          -0.145**           -0.214***    -0.188***       -0.126***
                                   (0.067)          (0.071)          (0.070)            (0.105)         (0.064)            (0.070)      (0.062)         (0.052)
 Expected inflation,

     MSC                            1.357***         1.035**          0.530***           0.794***        0.585***           0.875***     0.566***        0.595***
                                   (0.089)          (0.107)          (0.155)            (0.170)         (0.150)            (0.161)      (0.203)         (0.172)
     Naïve                                           0.231***                                                                           -0.130          -0.050
                                                    (0.089)                                                                             (0.104)         (0.093)
     SPF                                                              0.533***                                                          -0.077          -0.050
                                                                     (0.136)                                                            (0.359)         (0.429)
     Greenbook                                                                           0.445***                                                        0.143
                                                                                        (0.103)                                                         (0.222)
     Financial markets                                                                                   0.406***                        0.182          -0.219
                                                                                                        (0.108)                         (0.323)         (0.380)
     MSC (5 year ahead)                                                                                                     0.508***     0.438**         0.457**
                                                                                                                           (0.118)      (0.198)         (0.191)

 sum                                0.039***         0.046***         0.064***           0.067***        0.058***           0.062***     0.068***         0.073***
                                   (0.011)          (0.010)          (0.011)            (0.012)         (0.011)            (0.013)      (0.013)          (0.012)

 Observations                        144              144              132               120              130                 118         113               94
 R-squared                          0.815            0.825            0.587             0.815            0.571               0.765       0.591            0.644
 Sample period                    78Q3:14Q3        78Q3:14Q3        81Q3:14Q3         79Q4:09Q4        82Q1:14Q3           79Q1:14Q3   82Q1:14Q3        82Q1:09Q4

Notes: This table reports results for specification (10) modified as follows:                                                             ∑
      . The table shows reports results for ∑        in the last row. The dependent variable in specification (6) is the quarterly inflation rate (CPI, annualized). For
all measures of expected inflation (except the naïve expectations and the MSC 5 year ahead case),              is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean). For the
naïve expectations case,         is the average inflation rate over the previous four quarters. All regressions are estimated on the largest possible sample that covers
1978-2014. The number of observations varies across columns because some measures of expectations are available for fewer periods. MSC stands for the Michigan
Survey of Consumers. SPF stands for the Survey of Professional Forecasters.                  is the difference between the actual output rate and the CBO’s potential
output. All data are final-vintage. The estimation sample excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                   51
            Appendix Table 6. Sensitivity of the Phillips curve estimates to using alternative measure of inflation.

                                                                Inflation measure
                                                                                                           GDP
           Dep. var.:                CPI           Core CPI             PCE           Core PCE
                                                                                                         Deflator
                                     (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)
                                  -0.229**          -0.089           -0.006             0.129            -0.029
                                  (0.087)           (0.111)          (0.076)           (0.141)           (0.097)
                                   1.432***          1.281***         1.212***          1.010***          1.050***
                                  (0.072)           (0.122)          (0.080)           (0.105)           (0.113)
           Observations              146               146              146               146               146
           R-squared                0.773             0.737            0.820             0.734             0.760
Notes: The dependent variable in specification (9) is the quarterly inflation rate (annualized). The definition of
inflation is indicated in the top row.         is the one-year ahead inflation forecast (mean) in the Michigan Survey of
Consumers. The estimation sample is 78Q1:14Q3.                  is the difference between the actual unemployment rate
and the CBO’s NAIRU. All data are final-vintage. PCE is the chain-type price index for Personal Consumption
Expenditures. CPI is Consumer Price Index. Core CPI and PCE exclude food and energy. The estimation sample
excludes 2008Q4, which is an outlier in the data. Newey-West robust standard errors (five lags) are in parentheses.
***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                              52
Appendix B. Derivations of the New Keynesian Phillips curve and
Adam and Padula (2011)
The derivation of the Phillips curve is briefly outlined below to highlight where the FIRE assumption is
used. For a complete derivation see Galí (2008). Facing Calvo pricing, firms will be allowed to adjust prices
in a given period with constant probability 1-θ. If firm i resets its price in period t, it will choose the
following optimal price:
           ∗
            ,       1           ∑                   ,   ,       ,                                                      (B1)
Assuming constant returns to scale and perfect factor mobility, the nominal marginal cost faced by firm i
in period t+j that last updated prices in t is equal to the aggregate nominal marginal cost (                          ,   ,

       ).25 Hence:
          ∗                     ∑
           ,     1                              ,                                                                      (B2)
                                                                                 ∗
Recalling                           , and                               1                    and defining the cross-sectional
average expectation as                      ,   :

          ∗
           ,                1           ∑                   ,                                                         (B3)

                1           1           ∑                                    1       ∑                                (B4)
Shifting the equation forward one period and applying the law of iterated expectations:
                        1           1           ∑                                 1      ∑                            (B5)
Combining the previous two lines results in the NKPC:
                                                                                                                      (B6)

         Adam and Padula (2011), whose derivation is outlined next, show that the Phillips curve can be
derived under a more general information structure if a certain condition is satisfied. They call the needed
condition “Condition 1” and it requires that agents are unable to predict revisions in their own or other
agent’s forecasts. As in the NKPC case, assume monopolistic competition and Calvo pricing with reset
probability 1        . As in the previous derivation, assume constant returns to scale and perfect factor mobility
resulting in equal marginal costs across firms. Suppose there are I professional forecasters that each advise
1/I firms. Forecaster i has subjective expectation                  ,    ∙ . When allowed to update prices, a firm advised by
forecaster i will reset to its optimal price:



25
  In the typical NKPC derivation, the production function is assumed to be ,            ,  ,   resulting in     , ,
                ∗
                 ,         . We have  used the simplification of constant returns to scale and  perfect factor mobility
for easier analogy to the Adam and Padula (2011) derivation that follows. The importance of FIRE in the NKPC
derivation remains apparent, and the NKPC only changes by losing a constant multiplicative factor on marginal cost.


                                                                        53
          ∗
           ,           1               ∑                            ,                                                                (B8)
The new price level is:
                                                   ∗
               1                   ∑                ,                                                                                (B9)

Implying inflation is:
                                           ∗                                     ∗                ∗                    ∗        ∗
                           1                                            where            ≡    ∑    ,       ≡       ∑    ,        ,   (B10)

Let     ∙ ≡ ∑                  ∙ and apply it to the previous:
                                                           ∗
                               1                                                                                                     (B11)
                                                                                                           ∗
Next, apply the subjective expectation operator to the definition of                                           :
               ∗                                               ∗          ∗
          ,                        ,   ∑                        ,          ,                                                         (B12)

Condition 1 requires that agents are unable to predict revisions in their own or other agents forecasts and is
as follows:

          ,        ,                                    ,                       0 ∀ , ,                0                             (B13)

Plugging in the optimal prices, using Condition 1, rearranging, and switching from nominal to real marginal
cost:
               ∗
          ,                                    ,       ∑            ∑                ,        ,                ∑            ,    ,   (B14)
               ∗
          ,                    1                           ,                                                                         (B15)

Arriving at the Phillips curve:
                                                           ∗
                               1                                                                                                     (B16)

                               1                   1                                                                                 (B17)

                                                                                                                                     (B18)




                                                                                         54
