NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY CAPITAL
Adriano A. Rampini
S. Viswanathan
Working Paper 23302
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23302

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
We thank Nittai Bergman, Doug Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi, Itay Goldstein, Bengt Holmstrom,
Nobu Kiyotaki, Peter Kondor, David Martinez-Miera, Martin Oehmke, Vincenzo Quadrini,
Alexei Tchistyi, and seminar participants at the IMF, Duke, the MIT theory lunch, BU, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Koc, the Stanford macro lunch, UC Berkeley, Mannheim,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, NYU Stern, MIT Sloan, UT Austin, Stanford GSB, the
Central Bank of Chile, the Getulio Vargas Foundation, Yale, the ECB, the 2010 SED Annual
Meeting, the 2010 Tel Aviv University Finance Conference, the 2011 Jackson Hole Finance
Conference, the 2011 FIRS Annual Conference, the 2011 WFA Annual Meeting, the 2011 CEPR
European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2011 FARFE Conference, the 2011
Bank of Italy-CEPR Conference, the 2011 Conference of Swiss Economists Abroad, the 2012
AEA Conference, the 2012 New York Fed-NYU Conference, the 2012 Central Bank of Turkey
Conference, the 2012 Paul Woolley Centre Conference, the 2012 Mitsui Finance Symposium, the
2012 Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2013 AFA Annual Meeting, and the 2013
Conference at UC Davis for helpful comments. This paper subsumes the results on financial
intermediation in our 2007 paper "Collateral, financial intermediation, and the distribution of debt
capacity," which is now titled "Collateral, risk management, and the distribution of debt
capacity" (Rampini and Viswanathan (2010)). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Intermediary Capital
Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan
NBER Working Paper No. 23302
March 2017
JEL No. E02,E32,E51,G01,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We propose a dynamic theory of financial intermediaries that are better able to collateralize
claims than households, that is, have a collateralization advantage. Intermediaries require capital
as they can borrow against their loans only to the extent that households themselves can
collateralize the assets backing these loans. The net worth of financial intermediaries and the
corporate sector are both state variables affecting the spread between intermediated and direct
finance and the dynamics of real economic activity, such as investment, and financing. The
accumulation of net worth of intermediaries is slow relative to that of the corporate sector. The
model is consistent with key stylized facts about macroeconomic downturns associated with a
credit crunch, namely, their severity, their protractedness, and the fact that the severity of the
credit crunch itself affects the severity and persistence of downturns. The model captures the
tentative and halting nature of recoveries from crises.

Adriano A. Rampini
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rampini@duke.edu
S. Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu

1

Introduction

The capitalization of financial intermediaries is arguably critical for economic fluctuations
and growth. We provide a dynamic theory of financial intermediaries that have a collateralization advantage, that is, are better able to collateralize claims than households. Firms
need to collateralize promises to pay with tangible assets and can raise collateralized financing from both intermediaries and households; firms require net worth as collateral
constraints limit financing. Financial intermediaries require net worth as their ability to
refinance their collateralized loans from households is in turn limited, as they, too, need
to collateralize their promises. Importantly, the net worth of both financial intermediaries and firms hence plays a role in our model, in contrast to most previous work, and
these two state variables jointly determine the dynamics of economic activity, investment,
financing, and loan spreads. A key feature of our model is that the accumulation of the
net worth of intermediaries is slow relative to that of the corporate sector. The slowmoving nature of intermediary capital results in economic dynamics that are consistent
with key stylized facts about macroeconomic downturns associated with a credit crunch,
namely, their severity, their protractedness, and the fact that the severity of the credit
crunch itself affects the severity and persistence of downturns. Most uniquely, the model
captures the tentative and halting nature of recoveries from crises.
In the model firms can borrow from both intermediaries and households, and all financing needs to be collateralized. Firm financing is subject to two types of collateral
constraints, one for loans from households and one for loans from intermediaries. Since
intermediaries are better able to enforce collateralized claims, they can lend more than
households, but the additional amount that they can lend has to be financed out of
their own net worth, giving a role to financial intermediary capital. We show that these
collateral constraints can be derived from an economy with limited enforcement that constrains firms’ and intermediaries’ ability to make credible promises. Intermediaries, but
not households, participate in markets at all times which affords intermediaries with an
advantage in enforcing claims. This economy with limited enforcement without exclusion
and with limited participation is equivalent to our economy with collateral constraints.1
Intermediaries are essential in our economy in the sense that allocations can be
achieved with financial intermediaries, which cannot be achieved otherwise. Since intermediary net worth is limited, intermediated finance commands a positive spread. In a
deterministic steady state, the equilibrium capitalization of both the representative firm
1

We model limited enforcement à la Kehoe and Levine (1993) but without exclusion, as in Chien
and Lustig (2010) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013), and extend their results by introducing
limited participation as well.

1

and intermediary are positive. Steady state firm net worth is determined by the fraction
of tangible assets that firms cannot pledge to intermediaries or households and thus have
to finance internally. Steady state intermediary net worth is determined by the fraction
of investment that intermediaries have to finance due to their collateralization advantage,
that is, by the difference in the ability to enforce collateralized claims between intermediaries and households. As an aside, the determinants of the capital structure for firms
and intermediaries are thus distinct in our model.
The equilibrium spread on intermediated finance is determined by the two state variables, firm and intermediary net worth, jointly. Intermediary net worth increases intermediated loan supply and hence reduces spreads all else equal. In contrast, firm net
worth has two opposing effects on intermediated loan demand: on the one hand, firm net
worth increases investment and lowers the levered marginal product of capital reducing
firms’ willingness to pay, lowering spreads; on the other hand, firm net worth, by increasing investment, increases firms’ collateralizable assets, which in turn raises loan demand,
raising spreads. Hence, spreads can be high or low when firm net worth is low as they
depend on the relative capitalization of firms and intermediaries. When intermediary net
worth is relatively scarce, the collateral constraint on intermediated finance is slack and
firm net worth reduces spreads. When firm net worth is relatively scarce instead, the collateral constraint on intermediated finance binds and firm net worth increases spreads as
it increases firms’ ability to pledge and hence loan demand. Notably, equilibrium spreads
can be low in the model even when firms are poorly capitalized. This interaction of loan
supply and demand results in rich and subtle dynamics of intermediated finance and loan
spreads, with negative shocks to net worth potentially leading to spreads dropping on
impact, then spiking, and finally falling as the economy gradually recovers.
Our model allows the analysis of the dynamics of the capitalization of the corporate
and intermediary sector. The two state variables, net worth of firms and intermediaries,
jointly determine the dynamic supply and demand for intermediated loans and the equilibrium interest rate. A key feature of the equilibrium dynamics is that intermediary net
worth accumulation is slow relative to corporate net worth accumulation. This feature is
reflected in several aspects of the dynamics of the model. First, the recovery from a credit
crunch, that is, a drop in intermediary net worth, is relatively slow making such episodes
protracted. Second, the recovery from a downturn associated with a credit crunch, that is,
a drop in corporate and intermediary net worth, can stall, after an initial relatively swift
recovery, when firm net worth has partially recovered while intermediaries have yet to
recover. Third, the recovery from a downturn associated with a more severe credit crunch
is especially slow and halting, with output depressed and spreads elevated for a prolonged

2

period of time. The reason why intermediaries accumulate net worth more slowly in the
model is that their net worth grows at the intermediated interest rate, which is at most
the marginal levered product of capital, and may be lower than that when the collateral
constraint on intermediated finance binds. In contrast, firms accumulate net worth at the
average levered product of capital, which in turn exceeds the marginal levered product of
capital.
In a downturn without a credit crunch, that is, a drop in corporate net worth alone,
corporate investment drops; as a consequence of the collateral constraints on intermediated finance, corporate loan demand for intermediated loans drops as well, resulting in a
drop in the intermediated interest rate. Indeed, intermediaries find themselves temporarily relatively well capitalized and facing reduced loan demand respond in two possible
ways. On the one hand, intermediaries may lend some funds to households at an interest rate lower than that implied by their own rate of time preference, and in this sense
intermediaries may hold “cash,” to conserve net worth in order to meet higher future
corporate loan demand. Corporate loan demand is expected to recover relatively quickly
as firms reaccumulate net worth. On the other hand, if corporate loan demand is expected to remain depressed for an extended period of time, intermediaries may conserve
only part of their net worth and pay out some net worth as an initial dividend. As firms
reaccumulate net worth, corporate loan demand rises, and intermediary net worth becomes scarce. Initially, the intermediated interest rate rises as the collateral constraint
still binds, limiting loan demand. Eventually, the intermediated interest rate starts to
fall again, as firms accumulate sufficient net worth, so that the collateral constraint no
longer binds, and intermediary loan supply becomes the limiting factor. Firms initiate
dividends even before the economy has fully recovered, whereas intermediaries do not
resume payout until the steady state is reached.
In a credit crunch, that is, a drop in intermediary net worth, investment drops even if
the corporate sector remains well capitalized, as firms need to finance a larger part of their
investment with internal funds due to the limited supply of intermediated loans. Indeed,
firms are forced to delever and may temporarily accumulate more net worth then they
retain in the steady state. Moreover, and importantly, a credit crunch can have persistent
real effects as corporate investment may not recover for a prolonged period of time, due to
the slow recovery of intermediary capital. We emphasize that while firms may seem to be
well capitalized because they are paying dividends, the economy nevertheless has not fully
recovered. Downturns associated with a credit crunch, that is, a drop in both corporate
and intermediary net worth, are more severe and more protracted, lead to longer stalls
in the recovery, and feature higher spreads, especially in a bank-dependent economy.

3

We revisit the evidence on the effect of financial crises from the vantage point of our
theory. There are three main stylized facts about downturns associated with financial
crises that emerge from prior empirical work: (i) downturns associated with financial crises
are more severe; (ii) recoveries from financial crises are protracted and often tentative; and
(iii) the severity of the financial crises itself affects the severity and protractedness of the
downturn. Consistent with this evidence, our model predicts that the effects of a credit
crunch on economic activity is protracted due to the slow accumulation of intermediary
net worth. But perhaps most uniquely, our model captures the tentative and halting
nature of recoveries from such episodes emphasized by Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) and
allows the analysis of the severity of the credit crunch itself on the recovery, which calls
for a model with two state variables. Thus, the dynamic interaction of the two state
variables in our model implies rich dynamics with empirically plausible features.
Few extant theories of financial intermediaries provide a role for intermediary capital. Notable is in particular Holmström and Tirole (1997) who model intermediaries as
monitors that cannot commit to monitoring and hence need to have their own capital at
stake to have incentives to monitor. In their analysis, firm and intermediary capital are
exogenous and the comparative statics with respect to these are analyzed. Holmström
and Tirole conclude that “[a] proper investigation ... must take into account the feedback from interest rates to capital values. This will require an explicitly dynamic model,
for instance, along the lines of Kiyotaki and Moore [1997a].” We provide a dynamic
model in which the joint evolution of firm and intermediary net worth and the interest
rate on intermediated finance are endogenously determined. Diamond and Rajan (2001)
and Diamond (2007) model intermediaries as lenders which are better able to enforce
their claims due to their specific liquidation or monitoring ability in a similar spirit to
our model, but do not consider equilibrium dynamics. In contrast, the capitalization of
financial intermediaries plays essentially no role in liquidity provision theories of financial intermediation (Diamond and Dybvig (1983)), in theories of financial intermediaries
as delegated, diversified monitors (Diamond (1984), Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984),
and Williamson (1986)) or in coalition based theories (Townsend (1978) and Boyd and
Prescott (1986)).
Dynamic models in which net worth plays a role, such as Bernanke and Gertler (1989)
and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997a), typically consider the role of firm net worth only, although dynamic models in which intermediary net worth matters have recently been
considered (see, for example, Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), who also summarize the recent
literature, and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)).2 However, to the best of our knowl2

Gromb and Vayanos (2002) and He and Krishnamurthy (2012) study the asset pricing implications

4

edge, we are the first to consider a dynamic contracting model in which both firm and
intermediary net worth are critical and jointly affect the dynamics of financing, spreads,
and economic activity.
In Section 2 we describe the model with two types of collateral constraints, for intermediated and direct finance, respectively, and discuss how these collateral constraints
can be derived in an economy with limited enforcement and limited participation. We
establish the equivalence of these two economies formally in Appendix A. Section 3 shows
that intermediation is essential in our economy and determines the capitalization of intermediaries and spreads on intermediated finance in the steady state. The dynamics
of intermediary capital are analyzed in Section 4, focusing on the dynamic interaction
between corporate and intermediary net worth, the two state variables in the model;
specifically, we consider the effects of a downturn, a credit crunch, and a downturn associated with a credit crunch. In Section 5 we use the model to revisit three main stylized
facts about downturns associated with financial crises. Section 6 concludes. All proofs
are in Appendix B.

2

Collateralized finance with intermediation

We propose a dynamic model of financial intermediaries that have a collateralization
advantage, that is, are better able to collateralize claims than households. In the model
firms can borrow from both intermediaries and households, and all financing needs to be
collateralized. Firm financing is subject to two types of collateral constraints, one for
loans from households and one for loans from intermediaries. Since intermediaries are
better able to enforce collateralized claims, they can lend more than households, but the
additional amount that they can lend has to be financed out of their own net worth,
giving a role to financial intermediary capital. Thus, the net worth of both intermediaries
and firms are state variables and jointly determine economic activity.
We show that these collateral constraints can be derived from an economy with limited
enforcement that constrains firms’ and intermediaries’ ability to make credible promises.
Intermediaries, but not households, participate in markets at all times which affords intermediaries with an advantage in enforcing claims. This economy with limited enforcement
and limited participation is equivalent to our economy with collateral constraints.
of intermediary net worth in dynamic models.

5

2.1

Environment

Time is discrete and the horizon infinite. There are three types of agents: entrepreneurs,
financial intermediaries, and households; we discuss these in turn.
There is a continuum of entrepreneurs or firms with measure one which are risk neutral
and subject to limited liability and discount the future at rate β ∈ (0, 1). We consider an
environment with a representative firm. The representative firm (which we at times refer
to simply as the firm or the corporate sector) has limited net worth w0 at time 0 and has
access to a standard neoclassical production technology; an investment of an amount kt of
capital at time t yields output A(st+1 )f (kt ) at time t+1 where A(st+1 ) > 0 is the stochastic
total factor productivity and f (·) is the production function. Capital kt depreciates at
the rate δ ∈ (0, 1). We assume that the production function f (·) is strictly increasing
and strictly concave and satisfies the usual Inada condition, that is, limk→0 fk (k) = +∞.
Total factor productivity A(st+1 ) depends on the state st+1 realized at time t + 1 which
follows a Markov process with transition function Π(st , st+1 ). The firm can raise financing
from both intermediaries and households as we discuss below.
There is a continuum of financial intermediaries with measure one which are risk
neutral, subject to limited liability, and discount future payoffs at βi ∈ (0, 1). We consider
the problem of a representative financial intermediary with limited net worth wi0 at
time 0.3 Intermediaries can lend to and borrow from firms and households as described
in more detail below.
There is a continuum of households with measure one which are risk neutral and
discount future payoffs at a rate R−1 ∈ (0, 1). Households are assumed to have a large
endowment of funds and collateral in all dates and states, and hence are not subject to
enforcement problems but rather are able to commit to deliver on their promises. They
are willing to provide any state-contingent claim at an expected rate of return R as long
as such claims satisfy the firms’ and intermediaries’ collateral constraints.
We assume that β < βi < R−1 , that is, households are more patient than intermediaries which in turn are more patient than the firms. Since firms and intermediaries are
financially constrained, they would have an incentive to accumulate net worth and save
themselves out of their constraints. Assuming that firms and intermediaries are impatient
relative to households is a simple way to ensure that their net worth matters even in the
long run. Moreover, assuming that intermediaries are somewhat more patient than firms
implies that the net worth of both the corporate sector and the intermediary sector are
3

There is a representative intermediary in our model since intermediaries have constant returns to
scale, making the distribution of intermediaries’ net worth irrelevant and aggregation in the intermediation sector straightforward, and thus only the aggregate capital of the intermediation sector matters.

6

uniquely determined in the long run, too. We think these features are desirable properties
of a dynamic model of intermediation and are empirically plausible.
Financial intermediaries in this economy have a collateralization advantage. Specifically, intermediaries are better able to collateralize claims than households, that is, intermediaries are able to seize up to fraction θi ∈ (0, 1) of the (resale value of) collateral
backing promises issued to them whereas households are able to seize only fraction θ < θi ,
where θ ∈ (0, 1).
One interpretation of the environment is that there are three types of capital, working
capital, equipment (fraction θi − θ), and structures (fraction θ) (see Figure 1). Firms
have to finance working capital entirely out of their own net worth. Only intermediaries
can lend against equipment, but both households and intermediaries can lend against
structures. Equipment loans have to be extended by intermediaries and have to be finance
out of financial intermediary capital. We refer to these loans as intermediated finance.
In contrast, structure loans can be provided by either intermediaries or households. We
assume that these loans are provided by households and refer to such loans as direct
finance. This is without loss of generality and we could equivalently assume that all
corporate loans are extended by the intermediary who in turn borrows from households,
which we refer to as the indirect implementation. However, we focus on the (equivalent)
direct implementation in which households extend all structure loans directly throughout
as it simplifies the notation and analysis.4
We assume that loans are one-period and state-contingent and thus, the economy
has complete markets in two types of one-period ahead Arrow securities, claims provided
by intermediaries and claims provided by households, each subject to state-by-state collateral constraints. These collateral constraints are similar to the ones in Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997a), except that there are different collateral constraints for promises to pay
intermediaries and households, and that the collateral constraints are state-by-state.
Here we simply assume that there are only one-period ahead claims and that intermediaries provide the equipment loans, and only the equipment loans, and must finance
these out of their own net worth. In Section 2.3 we provide an environment with limited
enforcement and limited participation which is equivalent to the economy with collateral constraints described here. In that environment each period has two subperiods,
morning and afternoon, and equipment can serve as collateral only in the morning. The
key assumption affording intermediaries an enforcement advantage is that intermediaries,
but not households, participate in markets at all times; thus, equipment loans must be
4

Holmström and Tirole’s (1997) model of financial intermediation also has two implementations – a
direct one and an indirect one – which are equivalent and they, too, focus on the direct implementation.

7

provided by intermediaries. Moreover, limited enforcement of intermediaries’ liabilities
implies that intermediaries must finance such loans out of their own funds. Thus, the
properties that we have simply assumed here are in fact endogenous properties of optimal
dynamic contracts.

2.2

Economy with collateral constraints

We write the firm’s and intermediary’s problems recursively by defining an appropriate
state variable, net worth, for the firm (w) and intermediary (wi ).5 The state of the
economy z ≡ {s, w, wi } includes the exogenous state s as well as two endogenous state
variables, the net worth of the corporate sector w and the net worth of the intermediary
sector wi . The state-contingent interest rate on intermediated finance Ri0 depends on the
state s0 and the state z of the economy, as shown below, but we suppress the argument
for notational simplicity. Denote the transition probability on the induced state space for
the economy by Π(z, z 0 ) in a slight abuse of notation.
The firm’s problem stated recursively is, for given net worth w and aggregate state z, to
maximize the discounted expected value of future dividends by choosing a dividend payout
policy d, capital k, state-contingent promises b0 and b0i to households and intermediaries,
and state-contingent net worth w0 for the next period, taking the state-contingent interest
rates on intermediated finance Ri0 and their law of motion as given, to solve
v(w, z) =

max
0 0

{d,k,b ,bi

,w0 }

d + βE [v(w0 , z 0 )|z]

(1)

subject to the budget constraints for the current and each state next period
w ≥ d + k − E [b0 + b0i |z] ,

A0 f (k) + k(1 − δ) ≥ w0 + Rb0 + Ri0 b0i ,

(2)
(3)

the state-by-state collateral constraints for loans from intermediaries and households
(θi − θ)k(1 − δ) ≥ Ri0 b0i ,
θk(1 − δ) ≥ Rb0 ,

(4)
(5)

and the non-negativity constraints
d, k, b0i ≥ 0.
5

(6)

In our model with collateral constraints net worth, properly defined, turns out to be the most convenient state variable, whereas the state variable is typically continuation utility in dynamic contracting
models in the literature.

8

Depending on the realized state next period, the firm repays Rb0 to households and Ri0 b0i to
financial intermediaries as the budget constraint for the next period, equation (3), shows.
While equation (3) is stated as an inequality, which allows for free disposal, it binds at
an optimal solution, and hence we can define the net worth of the firm (next period) as
w0 ≡ A0 f (k) + k(1 − δ) − Rb0 − Ri0 b0i , that is, cash flows plus assets (net of depreciation)
minus liabilities. The budget constraint for this period, equation (2), states that current
net worth can be spent on dividends and purchases of capital net of the proceeds from
borrowing with state-contingent loans from households and intermediaries.6 The interest
rate on loans from households R is constant as discussed above.
The middle and bottom of Figure 1 illustrate the collateral constraints (4) and (5);7
one interpretation of these constraints is that equation (4) is the collateral constraint for
equipment loans provided by intermediaries and equation (5) is the collateral constraint
for structure loans provided by households.
The intermediary’s problem stated recursively is, for given net worth wi , to maximize
the discounted value of future dividends by choosing a dividend payout policy di , statecontingent loans to households l0 , state-contingent intermediated loans to firms li0 , and
state-contingent net worth wi0 next period to solve
vi (wi , z) =

max

{di ,l0 ,li0 ,wi0 }

di + βi E [vi (wi0 , z 0 )|z]

(7)

subject to the budget constraints for the current and each state next period
wi ≥ di + E[l0 + li0 |z],

Rl0 + Ri0 li0 ≥ wi0 ,

(8)
(9)

and the non-negativity constraints
di , l0 , li0 ≥ 0.

(10)

We can define the net worth of the intermediary (next period) as wi0 ≡ Rl0 + Ri0 li0 , that
is, the sum of the proceeds from loans to households and firms (as equation (9) binds
at an optimal solution). Recall that we focus on the direct implementation in which the
A promise to pay Rb0 to households in state s0 next period, raises Π(s, s0 )b this period, and thus
P
the total proceeds from borrowing from households are s0 ∈S Π(s, s0 )b0 = E[b0 |z], and analogously a
promise to pay Ri0 b0i to intermediaries in state s0 next period, raises Π(s, s0 )b0i this period, and thus the
P
total proceeds from borrowing from intermediaries are s0 ∈S Π(s, s0 )b0i = E[b0i |z].
7
A model with two types of collateral constraints is also studied by Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) who consider international financing in a model in which firms can raise funds from
domestic and international financiers subject to separate collateral constraints.
6

9

intermediary only lends the additional amount that it can take as collateral from firms
to simplify the analysis (but this is without loss of generality).
We now define an equilibrium for our economy using this recursive notation. An
equilibrium determines both aggregate economic activity and the cost of intermediated
finance in our economy.
Definition 1 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium is an allocation x ≡ [d, k, b0 , b0i , w0 ] for the
representative firm and xi ≡ [di , l0 , li0 , wi0 ] for the representative intermediary for all dates
and states and a state-contingent interest rate process Ri0 for intermediated finance such
that (i) x solves the firm’s problem in (1)-(6) and xi solves the intermediary’s problem in
(7)-(10) and (ii) the market for intermediated finance clears in all dates and states
li0 = b0i .

(11)

Note that equilibrium promises are default free, as the promises satisfy the collateral
constraints (4) and (5), which ensure that neither firms nor financial intermediaries are
able to issue promises on which it is not credible to deliver. While this is of course the
implementation that we study throughout, we emphasize that the promises traded in our
economy are contingent claims and that these contingent claims may be implemented
in practice with noncontingent claims on which issuers are expected and in equilibrium
indeed do default (see Kehoe and Levine (2008) for an implementation with equilibrium
default in this spirit).
The first-order conditions of the firm’s problem in equations (1) to (6), which are
necessary and sufficient, can be written as
µ = 1 + νd ,

(12)
0

0

0

µ = E [β (µ [A fk (k) + (1 − δ)] + [λ θ +
0

0

µ = Rβµ + Rβλ ,

µ = Ri0 βµ0 + Ri0 βλ0i − Ri0 βνi0 ,

λ0i (θi

− θ)] (1 − δ)) |z] ,

(13)
(14)
(15)

µ0 = vw (w0 , z 0 ),

(16)

where the multipliers on the constraints (2) through (5) are µ, Π(z, z 0 )βµ0 , Π(z, z 0 )βλ0 , and
Π(z, z 0 )βλ0i , and νd and Π(z, z 0 )Ri0 βνi0 are the multipliers on the non-negativity constraints
on dividends and intermediated borrowing;8 the envelope condition is vw (w, z) = µ.
Define the down payment ℘ when the firm borrows the maximum amount it can from
households only as ℘ = 1 − R−1 θ(1 − δ).Similarly, define the down payment when the firm
We ignore the constraints that k ≥ 0 and w0 ≥ 0 as they are redundant, due to the Inada condition
and the fact that the firms can never credibly promise their entire net worth in any state next period
(which can be seen by combining (3) at equality with (4) and (5)).
8

10

borrows the maximum amount it can from both households (at interest rate R) and intermediaries (at state-contingent interest rate Ri0 ) as ℘i (Ri0 ) = 1 − [R−1 θ + E[(Ri0 )−1 |z](θi −
θ)](1 − δ) (illustrated at the bottom of Figure 1). Note that the down payment, at times
referred to as the margin requirement, is endogenous in our model. Using this definition
and equations (13) through (15) the firm’s investment Euler equation can then be written
concisely as

 0 0
µ A fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
z .
(17)
1≥E β
µ
℘i (Ri0 )
The first-order conditions of the intermediary’s problem in equations (7) to (10), which
are necessary and sufficient, can be written as
µi = 1 + η d ,

(18)

µi = Rβi µ0i + Rβi η 0 ,

(19)

µi = Ri0 βi µ0i + Ri0 βi ηi0 ,

(20)

µ0i = vi,w (wi0 , z 0 ),

(21)

where the multipliers on the constraints (8) and (9) are µi and Π(z, z 0 )βi µ0i , and ηd ,
Π(z, z 0 )Rβi η 0 , and Π(z, z 0 )Ri0 βi ηi0 are the multipliers on the non-negativity constraints on
dividends and direct and intermediated lending; the envelope condition is vi,w (wi , z) = µi .

2.3

Deriving collateral constraints from limited enforcement

This section describes an economy with limited enforcement which is equivalent to the
economy with collateral constraints described above. First, we describe the environment
with limited enforcement; second, we state the equivalent representation with collateral
constraints; and third we sketch our equivalence result which we formally state and prove
in Appendix A.9 This equivalence is significant for three reasons; it shows that (i) the
restriction to one-period ahead contracts is without loss of generality; (ii) intermediaries
must provide equipment loans, that is, loans against the additional amount of collateral
they can seize; and (iii) intermediaries must finance these loans out of their own net
worth. Thus, the economy with limited enforcement endogenizes three key properties of
the model with collateral constraints that we have simply assumed so far. That said, a
reader, who is primarily interested in the dynamic implications of our model, may choose
to skip this derivation and proceed directly to Section 3.
Suppose that the environment is as before, but that each period has two subperiods
which we refer to as morning and afternoon. The economy has limited participation by
9

In Appendix C, we establish this equivalence and characterize the equilibrium in a static environment.

11

households. All types of agents participate in markets in the afternoon. In the morning,
however, only entrepreneurs and intermediaries participate in markets but not households.
This is the key assumption affording intermediaries an enforcement advantage.
The economy has limited enforcement in the spirit of Kehoe and Levine (1993) except that firms or intermediaries that default cannot be excluded from participating in
financial and real asset markets going forward. Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013)
study this class of economies but consider an economy with only one type of lender with
deep pockets and hence take the interest rate as given. We build on their work by considering an economy with two types of lenders, intermediaries and households, of which
one has limited net worth, and extend their analysis by determining the interest rates on
intermediated finance in dynamic general equilibrium with aggregate fluctuations.
Specifically, enforcement is limited as follows: Firms can abscond both in the morning
and in the afternoon. In the morning, after cash flows are realized, firms can abscond
with all cash flows and a fraction 1 − θi of depreciated capital, where θi ∈ (0, 1). In
the afternoon, firms can abscond with cash flows net of payments made in the morning
and a fraction 1 − θ of depreciated capital, where θ ∈ (0, 1). Critically, we assume that
θi > θ, which means that firms can abscond with less capital in the morning than in
the afternoon. Intermediaries, too, can abscond in both subperiods, although there is
no temptation for intermediaries to do so in the morning, as they will at best receive
payments, and so we can ignore this constraint and focus just on the afternoon. In the
afternoon, intermediaries can abscond with any payments received in the morning. To
reiterate, neither firms nor intermediaries are excluded from markets after default.
The timing is summarized as follows (see Figure 2): Each afternoon, firms and intermediaries first decide whether to make their promised payments or default. Then, firms,
intermediaries, and households consume, invest, and borrow and lend. The next morning,
cash flows are realized. Firms decide whether to make their promised morning payments
or default. Firms carry over the cash flows net of payments made and intermediaries
carry over any funds received until the afternoon. No other decisions are made until the
afternoon.
It is critical that intermediated loans backed by the additional amount of collateral
that can be seized in the morning, that is, θi −θ, are in fact repaid in the morning, as by the
afternoon firms can abscond with that additional amount of capital and these payments
are no longer enforceable. This implies that these loans are explicitly short term, that is,
are extended in the afternoon and must be repaid in the morning and cannot be rolled
over. It moreover implies that these loans must be extended by intermediaries, as only
they participate in markets in the morning when the claims need to be enforced. And

12

finally it means that intermediaries must finance these loans out of their own net worth,
as they cannot in turn finance them by borrowing from households because they could
simply default on promises to repay the households in the afternoon and abscond with
the payments received in the morning.10
Financial intermediaries are able to refinance loans that they make to firms up to a
fraction θ of collateral which are repaid in the afternoon by borrowing from households.
In other words, intermediaries’ corporate loans up to fraction θ can be used as collateral
to borrow from households, whereas loans beyond that, for fraction θi − θ, have to be
financed by intermediaries themselves, that is, out of financial intermediary capital.11
As discussed before, one interpretation of the environment is that there are three types
of capital, working capital, equipment (fraction θi − θ), and structures (fraction θ) (see
Figure 1). Firms can always abscond with working capital. Firms cannot abscond with
equipment in the morning, but can abscond with equipment in the afternoon.12 Firms can
never abscond with structures. Structure loans can be provided by either intermediaries
or households. In contrast, equipment loans have to be extended by intermediaries, have
to be repaid in the morning, and have to be finance out of financial intermediary capital.
For our environment with two subperiods, we can now state the equivalent problem
with collateral constraints in sequence form. The firm’s problem (PCC
0 ) at time 0 in the
∞
CC
afternoon is to choose a sequence xCC
≡ {xCC
= (dt , kt , bt , bit , bat ), that is,
0
t }t=0 where xt
dividends dt , capital kt , state-contingent loans from households bt , and state-contingent
loans from intermediaries to be repaid in the morning bit and in the afternoon bat , given
10

If households were to participate in the morning as well, then they would have the same ability to
enforce claims as intermediaries, and since households have deep pockets, there would be no role for
intermediaries at all. If instead there were only one subperiod and default decisions would have to be
made simultaneously, and one were to assume that intermediaries nevertheless retained their repossession
advantage, this would not be sufficient, since intermediaries would have no incentive to default before
receiving any payments, and intermediaries could finance all corporate loans, including equipment loans,
with loans from households and hence would not need any intermediary capital; effectively, households
could use the enforcement ability of the intermediaries fully, and the economy would be equivalent to
an economy without subperiods and with only one type of lender, households, that can enforce up to
fraction θi . Thus, limited participation is essential as a foundation for the economy with two types of
collateral constraints.
11
In contrast, an intermediary could promise corporate loans backed by θi − θ to other intermediaries,
as these participate in markets in the morning as well, that is, the interbank market is frictionless in our
model, which is why we are able to consider a representative financial intermediary.
12
The idea is that unlike immovable assets such as structures which are always collateralizable, movable
assets such as machinery and equipment are bolted down in the morning and hence collateralizable then,
but are unbolted by the afternoon and hence can no longer serve as collateral.

13

net worth w0 and given the sequence of stochastic interest rates Ri0 ≡ {Rit }∞
t=0 , to solve
"∞
#
X
β t dt
(22)
max E0
xCC
0

t=0

subject to the budget constraints for the current and all subsequent dates and states,
that is, ∀t ≥ 1,
w0 ≥ d0 + k0 − (E0 [b1 + bi1 + ba1 ])

(23)

At f (kt−1 ) + kt−1 (1 − δ) ≥ dt + kt + R(bt + bat ) + Rit bit − (Et [bt+1 + bit+1 + bat+1 ]), (24)
the collateral constraints for loans to be repaid in the morning and afternoon, for all dates
and states,
(θi − θ)kt (1 − δ) ≥ Rit+1 bit+1 ,

θkt (1 − δ) ≥ R(bt+1 + bat+1 ),

(25)
(26)

and the non-negativity constraints for all dates and states
dt , kt , bit ≥ 0.

(27)

Note that there are no non-negativity constraints on (bt , bat ). We emphasize that there
are two types of collateral constraints restricting loans to be repaid in the morning and
afternoon separately. Given our definition of the stochastic discount factor and the statecontingent interest rates, it is the expected value of the claims issued against the next
period that enters the budget constraint in the current period. As we show in Appendix A,
the morning loans are provided by intermediaries at the equilibrium state-contingent
interest rate Rit , and afternoon loans by both households and intermediaries are provided
at interest rate R in equilibrium.13
CC
The intermediary’s problem (PCC
≡
i0 ) at time 0 in the afternoon is to choose xi0
∞
CC
{xCC
= (dit , lt , lit , lat ), that is, dividends dit , state-contingent loans to
it }t=0 where xit
households lt , and state-contingent loans to firms to be repaid in the morning lit and in
the afternoon lat , given net worth wi0 and given the stochastic interest rates Ri0 , to solve
"∞
#
X
max E0
β t dit
(28)
xCC
i0

t=0

13

Importantly, morning loans need to be repaid in the morning and postponing payment to the afternoon is not feasible. Morning loans can therefore not be simply rolled over but are extended every
afternoon and repaid every morning. Our model thus provides a novel notion of short-term financing.

14

subject to the budget constraints for the current and all subsequent dates and states,
wi0 ≥ di0 + E0 [l1 + li1 + la1 ],

(29)

0 ≥ dit − Rlt − Rit lit − Rlat + Et [lt+1 + lit+1 + lat+1 ],

∀t ≥ 1,

(30)

the collateral constraints for all dates and states
lt + lat ≥ 0,

(31)

and the non-negativity constraints for all dates and states
dit , lit ≥ 0.

(32)

Note that there are no non-negativity constraints on (lt , lat ). Critically, the collateral
constraints imply that intermediaries can borrow from households only to the extent that
they have corporate loans that pay off (in the afternoon) in that state. Intermediaries
cannot borrow against corporate loans that pay off in the morning. Again, the reason is
intermediaries themselves could abscond with such payments.
We define an equilibrium for the economy with collateral constraints as follows:
Definition 2 (Equilibrium with collateral constraints). An equilibrium with collateral
for the representative firm and xCC
constraint is an allocation xCC
i0 for the representative
0
CC
CC
intermediary and interest rates Ri0 such that: (i) x0 and xi0 solve the firm’s problem
and the intermediary’s problem PCC
PCC
i0 , respectively; and (ii) markets for intermediated
0
debt clear in each date and state, that is, bi0 = li0 and ba0 = la0 .
Observe that the firm’s problem PCC
and the intermediary’s problem PCC
0
i0 only determine the sum of bt + bat and lt + lat , respectively, for all t. Thus, we can set bat = lat = 0
without loss of generality, that is, we can assume that all afternoon loans are extended by
households only. With this assumption and defining the state variables, net worth, for the
firm and intermediary as wt ≡ At f (kt−1 ) + kt−1 (1 − δ) − Rbt − Rit bit and wit ≡ Rlt + Rit lit ,
respectively, we obtain the recursive formulation of the firm’s and intermediary’s problem
in equations (1)-(6) and (7)-(10), respectively.
Finally, let us sketch our main equivalence result (see Appendix A for the formal statement and proof). The economic intuition for the equivalence of the economy with limited
enforcement, described in detail in Appendix A, and the economy with collateral constraints discussed in this section is based on two main insights. First, limited enforcement
implies that the present value of any sequence of promises can never exceed the current
value of collateral, as otherwise delivering on these promises would not be optimal and the
borrower would default. Indeed, limited enforcement constraints are equivalent to a type
15

of collateral constraint on the present value of sequences of promises (see Theorem A.1).
Second, any sequence of promises satisfying these collateral constraints on present values
can be implemented with one-period ahead morning and afternoon claims subject to the
collateral constraints in (25) and (26) for the firm and (31) for the intermediary, respectively (see Theorem A.2). The economy with collateral constraints is tractable, in part
because we can hence restrict attention, without loss of generality, to complete markets
in one-period ahead morning and afternoon Arrow securities. An important subtlety in
establishing the equivalence is the determination of the present values of morning and
afternoon promises. The fact that afternoon promises are discounted to the previous afternoon by both households and intermediaries at the interest rate charged by households
obtains by no arbitrage. Morning promises are discounted to the previous afternoon at
the interest rate on intermediated finance, and, if necessary, discounted further back at
the interest rate charged by households.
This economy with limited enforcement and limited participation therefore endogenizes three key properties that we previously simply assumed in the economy with collateral constraints. Henceforth, we work with the equivalent, recursive formulation of the
economy with collateral constraints.

3

Intermediary capital and steady state

Intermediary capital is scarce in the model. We first show that, as a consequence, intermediated finance carries a premium and that that premium affects investment and hence
real economic activity. We then show that intermediaries are essential in our economy,
that is, allow the economy to achieve allocations that would not be achievable in their
absence. Finally, we show that in a steady state intermediary finance carries a positive
spread over direct finance and determine the steady state capitalization of intermediaries.

3.1

Cost of intermediated finance

Internal funds and intermediated finance are both scarce in our model and command
a premium as collateral constraints drive a wedge between the cost of different types
of finance. Since the firm would never be willing to pay more for intermediated finance
than the shadow cost of internal funds, the premium on internal finance is higher than the
premium on intermediated finance. Define the premium on internal funds ρ as 1/(R+ρ) ≡
E[βµ0 /µ|z], where µ = vw (w, z) is the marginal value of firm net worth and the righthand side is the conditional expectation of the firm’s stochastic discount factor. Define
the premium on intermediated finance ρi as 1/(R + ρi ) ≡ E[(Ri0 )−1 |z].
16

Proposition 1 (Premia on internal and intermediated finance). The premium on internal
finance ρ (weakly) exceeds the premium on intermediated finance ρi
ρ ≥ ρi ≥ 0,
and the two premia are equal, ρ = ρi , iff the collateral constraint for intermediated finance
does not bind for any state next period, that is, E[λ0i |z] = 0. Moreover, the premium on
internal finance is strictly positive, ρ > 0, iff the collateral constraint for direct finance
binds for some state next period, that is, E[λ0 |z] > 0.
When all collateral constraints are slack, there is no premium on either type of finance,
but typically the inequalities are strict and both premia are strictly positive, with the
premium on internal finance strictly exceeding the premium on intermediated finance.
The scarcity of internal and intermediated finance affects investment and in turn real
economic activity. To see this, we can adapt Jorgenson’s (1963) definition of the user
cost of capital to our model with intermediated finance, and rewrite the investment Euler
0
equation (17) as Ru = E[β µµ A0 fk (k)|z], where we define the user cost of capital u as
u≡r+δ+

ρ
ρi
(1 − θi )(1 − δ) +
(θi − θ)(1 − δ),
R+ρ
R + ρi

(33)

where r + δ is the frictionless user cost derived by Jorgenson and r ≡ R − 1. The user cost
of capital exceeds the user cost in the frictionless model, because part of investment needs
to be financed with internal funds which are scarce and hence command a premium ρ (the
second term on the right hand side) and part of investment is financed with intermediated
finance which commands a premium ρi , as the funds of intermediaries are scarce as well
(the last term on the right hand side).14 The cost of intermediated finance thus affects
investment; scarcer intermediary capital, that is, a higher premium on intermediated
finance, results in reduced corporate investment.

3.2

Intermediation is essential

Intermediary capital is positive in equilibrium. Specifically, we show that intermediaries
always keep strictly positive net worth, that is, they never choose to pay out their entire
14

Alternatively, the user cost can be written in a weighted average cost of capital representation as
u ≡ R/(R + ρ)(rw + δ) where the weighted average cost of capital rw is defined as rw ≡ (r + ρ)℘i (Ri0 ) +
rR−1 θ(1−δ)+(r +ρi )(R +ρi )−1 (θi −θ)(1−δ). The cost of capital rw is a weighted average of the fraction
of investment financed with internal funds which cost r +ρ (first term on the right hand side), the fraction
financed with households funds at rate r (second term), and the fraction financed with intermediated
funds at rate r + ρi (third term).

17

net worth as dividends if the economy is deterministic or eventually deterministic, that
is, deterministic from some finite time τ̄ onward.
Proposition 2 (Positive intermediary net worth). Financial intermediaries always have
strictly positive net worth in an equilibrium in a deterministic or eventually deterministic
economy.
The economic intuition is that if intermediary net worth went to zero, the marginal value
of intermediary net worth in equilibrium would go to infinity, because intermediaries
would earn a positive spread forever; as a consequence, intermediaries would never pay
out all their net worth as dividends.
Since intermediaries always have positive net worth, the interest rate on intermediated
finance Ri0 must in equilibrium be such that the representative firm never would want to
lend at that interest rate, as otherwise there would be no demand for intermediated
finance, as the following lemma shows:
Lemma 1. In any equilibrium, (i) the cost of intermediated funds (weakly) exceeds the
cost of direct finance, that is, Ri0 ≥ R; (ii) the multiplier on the collateral constraint for
direct finance (weakly) exceeds the multiplier on the collateral constraint for intermediated
finance, that is, λ0 ≥ λ0i ; and (iii) the constraint that the representative firm cannot lend
at Ri0 never binds, that is, νi0 = 0 w.l.o.g. Moreover, in a deterministic economy, (iv) the
constraint that the representative intermediary cannot borrow at Ri0 never binds, that is,
ηi0 = 0; and (v) the collateral constraint for direct financing always binds, that is, λ0 > 0.
We define the essentiality of intermediaries as follows:
Definition 3 (Essentiality of intermediation). Intermediation is essential if an allocation can be supported with a financial intermediary but not without.15
The above results together imply that financial intermediaries must always be essential. First note that firms are always borrowing the maximal amount from households,
since direct finance is relatively cheap. If firms moreover always borrow a positive amount
from intermediaries, then they must achieve an allocation that would not otherwise be
feasible. If Ri0 = R, then the firm must be collateral constrained in terms of intermediated finance, too, that is, borrow a positive amount. If Ri0 > R, then intermediaries lend
all their funds to the corporate sector and in equilibrium firms must be borrowing from
intermediaries. We have proved the following:
15

This definition is analogous to the definition of essentiality of money in monetary theory (see, e.g.,
Hahn (1973)).

18

Proposition 3 (Essentiality of intermediaries). In an equilibrium in a deterministic economy, financial intermediaries are always essential.
Thus, intermediation always plays a role in our economy.

3.3

Intermediary capitalization and spreads in steady state

In a steady state, intermediary capital is positive and so is the spread on intermediated
finance. We define a deterministic steady state as follows:
Definition 4 (Steady state). A deterministic steady state equilibrium is an equilibrium
0∗
∗ 0∗ 0∗
0∗
∗
with constant allocations, that is, x∗ ≡ [d∗ , k ∗ , b0∗ , b0∗
i , w ] and xi ≡ [di , l , li , wi ], and a
constant interest rate on intermediated finance Ri0∗ .
In the deterministic steady state, intermediaries are essential, have positive capital,
and spreads are positive.
Proposition 4 (Steady state). In a deterministic steady state, intermediaries are essential, have positive net worth, and pay positive dividends. The spread on intermediated
finance is Ri0∗ −R = βi−1 −R > 0. Firms borrow the maximal amount from intermediaries.
The relative (ex dividend) intermediary capitalization is
wi∗
βi (θi − θ)(1 − δ)
=
.
∗
w
℘i (βi−1 )
The relative (ex dividend) intermediary capitalization, that is, the ratio of the representative intermediary’s net worth (ex dividend) relative to the representative firm’s net
worth (ex dividend), is the ratio of the intermediary’s financing (per unit of capital) to
the firm’s down payment requirement (per unit of capital). In a steady state, the shadow
cost of internal funds of the firm is β −1 − 1 while the shadow cost of internal funds of
the intermediary is βi−1 − 1 and equals the net interest rate on intermediated finance
Ri0∗ − 1. Since βi > β, intermediated finance is cheaper than internal funds for firms in
the steady state, and firms borrow as much as they can from intermediaries. The spread
on intermediated finance is strictly positive in the steady state because intermediaries
are less patient than households. In the analysis of the equilibrium dynamics in the next
section we find that the spread on intermediated finance depends on the net worth of
both firms and intermediaries, and can be higher or lower than the steady state spread.
In a steady state equilibrium, financial intermediaries have positive capital and pay
out the steady state interest income as dividends d∗i = (Ri0∗ − 1)li0∗ . Both firms and
intermediaries have positive net worth in the steady state despite the fact that their rates
19

of time preference differ and both are less patient than households. The reason is that
firms have access to investment opportunities, but face collateral constraints and hence
need to finance part of their investment internally, and intermediaries can finance part of
firms’ investment more cheaply, but face collateral constraints themselves.
The determinants of the capital structure of firms and intermediaries are distinct. In a
steady state, firm leverage, that is, the total value of debt relative to total tangible assets,
is 1−℘i (Ri0∗ ) = (R−1 θ+(Ri0∗ )−1 (θi −θ))(1−δ) and is determined by the extent to which the
firm can collateralize tangible assets, as emphasized in Rampini and Viswanathan (2013).
In contrast, intermediary leverage can be defined in our indirect implementation as the
value of total direct finance divided by the total value of debt, that is, R−1 θ(1−δ) divided
by (R−1 θ + (Ri0∗ )−1 (θi − θ))(1 − δ), which is approximately equal to θ/θi . Intermediary
leverage is therefore determined by the relative enforcement ability of households and
intermediaries. The substantial difference in leverage between firms and intermediaries
in practice may simply be a consequence of the fact that their capital structures are
determined by different factors. Thus, the model has the potential to provide consistent
guidance on the financial structure of firms and intermediaries.
Financial intermediaries are essential in our economy. Intermediated finance is costly
and the spread on intermediated finance affects investment and aggregate economic output. Equilibrium determines the capitalization of both firms and intermediaries as well
as the spread on intermediated finance; in a steady state equilibrium financial intermediary capital is positive as is the spread on intermediated finance. Next we consider the
dynamics of our economy with intermediated finance, including the dynamics of firm and
intermediary net worth and the spread on intermediated finance.

4

Dynamics of intermediary capital

Our model allows the analysis of the joint dynamics of the capitalization of the corporate
and intermediary sector. The net worth of firms and intermediaries are the key state
variables determining dynamic intermediated loan demand and supply and the interest
rate on intermediated finance. The interaction between firms and intermediaries which
are both subject to financial constraints leads to subtle dynamics with several compelling
features. For example, spreads on intermediated finance are high when both firms’ and
intermediaries’ net worth is low and intermediaries are poorly capitalized even relative
to firms. A key feature is that intermediary capital accumulation is slow relative to
corporate net worth accumulation, at least early in a recovery. One reflection of this
is that the recovery from a credit crunch, that is, a drop in intermediary net worth, is
20

relative slow. Another reflection is that a simultaneous drop in the net worth of both
firms and intermediaries, that is, a downturn associated with a credit crunch, results
in an especially slow recovery, and that such recoveries can stall, with firm investment
and output remaining depressed for an extended period of time. We relate the dynamic
properties of our economy to stylized facts in the next section.

4.1

Dynamics of intermediary capital and spreads

Consider the recovery of the economy from an initial, low level of net worth of firms
and/or intermediaries, say after a downturn or credit crunch, that is, the deterministic
dynamics in an equilibrium converging to the steady state. We show that the equilibrium
dynamics evolve in two main phases, an initial one in which the corporate sector pays no
dividends and a second one in which the corporate sector pays dividends. Intermediaries
do not pay dividends until the steady state is reached, except that they may pay an
initial dividend, if they are initially well capitalized relative to the corporate sector, as
we discuss below.
Before stating these results formally (see Proposition 5 below), we provide an intuitive
discussion (see also Figure 3 for an illustration). Suppose both firms and intermediaries
are constrained, that is, the marginal value of net worth strictly exceeds 1; then neither
firms nor intermediaries pay dividends (Region ND in the proposition below). If the
firms’ collateral constraint on intermediated finance is slack, the intermediated interest
rate equals firms’ marginal levered return on capital (and exceeds the corporate discount
rate β −1 ), that is,

i
A0 fk w+w
+ (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
℘
0
,
Ri =
℘
0

0

i )(1−δ)
where we use the investment Euler equation (17), that is, 1 = β µµ A fk (k)+(1−θ
, and
℘i (Ri0 )
substitute out the stochastic discount factor using equation (15) and the fact that the
0
collateral constraint for intermediated finance is slack, which implies that β µµ = (Ri0 )−1 ,
and then rearrange. This case obtains when corporate net worth is sufficiently high
so that firms’ loan demand exceeds intermediaries loan supply, which is constrained by
intermediary net worth. Intermediaries then lend their entire net worth wi to firms, which
in turn use their own net worth w plus loans from intermediaries to finance the fraction
i
of investment not financed by households, that is, k = w+w
. We observe that in this case
℘
the intermediated interest rate decreases in both firm and intermediary net worth since
increased investment reduces the marginal return on capital.
If the firms’ collateral constraint on intermediated finance binds instead, that constraint determines the interest rate which is then strictly lower than firms’ marginal

21

levered return on capital; specifically,
Ri0

= (θi − θ)

w
wi

+1
℘

(1 − δ),

where we use the collateral constraint (4) at equality, that is, Ri0 b0i = (θi − θ)k(1 − δ)
i
and in equilibrium b0i = li0 = wi . Notice that in this
together with the fact that k = w+w
℘
case, the ratio of the net worth of firms relative to intermediaries matters, and remarkably
the intermediated interest rate increases in firms’ net worth keeping intermediary net
worth the same; the economic intuition is that higher firm net worth raises investment
and thus the collateral firms are able to pledge, increasing the equilibrium interest rate.
If the ratio wwi is sufficiently low, loan demand can be so low that the interest rate on
intermediated finance is below not just the firms’ discount rate but also intermediaries’
discount rate (βi−1 ). Indeed, the interest rate on intermediated finance can be as low
as R, the discount rate of households; this can happen when intermediaries save net
worth by lending to households, because current corporate loan demand is very low but
expected to increase as firms recover. Throughout Region ND, firm net worth must
accumulate faster than intermediary net worth because firms’ net worth grows at their
average levered return on capital (which exceeds their marginal levered return on capital)
whereas intermediaries accumulate net worth at the intermediated interest rate, which,
as just argued, is weakly below firms’ marginal levered return on capital.
Suppose now that firms pay dividends but not intermediaries (Region D in the proposition below). If the firms’ collateral constraint on intermediated finance is slack, the
intermediated interest rate must again equal firms’ marginal levered return on capital
which in this case equals firms’ discount rate, that is,
Ri0

 µ0 −1
A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
,
= β −1 =
= β
µ
℘

as µ = µ0 = 1 since firms pay dividends. This case obtains when firms’ net worth is
relatively high while intermediaries’ net worth does not suffice to meet the corporate loan
demand at the intermediated interest rate Ri0 = β −1 . In this phase, investment is constant
at k̄ and financed with firms’ ex dividend net worth wex and intermediary loans, that is,
℘k̄ = wex +wi ; as intermediaries accumulate net worth with the law of motion wi0 = β −1 wi
and progressively meet the corporate loan demand, firms gradually relever and draw down
0
w0
wex
, as
their (ex dividend) net worth by paying dividends. Therefore, wii = β −1 > 1 > w
ex
intermediaries accumulate net worth while firms draw it down; this is the time when
financial intermediaries are “catching up.” If firms’ collateral constraint binds, which
happens once intermediaries’ net worth is sufficient to meet loan demand at β −1 , the
22

collateral constraint (4) and firms’ investment Euler equation (17) jointly determine the
intermediated interest rate, and, as intermediary net worth increases, the intermediated
interest rate falls and investment increases. From the collateral constraint (4), Ri0 =
wex
+1

(θi − θ) wi℘ (1 − δ), we see that as the intermediated interest rate falls, the (ex dividend)
net worth of firms relative to intermediaries must fall, too. Thus, in this phase, while
firms’ and intermediaries both accumulate net worth, intermediaries accumulate net worth
faster than firms, as firms continue to relever; intermediaries continue to “catch up” until
the steady state is reached.
Intermediaries do not pay dividends until the steady state is reached with one exception. If the initial corporate net worth is so low, that intermediaries are well capitalized
relative to the corporate sector and the interest rate is below intermediaries’ discount
rate due to the limited corporate loan demand, then intermediaries may pay an initial
dividend if they expect corporate loan demand to be depressed for an extended period of
time. But after such an initial dividend, intermediaries do not resume payout until such
time as the steady state is reached. We emphasize, however, that, in contrast, firms do
initiate payout before the economy reaches the steady state.
The following proposition and lemma state these results formally and Figure 3 illustrates the pertinent regions of firm net worth w and intermediary net worth wi :
Proposition 5 (Deterministic dynamics). Given w and wi , there exists a unique deterministic dynamic equilibrium which converges to the steady state characterized by a no
dividend region (ND) and a dividend region (D) (which is absorbing) as follows:
Region ND wi ≤ wi∗ (w.l.o.g.) and w < w̄(wi ), and (i) d = 0 (µ > 1), (ii) the cost of
intermediated finance is





w+wi
0
w



+
(1
−
θ)(1
−
δ)
A fk
+
1
℘
wi
0
,
Ri = max R, min (θi − θ)
(1 − δ),



℘
℘

(iii) investment k = (w + wi )/℘ if Ri0 > R and k = w/℘i (R) if Ri0 = R, and
(iv) w0 /wi0 > w/wi , that is, firm net worth increases faster than intermediary net
worth.

Region D w ≥ w̄(wi ) and (i) d > 0 (µ = 1).
For wi ∈ (0, w̄i ), (ii) Ri0 = β −1 , (iii) k = k̄ which solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 −
0
δ)]/℘, (iv) wex
/wi0 < wex /wi , that is, firm net worth (ex dividend) increases more
slowly than intermediary net worth, and (v) w̄(wi ) = ℘k̄ − wi .
23

For wi ∈ [w̄i , wi∗ ), (ii) Ri0 = (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k/wi , (iii) k solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k) + (1 −
0
θ)(1 − δ)]/(℘ − wi /k), (iv) wex
/wi0 < wex /wi , that is, firm net worth (ex dividend)
increases more slowly than intermediary net worth, and (v) w̄(wi ) = ℘i (Ri0 )k.
For wi ≥ wi∗ , w̄(wi ) = w∗ and the steady state of Proposition 4 is reached with
d = w − w∗ and di = wi − wi∗ .
The representative intermediary’s dividend policy is characterized as follows:
Lemma 2 (Initial intermediary dividend). The representative intermediary pays at most
an initial dividend and no further dividends until the steady state is reached. If wi > wi∗ ,
the initial dividend is strictly positive.
It is worth emphasizing the predictions of our model for the relative speed of adjustment of the two endogenous state variables. In Region ND firm net worth accumulation is
faster while in Region D, when firms pay dividends, intermediaries accumulate net worth
more quickly. Both of these features are in a sense a consequence of the fact that intermediaries accumulate net worth more slowly in our model. To understand the economic
intuition consider Region ND when both firms and intermediaries are constrained and
do not pay dividends. The dynamics of financial intermediary net worth are relatively
simple, since as long as they do not pay dividends (which is the case until the steady
state is reached), the intermediaries’ net worth evolves according to the law of motion
wi0 = Ri0 wi , that is, intermediary net worth next period is simply intermediary net worth
this period plus interest income. When no dividends are paid, intermediaries lend out all
their funds at the (equilibrium) intermediated interest rate Ri0 , and hence their net worth
grows at the (gross) rate Ri0 . Moreover, the intermediated interest rate is (weakly) less
than firms’ marginal levered return on capital, which in turn in less than firms’ average
levered return on capital which equals the growth rate of firms’ net worth, that is,
wi0
A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)
w0
= Ri0 ≤
< .
wi
℘
w
This is why the net worth of the corporate sector grows faster than the net worth of the
intermediary sector in this phase.
One reflection of this difference in net worth growth is that the corporate sector
recovers faster, in the sense that firms initiate dividends before intermediaries do. Once
firms pay dividends (in Region D), it is now the intermediary sector that accumulates net
worth faster as it catches up; so the difference in the growth rate of net worth accumulation
across the two sectors switches sign. Indeed, as the intermediaries continue to accumulate
net worth, the corporate sector relevers and its net worth may temporarily shrink.
24

Below we use this analytical characterization of the dynamic equilibrium to study the
dynamics of the economy in response to an initial drop in corporate net worth (a “downturn”), an initial drop in the net worth of financial intermediaries (a “credit crunch”),
and a downturn associated with a credit crunch, that is, a simultaneous drop in both
corporate and intermediary net worth.

4.2

Dynamics of a downturn without credit crunch

Suppose the economy experiences a downturn, which we model as an unanticipated onetime drop in corporate net worth w. We consider a downturn without a credit crunch, that
is, assume that intermediaries’ net worth remains unchanged at its ex-dividend steady
state level. Figure 4 illustrates the dynamics of firm and intermediary net worth, the interest rate on intermediated finance, intermediary lending, and investment following such
a downturn (at time 0). In terms of Proposition 5, the recovery evolves in several phases,
as the net worths of the two sectors transit through various parts of first Region ND and
then Region D.
On impact the drop in corporate net worth results in a drop in corporate loan demand, leaving intermediaries initially relatively well capitalized. Indeed, as can be seen in
Panel A and Panel B2 of Figure 4, intermediaries respond by paying an initial dividend,
as their previous net worth is much more than firms’ reduced loan demand can accommodate. Moreover, intermediaries do not pay out all excess funds but conserve some net
worth to meet future loan demand by lending some of their funds to households; in fact,
the intermediaries’ lending to households exceeds their lending to the corporate sector
early on (see Panel B3). Because intermediaries lend to households at the margin, the
equilibrium spread on intermediated finance is zero, that is, Ri0 = R (see Panel B1); in
this sense, intermediaries are holding “cash” at an interest rate below their discount rate
for some time. The reason why intermediaries are willing to hold cash at a rate of return below their rate of time preference is because they anticipate an eventual rise in the
intermediated interest rate above their rate of time preference, at least for some time.
Intermediaries accumulate net worth at rate R in this phase while the corporate sector
accumulates net worth at a faster rate, given the high marginal levered return on capital;
thus, the net worth of the corporate sector rises relative to the net worth of intermediaries.
As firms’ net worth rises, so do corporate investment k = w/℘i (R) as well as corporate
loan demand. In Figure 4, this phase last from time 0 to time 4.
Eventually, the increased net worth of the corporate sector raises loan demand to the
point where intermediated finance becomes scarce and the intermediated interest rate
rises (time 5 in the figure). In the case considered in Figure 4, since the initial drop
25

in net worth is not too large, it turns out that the cost of intermediated finance stays
below β −1 and firms happen to initiate dividend payments at the same time; that is, the
economy has reaches Region D at time 5. Firms’ collateral constraint continues to bind
and, together with firms’ investment Euler equation, jointly determines the intermediated
interest rate and investment. Although firms are paying dividends from time 5 onwards,
neither investment nor intermediaries have fully recovered. As intermediaries continue to
accumulate net worth between time 5 and time 8, intermediary loan supply increases and
the intermediated interest rate drops. In response, firms continue to increase investment.
Intermediaries’ net worth reaches its (ex dividend) steady state value at time 8 and the
economy is back in steady state (as described in Proposition 4) from then on, with the
cost of intermediated finance equal to βi−1 , the unconstrained intermediaries’ shadow cost
for providing corporate loans.
We emphasize two key aspects of the dynamics of intermediary capital illustrated by
the recovery from a downturn traced out here, beyond the fact that intermediary and
firm net worth affect the dynamics jointly. First, intermediary capital accumulates more
slowly than corporate net worth as long as both firms and intermediaries are constrained.
Second, when the corporate sector is temporarily relatively poorly capitalized, the interest
rate on intermediated finance is low and intermediaries conserve net worth by lending to
households at a low interest rate to meet the higher subsequent corporate loan demand.
Of course, the second observation is a reflection of the relatively slow pace of intermediary
capital accumulation as well.

4.3

Dynamics of a credit crunch

Suppose the economy experiences a credit crunch, which we model here as an unanticipated one-time drop in intermediary net worth wi . We assume that the economy is
otherwise deterministic and is in steady state when the credit crunch hits with corporate net worth at its (ex-dividend) steady state value. Figure 5 illustrates the effects of
such a credit crunch on interest rates, net worth, intermediary lending, and investment.
The drop in intermediary net worth results in a reduction in lending and an increase in
the spread on intermediated finance on impact (see time 0 in Panel B1).16 Moreover, the
higher cost of intermediated finance increases the user cost of capital (33) as the premium
on internal finance increases as well and so the investment Euler equation implies that
investment drops (see Panel B4). Hence, a credit crunch has real effects in our model.
Due to the limited supply of intermediated finance firms are forced to delever at time 0,
16

If the credit crunch would hit before dividends are paid, then firms and intermediaries could absorb
the shock by cutting dividends, at least partially, reducing its impact.

26

replacing reduced intermediary loans with internal funds. Given their limited internal
funds, firms are moreover forced to downsize.
At time 1, the corporate sector reaccumulates net worth leading to an initial partial
recovery in investment and output; indeed, firms reinitiate dividend payments at time 1.
However, the economy and especially intermediaries have not fully recovered at this point,
as intermediary net worth remains well below its steady state level. The recovery stalls,
potentially for a long time (from time 1 to time 14 in Figure 5), in the sense that the
interest rate on intermediated finance remains elevated at Ri0 = β −1 > Ri0∗ = βi−1 and
investment remains constant below its steady state level at k̄ < k ∗ . The reason is that
firms’ user cost of capital remains elevated despite the fact that the corporate sector is
well capitalized and paying dividends, as intermediaries’ capacity to extend relatively
cheap financing is reduced. Thus, the real effects in our model are persistent, even if the
corporate sector recapitalizes relatively quickly, and the full recovery of the real economy
is delayed. We emphasize that while firms seem to be well capitalized because they are
paying dividends at this point, the economy has not fully recovered.
The recovery only resumes once intermediaries accumulate sufficient capital to meet
corporate loan demand at Ri0 = β −1 . At that point, intermediary interest rates start to
fall and investment begins to recover (time 15 to 18); as the interest rate on intermediated
finance is now below the shadow cost of internal funds of the corporate sector, the collateral constraint binds again. Investment increases due to the reduced cost of intermediated
financing and the recovery resumes. Eventually (at time 18), intermediaries accumulate
their steady state level of net worth and the cost of intermediated finance reaches βi−1 ,
the unconstrained intermediaries’ shadow cost of providing loans, and investment recovers
fully; and finally the steady state is reached (at time 19).
We emphasize two key additional aspects of the dynamics of our economy. First,
the recovery from a credit crunch can be much delayed, or can stall, due to the slow
accumulation of intermediary net worth; thus, one feature of a credit crunch in our model
is the persistence of the real effects. Second, the response of firms’ to a credit crunch is
also striking. In response to a credit crunch, firms cut dividends to substitute retained
earnings for intermediated loans. That is, firms delever and temporarily accumulate more
net worth than they retain in the steady state, and only as the intermediaries recover, do
firms gradually relever. The interaction between the two sectors which are both subject
to financial constraint leads to rich implications for economic dynamics.

27

4.4

Effects of severity of credit crunch

Suppose the economy simultaneously experiences a downturn in corporate net worth and
a credit crunch. Figure 6 illustrates the effect of the severity of the credit crunch itself
on the depth and protractedness of the macroeconomic downturn, the joint dynamics
of corporate and intermediary net worth accumulation, and spreads on intermediated
finance. We find that downturns associated with a credit crunch are more severe and more
protracted, and feature higher spreads and slower corporate net worth accumulation.
Figure 6 traces out three scenarios: a downturn in corporate net worth without a credit
crunch (solid), and downturns in corporate net worth associated with a moderate and a
severe credit crunch (dotted and dashed, respectively). The downturn in corporate net
worth without a credit crunch is the baseline scenario analyzed in Section 4.1 and Figure 4
above. As noted there, in this scenario, the intermediary is initially well-capitalized and
can hence accommodate the reduced corporate loan demand easily; spreads are initially
low, as intermediaries conserve net worth by lending to households. As corporate loan
demand increases and the economy recovers, spreads begin to rise and eventually fall
back to the steady state level. The corporate sector accumulates net worth faster and
reinitiates dividends sooner than the intermediary sector.
A moderate credit crunch slows the recovery of investment and intermediary lending
(see Panel B4 and B3, respectively), and raises spreads earlier and to a higher level (see
Panel B1).17 Corporate net worth accumulation is also slowed somewhat and the reinitiation of corporate dividends is delayed; moreover, the corporate sector first accumulates
net worth, and then partially draws down its net worth as intermediaries recover (see
Panel B2). Moreover, the recovery stalls, albeit briefly, when the corporate sector has
recovered to the point where it initiates dividends, but the intermediary sector still has
not accumulated sufficient net worth to meet loan demand at Ri0 = β −1 (see the leveling
off of investment and spreads from time 6 to 8 in Panels B4 and B1). Once intermediaries
accumulate enough net worth to accommodate loan demand at an interest rate equal to
the corporate sector’s discount rate, the recovery resumes.
17

Indeed, spreads rise over a couple of periods (from time 1 to time 3); at time 2 the corporate
sector borrows all the funds intermediaries are able to lend and invests k = (w + wi )/℘. The interest
rate on intermediated finance is determined by the collateral constraint, which is binding, and equals
Ri0 = (θi − θ) (w/wi + 1) (1 − δ)/℘; and since corporate net worth increases faster than intermediary net
worth, the interest rate on intermediated finance rises in this phase. As the corporate sector accumulates
net worth, it can pledge more and the equilibrium interest rate rises. As the net worth and investment
of the corporate sector continues to rise faster than intermediary net worth, eventually the increase in
firms’ collateral means that firms’ ability to pledge no longer constrains their ability to raise intermediated
finance, at which point spreads start to drop.

28

A severe credit crunch magnifies all these effects, amplifying the downturn, making it
more protracted, leading to longer stalls in the recovery, and raising spreads. Investment
initially drops more, and then recovers more slowly, stalling for an extend period of
time (time 7 through 16) before eventually recovering (see Panel B4). The spread on
intermediated finance shoots up on impact, because intermediated finance is limited not
by corporate loan demand but by the supply of intermediated funds;18 the spread is
hence determined by the levered marginal product of capital, which is high because the
corporate sector is financially constrained.19 As both sectors accumulate net worth, the
spread comes down from its initial highs, but stalls once the corporate sector starts to
pay dividends. Indeed, the spread stays at this elevated level while the intermediary
sector reaccumulates net worth, and returns to its steady state level only later on (see
Panel B1). Intermediary lending is also noteworthy, as it remains substantially below
the steady state level for an extended amount of time (see Panel B3). Finally, note
that the corporate sector temporarily accumulates more net worth than in the steady
state, a result of corporate deleveraging, as firms substitute internal funds for the lack of
intermediated finance for some time.

4.5

Net worth dynamics in bank-dependent economy

Suppose now that the economy is more bank dependent; specifically, consider an economy
with a higher value of θi . Recall from Proposition 4 that this implies that the ratio of
intermediary net worth to corporate net worth in the steady state is higher, that is, a larger
fraction of investment is financed by intermediaries. How does such a bank-dependent
economy respond to downturns with and without a credit crunch? The dynamic response
of such an economy is illustrated in Figure 7. To facilitate the comparison, we keep all the
parameters unchanged from the previous figures, except for two: first, we raise θi from
0.8 to 0.9 and second, we reduce the productivity A0 to keep steady state investment k ∗
unchanged. Moreover, in a steady state wi∗ +w∗ = ℘k ∗ , and thus the sum of corporate and
intermediary net worth is unchanged as well, facilitating the comparison. We consider the
same three scenarios as in Figure 6, a downturn without a credit crunch (solid), as well as
downturns with a moderate and a severe credit crunch (dotted and dashed, respectively).
Several features of the response are worth noting: First, the severity of the credit
crunch itself has a more significant impact on the initial drop in investment (see Panel B4).
Moreover, investment is more substantially reduced both early in the downturn and the
18

Since intermediaries lend out their entire net worth wi to the corporate sector, the law of motion of
investment is k = (w + wi )/℘.
19
That is, the equilibrium interest rate on intermediated finance is Ri0 = [A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘.

29

recovery stalls at a lower level of investment. Further, and perhaps most significantly,
the downturn is also more protracted with investment reduced, intermediated finance
depressed (see Panel B3), and spreads elevated (see Panel B1) for longer. The effects
on net worth of the two sectors are also magnified: intermediary net worth takes a long
time to recover and the corporate sector temporarily accumulates substantially more net
worth than it has in the steady state, again in an effort to substitute internal funding for
the lack of intermediated finance (see Panel B2).
Our theory predicts that in a bank-dependent economy, downturns associated with a
credit crunch are more severe and more protracted, with slower net worth accumulation
and longer stalls of the recovery at lower levels of investment. Thus, the recovery from
crises in more bank-dependent economies such as Europe or Japan may be substantially
different from, and more sluggish than, that in less bank-dependent economies such as
the U.S., where it may be typically more swift.

4.6

Comovement of firm and intermediary capital

The focus of our analysis thus far has been on the deterministic dynamics following unanticipated drops in net worth. Our model however encompasses economies with uncertainty
enabling the analysis of equilibrium risk management of shocks to net worth. Specifically,
we can ask whether we should expect the corporate sector and the intermediary sector to
be constrained at the same time, as arguably is the case in downturns associated with a
credit crunch in practice. In other words, should we expect the net worth (or the marginal
value of net worth) of firms and intermediaries to comove?
We consider this question in a stochastic economy which is deterministic from time 1
onward. Importantly, this allows both firms and intermediaries to engage in risk management at time 0 and hedge the net worth available to them in different states s0 ∈ S
at time 1. We first show that the representative firm optimally engages in incomplete
risk management, that is, the collateral constraint for direct finance against at least one
state s0 ∈ S must bind. We then provide sufficient conditions for the marginal value of
net worth of the representative firm and the representative intermediary to comove.
Proposition 6 (Comovement of the value of firm and intermediary capital). In an economy that is deterministic from time 1 onward and has constant expected productivity, (i)
the representative firm must be collateral constrained for direct finance against at least
one state at time 1; (ii) the marginal value of firm and intermediary net worth comove,
in fact µ(s0 )/µ(s0+ ) = µi (s0 )/µi (s0+ ), ∀s0 , s0+ ∈ S, if λi (s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. (iii) Suppose
moreover that there are just two states, that is, S = {ŝ0 , š0 }. If only one of the collateral
30

constraints for direct finance binds, λ(š0 ) > 0 = λ(ŝ0 ), then the marginal values must
comove, µ(ŝ0 ) > µ(š0 ) and µi (ŝ0 ) ≥ µi (š0 ).
Proposition 6 implies that the marginal values of firm and intermediary net worth
comove, for example, when the intermediary has very limited net worth and hence the
collateral constraints for intermediated finance are slack for all states. They also comove
if the firm hedges one of two possible states, as then the intermediary effectively must be
hedging that state, too. Thus, the marginal value of intermediary net worth may be high
exactly when the marginal value of firm net worth is high, too. The marginal values may
however move in opposite directions, for example, if a high realization of productivity
raises firm net worth substantially, which lowers the marginal product of capital and
hence the marginal value of firm net worth, while it may raise loan demand substantially
and hence raise the marginal value of intermediary net worth.
Comovement between the value of corporate and intermediary net worth is thus plausible but not a foregone conclusion. The nature of economic shocks affecting net worth
may also play a role. Throughout we have considered stochastic total factor productivity,
which directly affects corporate net worth only. Alternatively, one could easily adapt
the model to consider stochastic depreciation of capital, which would directly affect both
corporate and intermediary net worth; in fact, stochastic depreciation shocks would arguably affect intermediary net worth relatively more, as the assets of intermediaries are
collateralized claims. Depreciation shocks are one way to model shocks to the value of
collateral. A shock to total factor productivity may then result in a downturn without
a credit crunch, whereas a depreciation shock to the value of capital may result in a
downturn associated with a credit crunch. We leave an explicit analysis of a model with
both stochastic productivity and stochastic depreciation to future work.

5

Revisiting evidence on crises with theory

Our model provides guidance on the joint dynamics of the macro economy and the financial sector. We use the model and the analysis of the net worth dynamics in the
previous section to revisit three main stylized facts about downturns associated with financial crises, namely their severity, their protractedness, and the relation between the
severity of the financial crisis itself and the severity and persistence of the downturn.

31

5.1

Fact 1: Severity of downturns associated with financial crises

Prior empirical research shows that downturns associated with financial crises are more
severe. Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) find that “the average peak-to-trough decline for
the US real per capita GDP across nine major crises is about 9 percent.” Similarly,
using panel data for a large set of countries, Cerra and Saxena (2008) find that “banking
crises lead to severe output loss [even in high-income countries]” (page 442). Finally,
Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016) conclude that “[o]ur results affirm that financial crises
do result in deeper and more protracted recessions” (page 15).20
Thus, the evidence shows a first stylized fact, namely that downturns associated with
financial crises are more severe in the sense that output losses are larger, suggesting
amplification of macroeconomic shocks. The evidence also shows that such downturns
are more severe in the sense of being more protracted, but while these two notions of
severity are often commingled in the literature, we treat their persistence as a separate
stylized fact which we discuss in the next subsection. Comparing the dynamics of our
model without and with a credit crunch in Figures 4 and 6, we find that downturns
associated with a financial crisis are more severe, in the sense that output drops by more
on impact and that output is lower at any fixed horizon. That said, the initial effect of
the credit crunch on output can be muted in the model if the drop in corporate net worth
reduces loan demand so much that loan demand drops below (ex-dividend) intermediary
net worth.

5.2

Fact 2: Slow recoveries after financial crises

The evidence also shows that recoveries after financial crises are protracted. Reinhart and
Rogoff (2014) state that “a significant part of the costs of [systemic banking] crises lies in
the protracted and halting nature of the recovery” (page 50). Moreover, they argue that
”[t]he halting, tentative nature of the post-crisis recoveries (even in cases where there is a
20

We recognize that the conclusions regarding these stylized facts in part turn on the assumptions made
for measurement, for example, the severity cutoff used in defining a crisis, the definition of a recovery
(return to the previous output level or trend), adjustment for population growth, the definition of the
start of the episode (previous output peak or start of the financial disruption), and finally whether the
data includes emerging economies and pre-war episodes. Indeed, some recent studies provide a contrarian
view. For example, Bordo and Haubrich (2012) find “generally . . . rapid recoveries” with the exception of
the 1930s, 1990s, and the present recovery. Similarly, Romer and Romer (2015) find that “output declines
following financial crises in modern advanced countries are highly variable, on average only moderate,
and often temporary,” (abstract) using a new, qualitative measure of financial distress with a relatively
fine scale, thus, challenging the conventional wisdom that “the aftermath of financial crises is typically
severe and long-lasting” (page 1). We match the stylized facts that are the mainstream view.

32

sharp—but not sustained—growth rebound) is evidenced in the relatively high incidence
of double dips (or secondary downturns before the previous peak is reached)” (page 52).
They find that “[o]n average it takes about eight years to reach the pre-crisis level of
income,” with a median time of about 6.5 years, and that about 45% of the 100 crises
they study are associated with a double dip, and about two-thirds of the most severe crises
involve double-dips. Cerra and Saxena (2008) find “that the large output loss associated
with financial crises ... is highly persistent” (page 456); specifically, they show that the
output loss on impact of a banking crisis is about 7.5 percent and the output loss at a
ten-year horizon exceeds 6 percent, that is, is extremely persistent.
Our second stylized fact is therefore the persistence of downturns associated with financial crises; recoveries are slow and frequently stall, at least temporarily. The dynamics
of our model in Figure 5 highlight the protractedness of a credit crunch: the recovery
of output after a credit crunch is slower than after a regular downturn (compare to Figure 4). In addition, spreads remain elevated for an extended period of time. This is due
to the relative sluggishness of intermediary net worth accumulation.
Moreover, when both corporate and intermediary net worth drop at the same time,
that is, in a downturn associated with a credit crunch, downturns are more prolonged
(see Figure 6) and the recovery can stall, potentially for an extended period of time,
due to the joint dynamics of corporate and intermediary net worth; note that such stalls
can occur even in cases in which the initial rebound of output is quite brisk, consistent
with the data. The model therefore captures what Reinhart and Rogoff call the “halting,
tentative nature” of such recoveries. We are not aware of other models that predict such
stalls in the economic recovery post crises.

5.3

Fact 3: Impact of severity of financial crises

Further, the evidence suggests that how severe the financial crises per se is plays an
important role. Romer and Romer (2015) find that “one factor that appears to be important to the variation [in the aftermath of crises] is the severity and persistence of the
crisis itself” (page 41). For example, “Japan’s dismal economic performance ... [may be]
related to the fact that the distress was particularly severe and long-lasting” (page 38),
and for the 2008 Crisis they argue that “the extreme nature of the recent distress is one
likely reason for the severe and continuing economic weakness” (page 41-42). In a similar
spirit, Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016) measure the severity of a crisis using the spread
between high-yield and low-yield bonds, and conclude that “recessions in the aftermath
of financial crises are severe and protracted” and that furthermore “the severity of the
subsequent crisis can be forecast by the size of [changes in the spread]” (abstract).
33

Thus, the third stylized fact is that the severity of the financial crises itself in turn
affects both the severity and protractedness of the downturn; in other words, Fact 1
(“severity”) and Fact 2 (“protractedness”) are a matter of degree. Our model captures
this fact as demonstrated in Figure 6: the more severe the drop in intermediary net worth,
the larger the drop in output and the more protracted the recovery; indeed, recoveries
from severe financial crises are more protracted in the sense that (i) the initial recovery
is slower, (ii) the recovery stalls for longer, and (iii) the economy takes longer to recover
fully.
The dynamics of spreads also have empirically plausible features: spreads “blow out”
when the financial crisis is more severe, recover relatively quickly initially, but then remain elevated and recover fully only after an extended period of time. For spreads,
Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016) find that “the start of a crisis is associated with a spike
in spreads” and “a spike in spreads shifts down the conditional distribution of output
growth, fattening the lower tail” (page 17). Our model captures these observations in
two ways: first, more severe downturns are associated with higher spreads, and, second,
spreads spike at the beginning of very severe crises.
The measurement in the aforementioned studies is predicated on the assumption that
there are two separate driving forces, one for downturns and one for financial crises. Considering the effects of a credit crunch or financial crisis on aggregate dynamics implicitly
assumes that the financial disruption is a separate, exogenous force, rather than simply
an endogenous reflection of a single aggregate source of fluctuations. Understanding these
facts therefore calls for a model with two state variables, one for the corporate sector and
one for financial intermediaries, which is the type of model that we provide.

6

Conclusion

We develop a dynamic theory of financial intermediation and show that the capital of
both the financial intermediary and corporate sector affect real economic activity, such
as firm investment, financing, and the spread between intermediated and direct finance.
We derive collateral constraints from an explicit model of limited enforcement in which
financial intermediaries have a collateralization advantage due to limited participation by
households. Financial intermediaries participate in markets at all times allowing them to
enforce claims when more of the capital is collateralizable. This advantage in enforcement
enables financial intermediaries to lend more than households, but they cannot in turn
finance such loans by borrowing from households and hence have to finance these loans
out of their own net worth; we argue that this is why financial intermediaries need capital.
34

In our view, the enforcement of payment is a key rationale for the existence of financial
intermediaries, in addition to the monitoring and liquidity provision motives emphasized
in the previous literature.
The determinants of capital structure of firms and intermediaries in the model are
distinct. Firms’ capital structure is determined by the extent to which firms can pledge
their tangible assets required for production as collateral to intermediaries and households. In contrast, intermediaries’ capital structure is determined by the extent to which
their collateralized loans can be collateralized themselves, that is, by the difference between the intermediaries’ and households’ ability to collateralize claims. In other words,
firms issue promises against tangible assets whereas intermediaries issue promises against
collateralized claims, which are in turn backed by tangible assets. Thus, given these distinct determinants, firm leverage may be substantially lower than intermediary leverage
as is the case in practice.
Central to the aggregate implications is the fact that our model features two state
variables, the net worth of the corporate and intermediary sector. It is the joint dynamics
of these two state variables that result in the compelling dynamics of the model. In
downturns associated with a credit crunch, while the initial recovery can be quite brisk,
the recovery can stall as the intermediary sector is more slow to recover; thus, investment
and macroeconomic activity may remain depressed, and spreads elevated, potentially for
a prolonged period of time, even if the corporate sector seems to have recovered and
pays dividends. In a downturn without a credit crunch, corporate loan demand falls, and
intermediaries may hold cash to meet future corporate loan demand and thus spreads
may initially be very low. A key factor driving these results is that intermediary net
worth accumulates more slowly than corporate net worth in the model.
Our model is consistent with three key stylized facts about macroeconomic downturns
associated with a credit crunch, namely, their severity, their protractedness, and the fact
that the severity of the credit crunch itself in turn affects the severity and the persistence
of the downturn. Most uniquely, our model captures the tentative and halting nature
of recoveries from such episodes, a fact emphasized by Reinhart and Rogoff (2014). Our
model provides a useful framework for the analysis of the dynamic interaction between
financial structure and economic activity.

35

Appendix A: Equivalence of limited enforcement and
collateral constraints
We start by stating the representative firm’s and the representative intermediary’s problem in the economy with limited enforcement and limited participation. To facilitate this
we first develop some notation for states and the stochastic process for productivity, as
well as state prices, stochastic discount factors, and state-dependent interest rates for
both the morning and the afternoon.
Define a state at date t by st = {s0 , s1 , . . . , st } which includes the history of realizations
of the stochastic process sτ for dates τ = 0, 1, . . . , t, and the set of states at date t by
S t . Let the transition function from state st to st+1 be Π(st , st+1 ) and let Π(sτ , st ) be the
probability of state st occurring at date t given state sτ at date τ < t. Each date has two
subperiods, morning and afternoon, and states are realized in the morning.
Each afternoon there are markets in Arrow securities for all subsequent mornings
and afternoons. We define the (endogenous) state prices in these markets as follows:
τ
t
τ
Qm
τ t ≡ Qm (s , s ) is the price in the afternoon in state s of one unit of goods in the
morning in state st , t > τ , and Qaτt ≡ Qa (sτ , st ) the price in the afternoon in state sτ
of one unit of goods in the afternoon in state st , t ≥ τ . These prices are determined in
equilibrium but are taken as given by firms and intermediaries. Note that Qaττ = 1, that
is, the price of a unit of goods in the afternoon today is just one unit. We also define
stochastic discount factors qτmt ≡ qm (sτ , st ) and qτat ≡ qa (sτ , st ) as follows:
Qm (sτ , st ) ≡ Π(sτ , st )qm (sτ , st )

Qa (sτ , st ) ≡ Π(sτ , st )qa (sτ , st ).

Moreover, we define state-dependent interest rates Rmt+1 ≡ Rm (st , st+1 ) ≡ (qm (st , st+1 ))−1
for the morning and Rat+1 ≡ Ra (st , st+1 ) ≡ (qa (st , st+1 ))−1 for the afternoon, respectively.
Finally, to simplify notation, for a stochastic random variable yt ≡ y(st ), we define the
a
a ∞
∞
short hand yτ ≡ {yt }∞
t=τ . Similarly we define the short hand Qτ τ ≡ {{Qut }t=u }u=τ to
be all the current and future state prices for all future dates from time τ onward; qaττ is
defined analogously. Analogous definitions apply for the morning.
τ
LE
The firm’s problem (PLE
τ ) at date τ in history s in the afternoon is to choose xτ
where xLE
= (dt , kt , pt , pmt , pat ), that is, dividends dt , capital kt , net payments to houset
holds pt , and net payments to intermediaries in the morning pmt and in the afternoon pat ,
given net worth wτ , to solve
"∞
#
X
max Eτ
β t−τ dt
(A.1)
xLE
τ

t=τ

36

subject to the budget constraints for the current and all subsequent dates and states,
wτ ≥ dτ + kτ + pτ + paτ ,

(A.2)

At f (kt−1 ) + kt−1 (1 − δ) ≥ dt + kt + pt + pmt + pat ,
the participation constraints for the intermediary and the household,
" ∞
#
∞
X
X
Eτ
qτmt pmt +
qτat pat ≥ 0,
t=τ +1

Eτ

"

t=τ

∞
X

R−(t−τ ) pt

t=τ

#

the limited enforcement constraints
"∞
#
"∞
#
X
X
Eτ̂
β t−τ dt ≥ Eτ̂
β t−τ dˆt ,
t=τ̂

t=τ̂

≥ 0,

∀τ̂ > τ,

∀t > τ,

(A.3)

(A.4)
(A.5)

(A.6)

and the non-negativity constraints
dt , pmt ≥ 0,

∀t ≥ τ,

(A.7)

where d̂τ̂ together with the associated investment and financial policy x̂LE
solve probτ̂
LE
lem Pτ̂ given net worth ŵτ̂ ≡ Aτ̂ f (kτ̂ −1 ) + (1 − θi )kτ̂ −1 (1 − δ) if the firm defaults in
the morning and ŵτ̂ ≡ Aτ̂ f (kτ̂ −1 ) + (1 − θ)kτ̂ −1 (1 − δ) − pmτ̂ if the firm defaults in the
afternoon. There are therefore two sets of limited enforcement constraints, one for the
morning, where the firm can abscond with cash flows and 1−θi of depreciated capital, and
one for the afternoon, where the firm can abscond with cash flows minus any payments
made in the morning and 1−θ of capital. There is however only one budget constraint for
every date, rather than separate budget constraints for the two subperiods, because the
firm merely carries over funds from the morning to the afternoon. Note that net payments
to intermediaries in the morning are restricted to be non-negative, as intermediaries have
no other funds in the morning, but there are no restrictions on pt and pat .
τ
The intermediary’s problem (PLE
iτ ) at date τ in history s in the afternoon is to
LE
choose xLE
= (dit , pht , p̄mt , p̄at ), that is, dividends dit , net payments from
iτ where xit
households pht , and net payments from firms in the morning p̄mτ and in the afternoon
p̄aτ , given net worth wiτ , to solve
"∞
#
X
max Eτ
β t−τ dit
(A.8)
xLE
iτ

t=τ

37

subject to the budget constraints for the current and all subsequent dates and states,
wiτ ≥ diτ − phτ − p̄aτ

(A.9)

0 ≥ dit − pht − p̄mt − p̄at ,

∀t > τ,

the participation constraint for the firm and the household,
" ∞
#
∞
X
X
−Eτ
qτmt p̄mt +
qτat p̄at ≥ 0,
t=τ +1

−Eτ

"

t=τ

∞
X

R−(t−τ ) pht

t=τ

#

the limited enforcement constraints
"∞
#
"∞
#
X
X
Eτ̂
βit−τ̂ dit ≥ Eτ̂
βit−τ̂ dˆit ,
t=τ̂

t=τ̂

≥ 0,

∀τ̂ > τ,

(A.10)

(A.11)
(A.12)

(A.13)

and the non-negativity constraints
dit , p̄mt ≥ 0,

∀t ≥ τ,

(A.14)

LE
where d̂iτ̂ together with associated lending policy x̂LE
iτ̂ solve problem Piτ̂ given wealth
ŵiτ̂ = p̄mτ̂ if the intermediary absconds in the afternoon. Since the intermediary at best
receives payments in the morning, the limited enforcement constraint for the morning is
redundant and we hence drop it. As in the case of the firm, there is only one budget
constraint for each date, rather than separate budget constraints for each subperiod.
Note that we again restrict the morning payments from the firm to the intermediary to
be non-negative, but there are no restrictions on p̄at and pht , ∀t ≥ τ.
We define an equilibrium for the economy with limited enforcement as follows:

Definition A.1 (Equilibrium with limited enforcement). An equilibrium with limited
LE
enforcement is an allocation xLE
0 for the representative firm and xi0 for the representative
a
LE
intermediary and stochastic discount factors qm
and xLE
00 and q00 such that: (i) x0
i0
LE
LE
solve the firm’s problem P0 and the intermediary’s problem Pi0 , respectively; (ii) the
household participation constraints (A.5) and (A.12) hold; and (iii) markets clear, that is,
the promises made by firms to intermediaries equal the promises received by intermediaries
from firms, pm0 = p̄m0 and pa0 = p̄a0 .
We now show that the economy with limited enforcement and the economy with
collateral constraints are equivalent. We proceed in two steps. First, limited enforcement
38

implies that the present value of the sequence of promises issued by the firm and the
intermediary can never exceed the amount of collateral that can be seized. Second, after
several intermediate steps, we show that any such sequence can be implemented with the
two types of one-period ahead Arrow securities subject to the collateral constraints (25)
and (26) in PCC
and (31) in PCC
0
i0 in the main text.
Theorem A.1 establishes that limited enforcement implies present value collateral
constraints (and vice versa).
Theorem A.1 (Enforcement constraints imply present value collateral constraints). The
firm’s limited enforcement constraints (A.6) for the morning and the afternoon for all
dates and states are equivalent to present value collateral constraints for all dates and
states for the morning
" ∞
#
X

R−(t−τ ) pt + qτmt pmt + qτat pat ,
(A.15)
θi kτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pτ + pmτ + paτ + Eτ
t=τ +1

and for the afternoon
θkτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pτ + paτ + Eτ

"

∞
X

R−(t−τ ) pt + qτmt pmt + qτat pat

t=τ +1



#

.

(A.16)

Similarly, the intermediary’s limited enforcement constraints (A.13) for the afternoon in
all dates and states are equivalent to present value collateral constraints for the afternoon
for all dates and states
" ∞
#
X

phτ + p̄aτ + Eτ
R−(t−τ ) pht + qτmt p̄mt + qτat p̄at ≥ 0.
(A.17)
t=τ +1

Proof of Theorem A.1. We first consider the firm and show that the limited enforcement implies present value collateral constraints. The proof is by contraposition, that is,
we show that if the present value collateral constraint is violated, then so is the limited
enforcement constraint.
Define, for τ 0 ≥ τ,
"∞
#
X
R−(t−τ ) pt
PVτ (pτ 0 ) = Eτ
t=τ 0

and similarly

PVmτ (pmτ 0 ) = Eτ

"

∞
X
t=τ 0

#

qτmt pmt ;

PVaτ (paτ 0 ) = Eτ

39

"

∞
X
t=τ 0

#

qτat pat .

Suppose that the present value collateral constraint (A.16) does not hold in the afternoon at time τ . The firm can default and issue new promises at date τ
p̂τ = −PVτ (pτ +1 ) and p̂aτ = −PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) − PVaτ (paτ +1 )
while keeping the promises, investments, and dividends in all future dates and states the
same. The firm can make the same investment kτ and must be able to pay a higher
dividend, since, if (A.16) is violated,
θkτ −1 (1 − δ) − [pτ + paτ ] < PVτ (pτ +1 ) + PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) + PVaτ (paτ +1 ) = −p̂τ − p̂aτ ,
and therefore
dˆτ = Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + (1 − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) − kτ − p̂τ − pmτ − p̂aτ
> Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + kτ −1 (1 − δ) − kτ − pτ − pmτ − paτ = dτ ,
which completes the proof in one direction.
Suppose now that the present value collateral constraint (A.16) holds in the afternoon
at time τ . If the firm were to default in the afternoon, the firm’s net worth ŵτ would be
ŵτ = Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + (1 − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) − pmτ . Consider an optimal plan given ŵτ say x̂τ .
One can instead implement a plan x̌τ without defaulting that has x̌τ +1 = x̂τ +1 , ǩτ = k̂τ ,
and choose promises today given by
p̌τ = p̂τ + pτ + PVτ (pτ +1 )
p̌aτ = p̂aτ + paτ + PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) + PVaτ (paτ +1 ).
Hence, the firm could pay the present value of its current promises and make the same
promises as under x̂τ . Using (A.4) and (A.5) at equality for x̂τ and (A.16) for xτ we have
θkτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ p̌τ + p̌aτ + PVτ (p̂τ +1 ) + PVmτ (p̂mτ +1 ) + PVaτ (p̂aτ +1 ),
so (A.16) is satisfied for p̌τ , p̌mτ +1 , and p̌aτ . Moreover, using (A.16) for xτ , the dividend
dˆτ must satisfy
dˆτ = Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + (1 − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) − k̂τ − p̂τ − pmτ − p̂aτ
≤ Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + kτ −1 (1 − δ) − k̂τ − p̂τ − pmτ − p̂aτ
−pτ − paτ − PVτ (pτ +1 ) − PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) − PVaτ (paτ +1 )
= Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + kτ −1 (1 − δ) − ǩτ − p̌τ − p̌aτ = dˇτ .
Thus, a feasible strategy without default yields a weakly higher payoff, implying that
default cannot be optimal.
40

Next we show that if the present value collateral constraint (A.15) does not hold in
the morning at time τ , then the limited enforcement constraint is violated, too. If (A.15)
is violated, the firm could default in the morning, and in the afternoon set x̂τ +1 = xτ +1 ,
k̂τ = kτ , and issue new promises today such that (A.4) and (A.5) hold with equality and
0 = p̂τ + p̂aτ + PVτ (pτ +1 ) + PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) + PVaτ (paτ +1 ).
Since the present value collateral constraint is violated, we have
θi kτ −1 (1 − δ) − [pτ + pmτ + paτ ] < PVτ (pτ +1 ) + PVmτ (pmτ +1 ) + PVaτ (paτ +1 ) = −p̂τ − p̂aτ ,
and the firm can set dˆτ to
dˆτ = Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + (1 − θi )kτ −1 (1 − δ) − kτ − p̂τ − p̂aτ
> Aτ f (kτ −1 ) + kτ −1 (1 − δ) − kτ − pτ − pmτ − paτ = dτ ,
an improvement. Therefore, the limited enforcement constraint in the morning implies
the corresponding present value collateral constraint.
The proof that the present value collateral constraint in the morning implies the
limited enforcement constraint in the morning follows the argument for the afternoon
closely and is hence omitted.
Next we turn to the intermediary’s problem. Since the intermediary receives a nonnegative payment in the morning, intermediary default is a concern only in the afternoon.
Suppose that the present value collateral constraint (A.17) at date τ is violated, that is,
phτ + p̄aτ + PVτ (phτ +1 ) + PVmτ (p̄mτ +1 ) + PVaτ (p̄aτ +1 ) < 0.
The intermediary could default with ŵiτ = p̄mτ and issue new promises at date τ
p̂hτ = −PVτ (phτ +1 ) and p̄ˆaτ = −PVmτ (p̄mτ +1 ) − PVaτ (p̄aτ +1 )
while keeping the promises and dividends in all future dates and states the same. Hence,
p̂hτ + p̄ˆaτ > phτ + p̄aτ and the dividend at date τ is higher since
dˆiτ = wiτ + p̂hτ + p̄ˆaτ > wiτ + phτ + p̄aτ = diτ ,
implying that the limited enforcement constraint would be violated, too.
To see that (A.17) implies (A.13) proceed analogously to the proof for the firm by
assuming that the intermediary defaults and showing that the intermediary could do at
least as well without defaulting. 2

41

Before proceeding, we define a notion of consistency of state prices. Essentially, the
price of a state st contingent claim is the price of the state st−1 contingent claim payable
in the afternoon times the state st−1 one-period ahead price for date t of the morning or
afternoon claim, as the case may be.
Definition A.2 (Consistency of state prices). Let history st−1 be such that (st−1 , st ) ≡ st ,
that is, history st−1 occurs as part of history st . Then, for t > τ , state prices are consistent
if
Qm (sτ , st ) = Qa (sτ , st−1 )Qm (st−1 , st ) and

Qa (sτ , st ) = Qa (sτ , st−1 )Qa (st−1 , st ).
(A.18)

State prices in an equilibrium in the economy with limited enforcement are consistent.
Lemma A.1 (Consistency of state prices). A limited enforcement equilibrium has consistent state prices.
Proof of Lemma A.1. Consider first consistency of state prices for afternoon payments. Suppose consistency is violated at time τ for state sτ +2 and assume w.l.o.g. that
Qa (sτ , sτ +2 ) > Qa (sτ , sτ +1 )Qa (sτ +1 , sτ +2 ). The intermediary could issue a claim against
state sτ +2 and receive Qa (sτ , sτ +2 ) at time τ and at the same time purchase Qa (sτ +1 , sτ +2 )
units of state sτ +1 claims at a per unit cost of Qa (sτ , sτ +1 ), yielding a positive payout
today. In state sτ +1 , the promise the intermediary issued will be worth Qa (sτ +1 , sτ +2 )
which equals the payoff of the one-period claim. Thus the intermediary can repurchase
the claim at that time, yielding a zero payout then. Note that the payoff to the intermediary is positive at time τ and that the present value of the future promises is zero,
implying that the present value collateral constraint is satisfied throughout. This is an
arbitrage and hence afternoon state prices have to be consistent for time τ + 2, and,
proceeding recursively, for all t ≥ τ + 2.
To prove the consistency claim for morning state prices, we have to maintain the
constraints that pmt and p̄mt have to be non-negative. Suppose first that Qm (sτ , sτ +2 ) >
Qa (sτ , sτ +1 )Qm (sτ +1 , sτ +2 ). The firm could issue a claim against state sτ +2 in the morning
and receive Qm (sτ , sτ +2 ) at time τ and at the same time purchase Qm (sτ +1 , sτ +2 ) units of
state sτ +1 claims at a per unit cost of Qa (sτ , sτ +1 ), yielding a positive payout today. In
state sτ +1 , the promise the firm issued will be worth Qm (sτ +1 , sτ +2 ) which equals the payoff of the one-period claims bought. Thus the firm can repurchase the claim at that time,
yielding a zero payout then. Note that the payoff to the firm is positive at time τ , that
is, this is an arbitrage, and that the present value of the future promises is zero, implying
that the present value collateral constraint is satisfied throughout. Suppose instead that
42

Qm (sτ , sτ +2 ) < Qa (sτ , sτ +1 )Qm (sτ +1 , sτ +2 ), then the intermediary could purchase a claim
against state sτ +2 in the morning and proceed analogously to the firm above, reversing
all the signs of the transactions. In either case, there is thus an arbitrage and hence
morning state prices have to be consistent for time τ + 2, and, proceeding recursively, for
all t ≥ τ + 2. 2
It turns out that the state prices of afternoon claims can be determined by no arbitrage:
Lemma A.2 (One-period ahead afternoon interest rate equals R). The interest rate
on one-period ahead afternoon claims must equal the household’s interest rate, that is,
Ra (sτ , sτ +1 ) = (qa (sτ , sτ +1 ))−1 = R for all dates and states.
Proof of Lemma A.2. Suppose Ra (sτ , sτ +1 ) > R for some (sτ , sτ +1 ). The intermediary could lend t the firm at Ra (sτ , sτ +1 ) and borrow from the household at R against
state sτ +1 . This transaction satisfies the present value collateral constraints at both sτ
and sτ +1 and yields a zero payoff at sτ and a strictly positive payoff at sτ +1 , an arbitrage.
Therefore, Ra (sτ , sτ +1 ) ≤ R for all (sτ , sτ +1 ). Moreover, if Ra (sτ , sτ +1 ) < R for some
(sτ , sτ +1 ) then the reverse transaction presents an arbitrage for the intermediary. Thus,
the interest rate on one-period ahead afternoon claims equals R in all dates and states.
2
Essentially, the afternoon state-contingent interest rates must equal the riskless rate R,
as otherwise the intermediary could arbitrage by borrowing at R and lending at Ra (sτ , sτ +1 )
in a state-dependent way. Using Lemmas A.1 and A.2 recursively then yields
Qm (sτ , st ) = Π(sτ , st )R−(t−τ −1) (Rm (st−1 , st ))−1
Qa (sτ , st ) = Π(sτ , st )R−(t−τ ) .
It is noteworthy that multi-period ahead morning claims are priced using the morning
state-contingent interest rate only from the afternoon immediately preceding the morning
and are priced at the afternoon interest rate before. This is because a multi-period ahead
morning claim can be replicated using an afternoon claim paying off in the preceding
period and a one-period morning claim from then on. Effectively, the ability to enforce
morning claims is used only once. The interest rates for one-period ahead morning claims
Rm (sτ −1 , sτ ) are to be determined in equilibrium.
We are now ready for the second step, which establishes the equivalence of the
economies with limited enforcement and with collateral constraints and one-period ahead
complete markets for morning and afternoon claims. In the paper, we work with the
equivalent economy with collateral constraints which turns out to be more tractable.
43

Theorem A.2 (Equivalence of limited enforcement and collateral constraints). An equiLE
a
librium with limited enforcement (xLE
0 , xi0 , q00 , q00 ) is equivalent to an equilibrium with
CC
collateral constraints (xCC
0 , xi0 , Ri0 ). More specifically, in the economy with limited enLE
forcement, xLE
and xLE
and PLE
0
i0 solve P0
i0 , respectively, and markets clear, pm0 = p̄m0
and pa0 = p̄a0 , with stochastic discount factors q00 and qa00 , if and only if, in the economy
CC
with collateral constraints, xCC
and xCC
and PCC
0
i0 solve P0
i0 , respectively, and markets
clear, bi0 = li0 and ba0 = l̄a0 where
(i) Equivalence of state prices: The market clearing interest rates on one-period ahead
m
morning claims Ri0 are given by Rit+1 = (qtt+1
)−1 for all dates and states.
(ii) Equivalence of allocations: Dividends and investment (d0 , k0 , di0 ) are identical in the
equilibrium with limited enforcement and with collateral constraints.
Proof of Theorem A.2. Using Lemmas A.1 and A.2, we can write the present value
collateral constraints (A.15) and (A.16) for the morning and afternoon, respectively, as
" ∞
#
X

−(t−τ )
−(t−τ −1)
−1
−(t−τ )
R
pt + R
(Rmt ) pmt + R
pat
θi kτ −1 (1−δ) ≥ pτ +pmτ +paτ +Eτ
t=τ +1

and
θkτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pτ + paτ + Eτ

"

∞
X

R−(t−τ ) pt + R−(t−τ −1) (Rmt )−1 pmt + R−(t−τ ) pat

t=τ +1



#

.

−1
Now define p+
at ≡ pat + Et [(Rmt+1 ) pmt+1 ] and rewrite the collateral constraints as
+
θi kτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pτ + pmτ + p+
aτ + PVτ (pτ +1 + paτ +1 )

(A.19)

+
θkτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pτ + p+
aτ + PVτ (pτ +1 + paτ +1 ).

(A.20)

and
Note that determining (p0 , pm0 , pa0 ) and (p0 , pm0 , p+
a0 ) are equivalent. Next we show
that collateral constraints (A.19) and (A.20) are equivalent to (A.20) and the following
collateral constraint
(θi − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ pmτ .
(A.21)
First, observe that adding (A.20) and (A.21) yields (A.19) which establishes the first
direction. Second, to establish the other direction, suppose (A.21) is violated, that is,
(θi − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) < pmτ . Then it must be that (A.20) is slack, that is, the inequality
must be strict, as otherwise adding (A.21) and (A.20) would imply that (A.19) is violated.
For such a state sτ the firm could raise the payment pτ to households in the afternoon
44

by Rε and reduce the payment pmτ to intermediaries in the morning by Rmτ ε (and
correspondingly reduce the payment pτ −1 to households at time τ − 1 by Π(sτ , sτ +1 )ε
while raising the payment p+
aτ −1 to intermediaries by the same amount). This would yield
an additional payoff (Rmτ − R)ε in state sτ which is non-negative and strictly positive if
Rmτ > R; but in the latter case we obtain a strict improvement, which is not possible, and
in the former case we can shift the payment to the afternoon and (C.16) holds without loss
of generality. This establishes the equivalence of the economy with limited enforcement
and an economy with collateral constraints as in (A.21) and (A.20).
We now show how to recover the collateral constraints in the one period debt form
(25), (26), and (31). First, let Riτ ≡ Rmτ , for all (τ, sτ ). Second, for τ ≥ 1 define
biτ = (Riτ )−1 pmτ ,

Rbτ ≡ PVτ (pτ ),

Rbaτ ≡ PVτ (p+
aτ ),

and rewrite (A.21) and (A.20) as
(θi − θ)kτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ Riτ biτ

θkτ −1 (1 − δ) ≥ R(bτ + baτ ),

that is, as in (25) and (26). Similarly, given one period borrowing (b0 , bi0 , ba0 ) we can
recover payments (p0 , pm0 , p+
a0 ) by constructing, for all τ ≥ 1,
pτ = Rbτ − Eτ [bτ +1 ],

pmτ = Riτ biτ ,

p+
aτ = Rbaτ − Eτ [baτ +1 ],

which can be seen for pτ , for example, as follows:
Rbτ ≡ PVτ (pτ ) = pτ + R−1 Eτ [PVτ +1 (pτ +1 )] = pτ + R−1 Eτ [Rbτ +1 ] = pτ + Eτ [bτ +1 ],
and analogously for p+
aτ . For date 0, using the household’s participation constraint (A.5)
at equality we have
0 = PV0 (p0 ) = p0 + R−1 E0 [P V1 (p1 )] = p0 + R−1 E0 [Rb1 ] = p0 + E0 [b1 ],
that is, p0 = −E0 [b1 ], and similarly using the intermediary’s participation constraint at
equality we have
+
−1
+
0 = PV0 (p+
a0 ) = pa0 + R E0 [P V1 (pa1 )]

= pa0 + E0 [(Rm1 )−1 pm1 ] + R−1 E0 [Rba1 ] = pa0 + E0 [bi1 ] + E0 [ba1 ],
so pa0 = −E0 [bi1 ] − E0 [ba1 ], and thus (A.2) and (23) are equivalent.
Hence, given w0 , we have shown how to translate an allocation xLE
(with pm0 = 0)
0
CC
into an allocation x0 for the firm and vice versa.
45

Consider next the intermediary’s present value collateral constraint (A.17) which using
Lemmas (A.1) and (A.2) can be written as
" ∞
#
X

phτ + p̄aτ + Eτ
R−(t−τ ) pht + R−(t−τ )−1 (Rmt )−1 p̄mt + R−(t−τ ) p̄at ≥ 0,
t=τ +1

−1
and further simplified by proceeding as before and defining p̄+
at ≡ p̄at +Et [(Rmt+1 ) p̄mt+1 ]
and for τ ≥ 1,

Rlτ ≡ PVτ (phτ ),

liτ = (Riτ )−1 p̄mτ ,

Rlaτ ≡ PVτ (p̄+
aτ ),

reducing the collateral constraint for the intermediary to
lt + lat ≥ 0,
which is (31), the collateral constraint with one period loans. Moreover, by mimicking
the proof for the firm above, we can show that for τ ≥ 1
phτ = Rlτ − Eτ [lτ +1 ],

p̄mτ = Riτ liτ ,

p̄+
aτ = Rlaτ − Eτ [laτ +1 ],

and, using the participation constraints for the firm and household at equality, that
ph0 = −E0 [l1 ] and p̄a0 = −E0 [li1 ] − E0 [la1 ].
Hence, given wi0 , we have shown how to translate an allocation xLE
i0 (with p̄m0 = 0)
CC
into an allocation xi0 for the intermediary and vice versa.
Consider now a given equilibrium with limited commitment. Using the interest rates
Rm0 implied by the state prices for morning payments, in the equivalent collateral constraint problem with Ri0 = Rm0 our construction ensures that the same dividends and
investment and the one period borrowing defined above are optimal for the firm. Similarly, the same dividends and the one period loans defined above are optimal for the
intermediary. Hence, given one period interest rates Ri0 for intermediary loans repaid in
the morning and the interest rate R for loans repaid in the afternoon, the market clears
and we have an equilibrium with collateral constraints. The converse argument obviously
obtains as well. Therefore, we have shown the equivalence of the economy with limited
enforcement and the economy with collateral constraints. 2

46

Appendix B: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Using (15) and the fact that νi0 = 0 (proved below in Lemma 1,
part (iii)), we have (Ri0 )−1 = βµ0 /µ + βλ0i /µ and, taking conditional expectations,
 0 
 0 −1 
1
1
λ
≡ E (Ri ) |z =
+E β i z
R + ρi
R+ρ
µ

and hence ρ ≥ ρi with equality iff E[λ0i |z] = 0. Moreover, since Ri0 ≥ R (proved below
in Lemma 1, part (i)), ρi ≥ 0. Finally, using (14), we have 1/(R + ρ) ≡ E[βµ0 /µ|z] =
1/R − E[βλ0 /µ|z], implying that ρ > 0 iff E[λ0 |z] > 0. 2
Proof of Proposition 2. Consider a deterministic economy. Suppose intermediaries
pay out their entire net worth at some point. From that point on, the firm’s problem is
as if there is no intermediary. We first characterize the solution to this problem and then
show that the solution implies shadow interest rates on intermediated finance at which it
would not be optimal for intermediaries to exit.
To characterize the solution in the absence of intermediaries, consider a steady state
at which µ = µ0 ≡ µ̄ and note that (14) implies λ̄0 = ((Rβ)−1 − 1)µ̄ > 0. The investment
Euler equation (17) simplifies to 1 = β[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)/℘ which defines k̄. The
firm’s steady state net worth is w̄0 = A0 f (k̄) + (1 − θ)k̄(1 − δ) and the firm pays out
d¯ = w̄0 − ℘k̄ = A0 f (k̄) − k̄[1 − (R−1 θ + (1 − θ))(1 − δ)]

> A0 f (k̄) − β −1 k̄[1 − (R−1 θ + β(1 − θ))(1 − δ)]
Z k̄
=
[A0 fk (k) − β −1 (1 − (R−1 θ + β(1 − θ))(1 − δ))]dk > 0.
0

¯ Whenever w < w̄,
Therefore, µ̄ = 1. Investment k̄ is feasible as long as w ≥ w̄ = w̄0 − d.
k < k̄ and hence using (17) we have µ/µ0 = β[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ > 1. The
shadow interest rate on intermediated finance is Ri0 = β −1 µ/µ0 ≥ β −1 for all values of
w. But then it cannot be optimal for intermediaries to pay out all their net worth in
a deterministic economy as keeping ε > 0 net worth for one more period improves the
objective by (βi Ri0 − 1)ε > 0.
Consider now an eventually deterministic economy. From time T onward, the economy
is deterministic and the conclusion obtains by above as long as the intermediary has
positive net worth in all states at time T . Suppose not, that is, suppose intermediary net
worth is zero for some state. As before the discounted marginal value on an infinitesimal
amount of intermediary net worth at time T lent out for one period is at least βi Ri0 ≥
βi β −1 > 1 since Ri0 ≥ β −1 . Lending for τ periods thus guarantees a discounted marginal
47

value of (βi β)τ . As τ → ∞, the marginal value grows without bound. (Note that since
we consider an infinitesimal amount, the collateral constraint cannot be biding for any
finite τ .) The expected marginal value of this lending policy at time 0 is at least (βi R)T
times the marginal value at time T and hence grows without bound as τ → ∞.
But the marginal value of intermediary net worth at time 0 is finite as either the intermediary pays dividends and the marginal value is one, or the intermediary saves into at
least one state at Ri0 and thus µi = Ri0 βµ0i and Ri0 is bounded above by (4) and otherwise
Ri0 = R. Furthermore, µ0i is bounded by a similar argument going forward until dividends
are paid at which point the marginal value is one. But then it cannot be an equilibrium
for intermediaries to pay out all their net worth. 2
Proof of Lemma 1. Part (i): If Ri0 < R, then using (14) and (15) we have 0 < (R −
Ri0 )βµ0 ≤ Ri0 βλ0i and thus b0i > 0. But (19) and (20) imply that 0 < (R − Ri0 )βµ0i ≤ Ri0 βηi0
and thus li0 = 0, which is not an equilibrium.
Part (ii): Given νi0 = 0 (see part (iii)), (14) and (15) imply that λ0 = (Ri0 /R − 1)µ0 +
Ri0 /Rλ0i ≥ λ0i .
Part (iii): First, suppose to the contrary that νi0 > 0. Then λ0i = 0 as b0i = 0 <
(Ri0 )−1 (θi − θ)k(1 − δ) implies that (4) is slack. Using (15) and (14) we have βµ0 Ri0 > µ ≥
βµ0 R and thus Ri0 > R. Equations (19) and (20) imply that Rη 0 − Ri0 ηi0 = (Ri0 − R)µ0i > 0
and thus η 0 > 0 and l0 = 0. But if wi0 > 0, which is always true under the conditions of
Proposition 2, we have li0 = (Ri0 )−1 wi0 > 0 = b0i , which is not an equilibrium. If instead
wi0 = 0, then li0 = 0 and we can set Ri0 = (βµ0 /µ)−1 and ηi0 = 0 w.l.o.g.
Part (iv): Suppose to the contrary that ηi0 > 0 (and hence li0 = 0). Since intermediaries
never pay out all their net worth in a deterministic economy, equation (9) implies 0 <
wi0 ≤ Rl0 and hence η 0 = 0. But then (19) and (20) imply βi µ0i /µi R = 1 > βi µ0i /µi Ri0 or
R > Ri0 contradicting the result of part (i). Thus, ηi0 = 0 and µ0i = (βi Ri0 )−1 µi .
Part (v): Suppose λ0 = 0. Then (14) reduces to 1 = βµ0 /µR and thus 1 ≤ µ = βRµ0 <
µ0 and d0 = 0. By part (ii), λ0i = 0 and using (15) we have Ri0 = R, µ0i = (βR)−1 µi >
1, and d0i = 0. The investment k ∗∗ solves R = [A0 fk (k ∗∗ ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (R) or
R − 1 + δ = A0 fk (k ∗∗ ); this is the first best investment when dividends are discounted at
R and it can never be optimal to invest more than that. To see this use (17) and note
[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (Ri0 ) = µ/(βµ0 ) ≥ R = [A0 fk (k ∗∗ ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (R),
that is, fk (k) ≥ fk (k ∗∗ ). Note that the firm’s net worth next period, using (3) and (17),

48

is
w0 = A0 f (k ∗∗ ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)k ∗∗ − [Rb0 − θ(1 − δ)k ∗∗ ] − [Rb0i − (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k ∗∗ ]
> R℘i (R)k ∗∗ − [Rb0 − θ(1 − δ)k ∗∗ ] − [Rb0i − (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k ∗∗ ] = R[k ∗∗ − b0 − b0i ]

= Rwex .

Note that d0 = 0, d0i = 0, k 0 ≤ k ∗∗ , and w0 > wex , and from (2) next period, k 0 = w0 +b00 +b00i .
If Ri00 > R, then b00i = wi0 and b00 = R−1 θ(1 − δ)k 0 . Therefore, ℘k 0 = w0 + wi0 , but using
(2) we have ℘k ∗∗ ≤ k ∗∗ − b0 = wex + b0i < w0 + wi0 = ℘k 0 , a contradiction. If Ri00 = R,
then b00 + b00i = k 0 − w0 < k ∗∗ − wex = b0 + b0i , that is, the firm is paying down debt, and
w00 > w0 and wi00 > wi0 . But then w and wi grow without bound unless the firm or the
intermediary eventually pay a dividend. But since µ and µi are strictly increasing as long
as Ri0 = R, if either pays a dividend at some future date, then µ < 1 or µi < 1 currently,
a contradiction. 2
Proof of Proposition 4. First, note that k ∗ > 0 due to the Inada condition and hence
w0∗ ≥ A0 f (k ∗ ) + k ∗ (1 − θi )(1 − δ) > 0. Moreover, d∗ > 0 since otherwise the value would
be zero which would be dominated by paying out all net worth. Hence, µ∗ = µ0∗ = 1. By
Proposition 2 intermediary net worth is positive and hence d∗i > 0 (arguing as above),
0∗
−1
which implies µ∗i = µ0∗
− 1 > 0 and li0∗ > 0 (and ηi0∗ = 0),
i = 1. But then η = (Rβi )
since otherwise intermediary net worth would be 0 next period. Therefore, Ri0∗ = βi−1 ,
−1
−1
and thus λ0∗
− 1 > 0, that is, the firm’s collateral constraint for intermediated
i = (βi β)
finance binds. Moreover, k ∗ solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k ∗ ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (βi−1 ) and d0∗ , b0∗ ,
0∗
b0∗
are determined by (2)-(4) at equality. Specifically, d∗ = A0 f (k ∗ ) + k ∗ (1 −
i , and w
∗
θi )(1 − δ) − ℘i (βi−1 )k ∗ > 0 and b0∗
i = βi (θi − θ)k (1 − δ). The net worth of the firm after
−1
∗
∗
∗
dividends is w∗ = ℘i (βi−1 )k ∗ . Finally, li0∗ = b0∗
i = wi and di = (βi − 1)wi . 2
Proof of Proposition 5. Consider first region D and take w ≥ w̄(wi ) (to be defined
below) and d > 0 forever (µ = µ0 = 1). The investment Euler equation then implies
1 = β[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (Ri ). If the collateral constraint for intermediated
finance (4) does not bind, then µ = Ri0 βµ0 , that is, Ri0 = β −1 , and investment is constant
at k̄ which solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄)+(1−θi )(1−δ)]/℘i (β −1 ) or, equivalently, 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄)+
(1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘. Define w̄(wi ) ≡ ℘k̄ − wi and w̄i = β(θi − θ)k̄(1 − δ). At w̄i , (4) is just
binding. For wi ∈ (0, w̄i ), (4) is slack. Moreover, wi0 = β −1 wi and, if wi0 ∈ (0, w̄i ), the
ex dividend net worth is wex = w̄(wi ) both in the current and next period, and we have
0
immediately wex
/wi0 < wex /wi . Further, using (3) and (17) we have
w0 = A0 f (k̄) + (1 − θ)k̄(1 − δ) − Ri0 wi > [A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]k̄ − Ri0 wi = Ri0 w̄(wi ).
49

0
0
But wex
= w̄(wi0 ) < w̄(wi )wi0 /wi = Ri0 wex , so d0 = w0 − wex
> 0. For wi ∈ [w̄i , wi∗ ),
(4) binds and k(wi ) solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k(wi )) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/[℘ − wi /k(wi )] and Ri0 =
(θi −θ)k(wi )/wi (1−δ). Note that the last two equations imply that k(wi ) ≥ k̄, wi /k(wi ) ≥
w̄i /k̄, and Ri0 ≤ β −1 in this region. As before, define w̄(wi ) = ℘k(wi ) − wi and note
that the ex dividend net worth is wex = w̄(wi ). Suppose wi+ > wi then k(wi+ ) > k(wi ),
+
k(wi+ )/wi+ < k(wi )/wi , and wex
/wi+ = ℘k(wi+ )/wi+ −1 < wex /wi . Moreover, wi0 = Ri0 wi >
wi and hence k (strictly) increases and Ri0 (strictly) decreases in this region. Proceeding
as before,

w0 = A0 f (k(wi )) + (1 − θi )k(wi )(1 − δ) > [A0 fk (k(wi )) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]k(wi )
≥ Ri0 β[A0 fk (k(wi )) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]k(wi ) = Ri0 w̄(wi ).

0
0
But wex
= w̄(wi0 ) < w̄(wi )wi0 /wi = Ri0 wex , so d0 = w0 − wex
> 0. Finally, if wi ≥ wi∗ and
w ≥ w̄(wi ) = w∗ , the steady state of Proposition 4 is reached.
We now show that the above policies are optimal for both the firm and the intermediary given the interest rate process in region D and hence constitute an equilibrium.
Since Ri0 > βi−1 before the steady state is reached, the intermediary lends its entire net
worth to the firm, li0 = wi , and does not pay dividends until the steady state is reached.
Hence, the intermediary’s policy is optimal. To see that the firm’s policy is optimal in
region D, suppose that the firm follows the optimal policy from the next period onward
but sets d˜ = 0 in the current period. If the firm invests the additional amount, then
k̃ = (wi + w)/℘ > k and w̃0 > w0 (and therefore µ̃0 = 1). The investment Euler equation
requires 1 = β/µ̃[A0 fk (k̃) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (Ri0 ), but since fk (k̃) < fk (k) and k satisfies the investment Euler equation at µ = µ0 = 1, this implies µ̃ < 1, a contradiction.
Suppose the firm instead invests the same amount k̃ = k but borrows less b̃0i < b0i . Then
w̃0 > w0 , µ̃0 = 1, and from (17) µ̃ = 1. If Ri0 < β −1 , then (4) is binding, a contradiction. If
Ri0 = β −1 , then the firm is indifferent between paying dividends in the current period or
in the next period. But in equilibrium b0i = wi and hence d˜ = d > 0 for the representative
firm. By induction starting at the steady state and working backwards, the firm’s policy
is optimal in region D. Further, we show in Lemmata B.1 and B.2 that the equilibrium
in region D is the unique equilibrium converging to the steady state.
Consider now region ND with wi ≤ wi∗ (as Lemma 2 shows) and w < w̄(wi ) as defined
in the characterization of region D above and d = 0. Denote the firm’s ex dividend
net worth by wex ≤ w. There are 3 cases to consider: wex /wi > w̄/w̄i , wex /wi ∈
[w∗ /wi∗ , w̄/w̄i ], and wex /wi < w∗ /wi∗ .
First, if wex /wi > w̄/w̄i , then wex + wi < w̄(wi ) + wi = w̄ + w̄i and k ≤ (wex + wi )/℘ <
(w̄ + w̄i )/℘ = k̄. Note that since b0i ≤ wi − di ≤ wi , we have wex /b0i ≥ wex /wi > w̄/w̄i . If

50

(4) binds, then Ri0 = (θi −θ)(1−δ)(wex /b0i +1)/℘ > (θi −θ)(1−δ)(w̄/w̄i +1)/℘ = β −1 . If (4)
does not bind, then Ri0 = [A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ > [A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ = β −1 .
In either case, Ri0 > β −1 , and hence d = 0, di = 0, and b0i = wi .
Second, consider wex /wi ∈ [w∗ /wi∗ , w̄/w̄i ]. If wex /b0i > w̄/w̄i we are in the first region
and hence di = 0 and b0i = wi , a contradiction. Hence, w.l.o.g. wex /b0i ∈ [w∗ /wi∗ , w̄/w̄i ].
Take w̃i such that wex /b0i = w̄(w̃i )/w̃i . Note that (4) binds at w̃i and w̄(w̃i ), and thus
b0i + wex < w̃i + w̄(w̃i ) and moreover k < k̂(w̃i ). If (4) does not bind, then
R̂i0 (w̃i ) = (θi − θ)(1 − δ)(w̄(w̃i )/w̃i + 1)/℘ > (θi − θ)(1 − δ)(wex /b0i + 1)/℘ > Ri0
= [A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ > [A0 fk (k̂(w̃)) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘.

But since (4) binds at w̃i and w̄(w̃i ), R̂i0 (w̃i ) < [A0 fk (k̂(w̃)) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘, a contradiction. Therefore, (4) binds and Ri0 = R̂i0 (w̃i ). From (17), βµ0 /µ[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 −
δ)]/℘i (Ri0 ) = 1 = β[A0 fk (k̂(w̃i )) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (R̂i0 (w̃i )) and, since k < k̂(w̃i ),
µ > µ0 ≥ 1, that is, d = 0. Further, if wex /wi ∈ (w∗ /wi∗ , w̄/w̄i ], then Ri0 ∈ (βi−1 , β −1 ], and
thus di = 0 and b0i = wi . If wex /wi = w∗ /wi∗ , then either di > 0 or b0i < wi yields Ri0 > βi−1
and therefore di = 0 and b0i = wi at such wex and wi as well.
Third, consider wex /wi < w∗ /wi∗ . As before, w.l.o.g. wex /b0i < w∗ /wi∗ . Then from (4),
Ri0 ≤ (θi −θ)(1−δ)(wex /b0i +1)/℘ < (θi −θ)(1−δ)(w∗ /wi∗ +1)/℘ = βi−1 , that is, Ri0 < βi−1 .
From (17), βµ0 /µ[A0 fk (k)+(1−θi )(1−δ)]/℘i (Ri0 ) = 1 = β[A0 fk (k ∗ )+(1−θi )(1−δ)]/℘i (βi−1 )
and, since k < k ∗ and Ri0 < βi−1 , µ > µ0 ≥ 1, that is, d = 0. Moreover, (4) binds, since
otherwise βi−1 > Ri0 = [A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ > [A0 fk (k ∗ ) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘, but
since in the steady state (4) binds βi−1 < [A0 fk (k ∗ ) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘, a contradiction.
Thus, we conclude that d = 0, (property (i) in the statement of the proposition),
di = 0 (except possibly in the first period (see Lemma 2), that Ri0 satisfies the equation
in property (ii) of the proposition), and that b0i = wi and k = (w + wi )/℘ if Ri0 > R and
k = w/℘i (R) if Ri0 = R (property (iii)). Moreover, using (3) and (17) we have
w0 = A0 f (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)k − [Ri0 b0i − (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k]

> Ri0 ℘i (Ri0 )k − [Ri0 b0i − (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k] ≥ Ri0 ℘k − Ri0 b0i = Ri0 w,

which, together with the fact that wi0 = Ri0 wi , implies that w0 /wi0 > w/wi (property (iv)).
Note that the equilibrium is thus unique in region ND as well. 2
Proof of Lemma 2. We first show that di > 0 when wi > wi∗ . If w ≥ w∗ , the stationary
state is reached and the result is immediate. Suppose hence that w < w∗ . Suppose
instead that di = 0. We claim that Ri0 < βi−1 for such wi and w. Either Ri0 = R and
hence the claim is obviously true or Ri0 > R, but then b0i = wi . Using (4) and (2) we have
51

Ri0 ≤ (θi −θ)(1−δ)k/b0i ≤ (θi −θ)(1−δ)(w/wi +1) < (θi −θ)(1−δ)(w∗ /wi∗ +1) = βi−1 , that
is, R ≤ Ri0 < βi−1 . But as long as di = 0, wi0 = Ri0 wi ≥ Rwi > wi , that is, intermediary
net worth keeps rising. If eventually firm net worth exceeds w∗ , then the steady state is
reached and µ0i = 1 from then onward. But then µi = βi Ri0 µ0i = βi Ri0 < 1, which is not
possible. The intermediary must pay a dividend in the first period, because if it pays a
dividend at any point after that, an analogous argument would again imply that µi < 1
in the first period, which is not possible. Similarly, if w < w∗ forever, then w > wi∗ forever
and the firm must eventually pay a dividend in this region, as never paying a dividend
cannot be optimal. But by the same argument again then the dividend must be paid in
the first period.
To see that at most an initial dividend is paid and no further dividends are paid until
the steady state is reached, note that in equilibrium once Ri0 > βi−1 , then this is the case
until the steady state is reached. But as long as Ri0 > βi−1 , the intermediary does not pay
a dividend (and this is true w.l.o.g. also at a point where Ri0 = βi−1 before the steady state
is reached). Before this region is reached, Ri0 < βi−1 , but then the intermediary would not
postpone a dividend in this region, as other wise again µi = βi Ri0 µ0i = βi Ri0 < 1, which is
not possible. 2
Lemma B.1. Consider an equilibrium with Ri0 ∈ [βi−1 , β −1 ] and µ = µ0 = 1 and assume
the equilibrium is unique from the next period onward. Consider another equilibrium
interest rate R̃i0 , then k̃ ≶ k and R̃i0 ≶ Ri0 is impossible.
Proof of Lemma B.1. Using (17) at the two different equilibria, if k̃ ≶ k and R̃i0 ≶ Ri0 ,
then
A0 fk (k̃) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
µ̃
=
β
≷
β
=1
µ̃0
℘i (Ri0 )
℘i (R̃i0 )

(B.1)

If k̃ < k and R̃i0 < Ri0 = βi−1 , then by (B.1) µ̃ > µ̃0 . Thus, µ̃ > µ̃0 R̃i0 βi implying that (4)
must be binding. But then the firm must pay a dividend and 1 = µ̃ > µ̃0 , a contradiction.
If k̃ > k and R̃i0 > Ri0 and the collateral constraint binds at the original equilibrium,
then w̃0 ≥ A0 f (k̃) + (1 − θ)i)(1 − δ)k̃ > A0 f (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)k = w0 . Since w̃0 > w0 ,
µ0 = 1, and the equilibrium is unique , µ̃0 = 1. By (B.1), µ̃ < µ̃0 = 1, a contradiction.
If k̃ > k and R̃i0 > Ri0 and the collateral constraint does not bind at the original
equilibrium, the Ri0 = β −1 (using (15)). But then µ̃/µ̃0 ≥ R̃i0 β > 1 while (B.1) implies
µ̃/µ̃0 < 1, a contradiction. 2
Lemma B.2. The equilibrium in region D is the unique equilibrium converging to the
steady state.
52

Proof of Lemma B.2. The proof is by induction. First, note that if w ≥ w∗ and
wi ≥ wi∗ , then the unique steady state is reached. Consider an equilibrium interest rate
Ri0 in region D and suppose the equilibrium is unique from the next period on. Suppose
Ri0 ∈ [βi−1 , β −1 ) and consider another equilibrium with R̃i0 . If the collateral constraint (4)
binds at this equilibrium, then R̃i0 = (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k̃/wi ≷ (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k/wi = Ri0 , which
is impossible by Lemma (B.1). If the collateral constraint (4) does not bind at this equilibrium and k̃ < k, then R̃i0 < (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k̃/wi < (θi − θ)(1 − δ)k/wi = Ri0 , which is also
impossible by Lemma (B.1). If the collateral constraint (4) does not bind at this equilibrium and k̃ > k, by Lemma (B.1) R̃i0 < Ri . But then by (15) µ̃/µ̃0 = β R̃i0 < βRi0 < 1.
Since k̃ > k and the collateral constraint binds at Ri0 , w̃0 > w0 implying µ̃0 = 1 and
by above inequality µ̃ < 1, a contradiction. Thus for Ri0 ∈ [βi−1 , β −1 ) the equilibrium
is unique. Suppose Ri0 = β −1 . By Lemma (B.1), we need only consider the two cases
k̃ ≷ k and R̃i0 ≶ Ri0 = β −1 . If k̃ < k and R̃i0 > β −1 , (15) implies that µ̃ > 1 and hence
the firm does not pay a dividend. But then the firm must be borrowing less from intermediaries, which cannot be an equilibrium as li0 = wi at this interest rate. If k̃ > k and
R̃i0 < Ri0 = β −1 , and if (4) binds at R̃i0 , R̃i0 = (θi −θ)(1−δ)k̃/wi > (θi −θ)(1−δ)k/wi ≥ Ri0 ,
a contradiction; if (4) instead does not bind at R̃i0 , µ̃/µ̃0 = β R̃i0 < 1. Since k̃ > k and
R̃i0 b̃0i ≤ Ri0 wi , w̃0 > w0 implying µ̃0 = 1 and by above inequality µ̃ < 1, a contradiction.
Therefore the equilibrium in region D is unique. 2
Proof of Proposition 6. Part (i): By assumption the expected productivity in the
first period equals the deterministic productivity from time 1 onward (denoted Ā0 here),
that is, E[A0 ] = Ā0 . Define the first best level of capital kf b by r + δ = Ā0 fk (kf b ).
Using the definition of the user cost of capital the investment Euler equation (17) for the
deterministic case can be written as
r+δ+

ρi
ρ
(1 − θi )(1 − δ) +
(θi − θ)(1 − δ) = Rβ Ā0 fk (k ∗ ) < Ā0 fk (k ∗ )
R+ρ
R + ρi

and thus k ∗ < kf b . Now suppose that λ(s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. Part (ii) of Lemma 1 then
implies that λi (s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, and (14) and (15) simplify to µ = Rβµ0 and µ = Ri0 βµ0 ,
implying that Ri0 = R, ∀s0 ∈ S, and that d0 = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, as otherwise µ < 1. Moreover,
(20) simplifies to µi = Rβi µ0i and thus d0i = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, as well since otherwise µi < 1.
Investment Euler equation (17) reduces to r + δ = Ā0 fk (kf b ), that is, investment must be
kf b . We now show that this implies that the sum of the net worth of the intermediary
and the firm exceeds their steady state (cum dividend) net worth in at least one state,
which in turn implies that at least one of them pays a dividend, a contradiction. To see
this note that w0 = A0 f (kf b ) + kf b (1 − δ) − Rb0 − Ri0 b0i and wi0 = Rl0 + Ri0 li0 ≥ Ri0 li0 = Ri0 b0i
53

and thus
w0 +wi0 ≥ A0 f (kf b )+kf b (1−δ)−Rb0 ≥ A0 f (kf b )+(1−θ)kf b (1−δ) > A0 f (k ∗ )+(1−θ)k ∗ (1−δ)
whereas w0∗ + wi0∗ = Ā0 f (k ∗ ) + (1 − θ)k ∗ (1 − δ). For A0 > Ā0 , w0 + wi0 > w0∗ + wi0∗ , and
either the intermediary or the firm (or both) must pay a dividend, a contradiction.
Part (ii): If λi (s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S, then (βµ0 /µ)−1 = Ri0 = (βi µ0i /µi )−1 where the first
equality uses (15) and the second equality uses (20) and the fact that part (iv) of Lemma 1
holds for an eventually deterministic economy.
Part (iii): Since λ(ŝ0 ) = 0, λi (ŝ0 ) = 0 by part (ii) of Lemma 1 and Ri (ŝ0 ) = R.
From (14), µ(ŝ0 ) = µ(š0 ) + λ(š0 ) > µ(š0 ). Using (20), (βi µi (ŝ0 )/µi )−1 = R ≤ Ri (š0 ) =
(βi µi (š0 )/µi )−1 and thus µi (ŝ0 ) ≥ µi (š0 ). 2

54

References
Bernanke, B. and Gertler, M. (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 79, 14-31.
Bordo, M. D. and Haubrich, J. G. (2012), “Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record” (NBER working paper 18194).
Boyd, J. H. and Prescott, E. C. (1986), “Financial Intermediary Coalitions,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 38, 211-232.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Sannikov, Y. (2014), “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,” American Economic Review, 104, 379-421.
Caballero, R. J. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2001), “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 48, 513-548.
Cerra, V. and Saxena, S. C. (2008), “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery,” American Economic Review, 98, 439-457.
Chien, Y. and Lustig, H. (2010), “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth
Distribution,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1596-1650.
Diamond, D. W. (1984), “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review
of Economic Studies, 51, 393-414.
Diamond, D. W. (2007), “Legal Systems, Bank Finance, and Debt Maturity” (Working
paper, University of Chicago).
Diamond, D. W. and Dybvig, P. H. (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401-419.
Diamond, D. W. and Rajan, R. G. (2000), “A Theory of Bank Capital,” Journal of
Finance, 55, 2431-2465.
Gertler, M. and Kiyotaki, N. (2010), “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” in Friedman, B. M. and Woodford, M. (eds), Handbook
of Monetary Economics Vol. 3, (Amsterdam: Elsevier) 547-599.
Gromb, D. and Vayanos, D. (2002), “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361-407.
Hahn, F. H. (1973), “On the Foundations of Monetary Theory,” in Parkin, M. and
Nobay, A. R. (eds), Essays in Modern Economics, (New York: Barnes and Noble)
230-242.
He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2012), “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review of
Economic Studies, 79, 735-777.
55

Holmström, B. and Tirole, J. (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663-691.
Jorgenson, D. W. (1963), “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 53, 247-259.
Kehoe, T. J. and Levine, D. K. (1993), “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of
Economic Studies, 60, 865-888.
Kehoe, T. J. and Levine, D. K. (2008), “Bankruptcy and Collateral in Debt Constrained
Markets,” in Farmer, R. E. A. (ed), Macroeconomics in the Small and the Large:
Essays on Microfoundations, Macroeconomic Applications, and Economic History
in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).
Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997a), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
211-248.
Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997b), “Credit Chains” (Working paper, University of
Minnesota and LSE).
Krishnamurthy, A. and Muir, T. (2016), “Credit Spreads and the Severity of Financial
Crises” (Working paper, Stanford University and Yale University).
Ramakrishnan, R. T. and Thakor, A. V. (1984), “Information Reliability and a Theory
of Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, 51, 415-432.
Rampini, A. A. and Viswanathan, S. (2007), “Collateral, Financial Intermediation, and
the Distribution of Debt Capacity” (Working paper, Duke University).
Rampini, A. A. and Viswanathan, S. (2010), “Collateral, Risk Management, and the
Distribution of Debt Capacity,” Journal of Finance, 65, 2293-2322.
Rampini, A. A. and Viswanathan, S. (2013), “Collateral and Capital Structure,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 109, 466-492.
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2014), “Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence
from 100 Episodes,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104, 50-55.
Romer, C. D. and Romer, D. H. (2015), “New Evidence on the Impact of Financial
Crises in Advanced Countries” (Working paper, University of California, Berkeley).
Townsend, R. M. (1978), “Intermediation with Costly Bilateral Exchange,” Review of
Economic Studies, 45, 417-425.
Williamson, S. D. (1986), “Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and Equilibrium Credit Rationing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 18, 159-179.

56

Figure 1: Capital, Collateral Value, and Financing
This figure shows, at the top, the extent to which one unit of capital can be collateralized by households
(fraction θ, interpreted as structures) and intermediaries (fraction θi , interpreted to include equipment),
in the middle, the collateral value next period after depreciation, and at the bottom, the maximal amount
that households and intermediaries can finance, as well as the minimum amount of internal funds required.

Capital

Structures

z

}|

0

❵❵

❵
θ(1 −
❵ ❵ δ)

❵
❵❵
❵❵
❵
❵
R−1 θ(1
❵ ❵ − δ)

Collateral value
(next period)
Financing
(this period)

❵
❵❵

{z

|

}|

{z

θ

❵

{z

Equipment
}|

Working capital
}|

θi

{

1

❵
❵
❵❵
❵ ❵
❵ ❵
❵❵
❵
❵
θi (1 ❵−❵ ❵ δ)
1 − δ❵ ❵ ❵
❵❵ ❵
❵❵
❵❵
❵❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵
}|
{z
}

Intermediaries
Ri′−1 (θi − θ)(1 − δ)

Households

{z

Internal funds
℘i (Ri′ )

Figure 2: Time Line of Firm’s Problem
This figure shows the time line of the firm’s problem in the afternoon of the current period including the
repayment decisions in the morning and afternoon of the next period.
Current period
Afternoon
❵ ❵ ❵ ❵ ❵

Payments
. . . from/to intermediaries
. . . from/to households
Net worth if firm defaults

z
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵

Consume d
Invest k

}|

Borrow E[b′i ] + E[b′a ]
Borrow E[b′ ]

Next period
{z
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵

Morning
}|

State s′
Cash flow A′ f (k)
Repay Ri′ b′i
A′ f (k) + (1 − θi )k(1 − δ)

{z
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵

Afternoon
}|

Repay Rb′a
Repay Rb′
A′ f (k) + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ)

{

❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵
❵

Figure 3: Dynamics of Firm and Financial Intermediary Net Worth
Contours of the regions describing the deterministic dynamics of firm and financial intermediary net
worth (see Proposition 5). Region ND, in which firms pay no dividends, is to the left of the solid
line and Region D, in which firms pay positive dividends, is to the right of the solid line. The point
where the solid line reaches the dotted line is the deterministic steady state (w∗ , wi∗ ). The kink in
the solid line is the point (w̄, w̄i ) where Ri0 = β −1 and the collateral constraint just binds. The solid
line segment between these two points is w̄(wi ) = ℘k(wi ) − wi (with Ri0 ∈ (βi−1 , β −1 )). The solid
line segment sloping down is w̄(wi ) = ℘k̄ − wi (with Ri0 = β −1 ). Region ND is dividend by two dash
dotted lines: below the dash dotted line through (w̄, w̄i ) Ri0 > β −1 ; between the two dash dotted lines
Ri0 ∈ (βi−1 , β −1 ); and above the dash dotted line through (w∗ , wi∗ ) Ri0 < βi−1 . The parameter values
are: β = 0.90, R = 1.05, βi = 0.94, δ = 0.10, θ = 0.60, θi = 0.80, A0 = 0.20, and f (k) = k α with α = 0.80.

Figure 4: Dynamics of a Downturn without a Credit Crunch
This figure illustrates the deterministic dynamics after a downturn in corporate net worth starting from
initial values of net worth w = 0.04 and wi = wi∗ . Panel A traces out the path of firm and intermediary
net worth in w vs. wi space with the contours as in Figure 3. Panel B shows the evolution of the interest
rate on intermediated finance (Panel B1), firm net worth (dashed) and intermediary net worth (solid)
(cum dividend (higher) and ex dividend (lower)) (Panel B2), intermediated lending to firms (solid)
and households (dashed) (Panel B3), and investment (Panel B4). The parameter values are as in Figure 3.

Panel A: Joint evolution of firm and intermediary net worth

Panel B: Interest rates, net worth, lending, and investment over time
Panel B1. Cost of intermediated finance

Panel B2. Firm and intermediary wealth
0.3

1.2

w ∗ + d∗
0.25
w∗

1.15

0.2
0.15

← β −1

1.1

w i∗ + d ∗i
w i∗

0.1
βi−1
1.05

←R
0

5

10

15

20

25

0.05
0

0

5

10

15

Time

Time

Panel B3. Intermediary lending

Panel B4. Investment

20

25

0.2
0.8
k∗

0.15
0.6
li′∗
0.1

0.4

0.05

0

0.2

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

0

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

Figure 5: Dynamics of a Credit Crunch
This figure illustrates the deterministic dynamics after a credit crunch starting from initial values of
net worth w = w∗ and wi = 0.02. Panel A traces out the path of firm and intermediary net worth
in w vs. wi space with the contours as in Figure 3. Panel B shows the evolution of the interest rate
on intermediated finance (Panel B1), firm net worth (dashed) and intermediary net worth (solid)
(cum dividend (higher) and ex dividend (lower)) (Panel B2), intermediated lending to firms (solid)
and households (dashed) (Panel B3), and investment (Panel B4). The parameter values are as in Figure 3.

Panel A: Joint evolution of firm and intermediary net worth

Panel B: Interest rates, net worth, lending, and investment over time
Panel B1. Cost of intermediated finance

Panel B2. Firm and intermediary wealth
0.3

1.2

w ∗ + d∗
0.25
w∗

1.15

0.2
0.15

← β −1

1.1

w i∗ + d ∗i
w i∗

0.1
βi−1
1.05
0

5

10

15

20

25

0.05
0

0

5

10

15

Time

Time

Panel B3. Intermediary lending

Panel B4. Investment

20

25

0.2
0.8
k∗

0.15
0.6

← k̄

li′∗
0.1

0.4

0.05

0

0.2

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

0

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

Figure 6: Dynamics of a Downturn Associated with a Credit Crunch
This figure illustrates the deterministic dynamics after a downturn in corporate net worth associated
with a credit crunch starting from initial values of net worth w = 0.04 and three values of intermediary
net worth wi : wi∗ (solid; see also Figure 4), 0.04 (dotted), and 0.01 (dashed). Panel A traces out the path
of firm and intermediary net worth in w vs. wi space with the contours as in Figure 3. Panel B shows
the evolution of the interest rate on intermediated finance (Panel B1), firm net worth (higher lines) and
intermediary net worth (lower lines) (cum dividend and ex dividend) (Panel B2), intermediated lending
to firms (increasing lines) and households (decreasing lines) (Panel B3), and investment (Panel B4).
The parameter values are as in Figure 3.

Panel A: Joint evolution of firm and intermediary net worth

Panel B: Interest rates, net worth, lending, and investment over time
Panel B1. Cost of intermediated finance

Panel B2. Firm and intermediary wealth

1.25

0.3
w ∗ + d∗
0.25

1.2

w∗
0.2

1.15

0.15
← β −1

1.1

0

5

0.1
βi−1

←R

1.05

10

15

20

w i∗ + d ∗i
w i∗

25

0.05
0

0

5

10

15

20

Time

Time

Panel B3. Intermediary lending

Panel B4. Investment

25

0.2
0.8
k∗

0.15
0.6

← k̄

li′∗
0.1

0.4

0.05

0

0.2

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

0

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

Figure 7: Downturn with a Credit Crunch in Bank-Dependent Economy
This figure illustrates the deterministic dynamics after a downturn in corporate net worth associated
with a credit crunch in a bank-dependent economy starting from initial values of net worth w = 0.04
and three values of intermediary net worth wi : wi∗ (solid), 0.04 (dotted), and 0.01 (dashed). Panel A
traces out the path of firm and intermediary net worth in w vs. wi space with the contours analogous
to Figure 3. Panel B shows the evolution of the interest rate on intermediated finance (Panel B1),
firm net worth (higher lines) and intermediary net worth (lower lines) (cum dividend and ex dividend)
(Panel B2), intermediated lending to firms (increasing lines) and households (decreasing line) (Panel B3),
and investment (Panel B4). The parameter values are as in Figure 3 except that θi = 0.90 and that
A0 = 0.1953 is adjusted to keep k ∗ and thus w∗ + wi∗ constant.

Panel A: Joint evolution of firm and intermediary net worth

Panel B: Interest rates, net worth, lending, and investment over time
Panel B1. Cost of intermediated finance

Panel B2. Firm and intermediary wealth

1.25

0.3
0.25

1.2

w ∗∗ + d ∗∗
w + di
w ii∗∗
w

0.2
1.15

0.15
← β −1

1.1
←R

1.05
0

0.1
βi−1

5

10

15

20

25

0.05
0

0

5

10

15

Time

Time

Panel B3. Intermediary lending

Panel B4. Investment

20

25

0.2
li′∗

0.8
k∗

0.15
0.6
← k̄

0.1

0.4

0.05

0

0.2

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

0

0

5

10

15
Time

20

25

Appendix -- For Online Publication

Appendix C: Static model of intermediary capital
In this appendix we study how the choice between intermediated and direct finance varies
with firm and intermediary net worth in a static (one period) version of our model with a
representative firm. We further simplify by considering the deterministic case, although
the results in this appendix do not depend on this assumption.21 For this case, we first
show the equivalence of limited enforcement and collateral constraints, then characterize
the effect of intermediary net worth on spreads, and finally, analyze the choice between
intermediated and direct finance in the cross section of firms with different net worths.

Appendix C.1: Equivalence of limited enforcement and collateral
constraints
To show the equivalence of the economy with limited enforcement and limited participation and with collateral constraints, consider the firm’s and the intermediary’s problem
with limited enforcement first. The firm’s problem is to choose dividends {d, d0 }, investment k, and payments to the household {p, p0 } and intermediary {pa , p0m , p0a } to maximize
d + βd0

(C.1)

subject to the budget constraints for time 0 and time 1
w ≥ d + k + p + pa ,

A0 f (k) + k(1 − δ) ≥ d0 + p0 + p0m + p0a ,

(C.2)
(C.3)

the participation constraints for the intermediary and household
0 0
pa + qm
pm + qa0 p0a ≥ 0,
−1 0

p+R p

≥ 0,

(C.4)
(C.5)

the limited enforcement constraints for the morning and afternoon
d0 ≥ A0 f (k) + (1 − θi )k(1 − δ),

d0 ≥ A0 f (k) + (1 − θ)k(1 − δ) − p0m ,

(C.6)
(C.7)

and the non-negativity constraints
d, d0 , p0m ≥ 0.

(C.8)

With one period only, the interest rate on intermediated finance is independent of the state s0 , as
the marginal value of net worth next period for financial intermediaries and firms equals 1 for all states,
that is, µ0 = µ0i = 1, rendering the model effectively deterministic.
21

1

Appendix -- For Online Publication
The firm can abscond with a fraction 1 − θi of capital in the morning, whereas in the
afternoon it can abscond with fraction 1 − θ but not payments p0m already made.
The intermediary’s problem is to choose dividends {di , d0i } and payments from the
household {ph , p0h } and from the firm {p̄a , p̄0m , p̄0a } to maximize
di + βi d0i

(C.9)

subject to the budget constraints for time 0 and time 1
wi ≥ di − ph − p̄a ,

0 ≥ d0i − p0h − p̄0m − p̄0a ,

(C.10)
(C.11)

the participation constraints for the firm and household
0 0
−(p̄a + qm
p̄m + qa0 p̄0a ) ≥ 0,

−(ph + R−1 p0h ) ≥ 0,

(C.12)
(C.13)

the limited enforcement constraint for the afternoon
d0i ≥ p̄0m ,

(C.14)

di , d0i , p̄0m ≥ 0.

(C.15)

and the non-negativity constraints

The intermediary can abscond in the afternoon with payments received in the morning.
We emphasize that the intermediary’s limited enforcement constraint in the morning is
redundant, because the intermediary would abscond without anything in the morning.
Using the firm’s time 1 budget constraint (C.3) which holds with equality and the
limited enforcement constraint for the morning (C.6), we have
A0 f (k) + k(1 − δ) − (p0 + p0m + p0a ) = d0 ≥ A0 f (k) + (1 − θi )k(1 − δ)
which is equivalent to the following collateral constraint
θi k(1 − δ) ≥ p0 + p0m + p0a ,

(C.16)

and similarly the limited enforcement constraint for the afternoon is equivalent to the
following collateral constraint
θk(1 − δ) ≥ p0 + p0a .
(C.17)
We will further simplify the collateral constraint for the morning below, after a few
intermediate steps.
2

Appendix -- For Online Publication
Using the intermediary’s time 1 budget constraint (C.11) which holds with equality
and the limited enforcement constraint for the afternoon (C.14), we have
p0h + p̄0m + p̄0a = d0i ≥ p̄0m
which is equivalent to the following collateral constraint
p̄0a ≥ −p0h .

(C.18)

The intermediary can borrow from the household only against claims it has on the firm.
Next we show that the interest rate on intermediated loans repaid in the afternoon
must equal R and that the interest rate on intermediated loans repaid in the morning
must (weakly) exceed R. The intuition is that if the afternoon interest rate would differ
from the interest rates charged by the household, the intermediary could arbitrage this
spread. Moreover, since the intermediary can always lend at R to the household, loans
repaid in the morning must yield at least R.
Lemma C.1. Equilibrium state prices satisfy (i) qa0 = R−1 and (ii) q 0 ≤ R−1 without loss
of generality.
Proof of Lemma C.1. Part (i): Suppose not and assume qa0 < R−1 without loss of
generality. Take ε > 0 and consider the alternative payments p̂h = ph + ε and p̄ˆa =
p̄a − ε at time 0 and p̂0h = p0h − Rε and p̄ˆ0a = p̄0a + (qa0 )−1 ε in the afternoon. These
payments satisfy the intermediary’s time 0 budget constraint (C.10) and the firm’s and
household’s participation constraints, (C.12) and (C.13), by construction. Moreover, the
intermediary’s afternoon collateral constraint (C.18) is satisfied as
p̂0h + p̄ˆ0a = p0h + p̄0a + ((qa0 )−1 − R)ε > p0h + p̄0a ≥ 0.
and using the intermediary’s time 1 budget constraint (C.11) we can choose dˆ0i = d0i +
((qa0 )−1 − R)ε > d0i , which is an improvement, contradicting the optimality of the original
solution.
Part (ii): Suppose not, i.e., q 0 > R−1 and p̄0i > 0. (If p̄0i = 0, then we can set
q 0 = R−1 without loss of generality.) Then consider the alternative choice p̄ˆ0i = p̄i − ε
and p̄ˆ0a = p̄0a + q 0 /R−1 ε, where ε > 0, which satisfies the firm’s participation constraint
(C.12) by construction. Moreover, we can choose dˆ0i = d0i + (q 0 /R−1 − 1)ε > d0i , which is
an improvement and hence again impossible. 2
Observe that the firm’s problem only determines the sum of p+pa and p0 +p0a . Similarly,
the intermediary’s problem only determines the sum of ph + p̄a and p0h + p̄0a .
3

Appendix -- For Online Publication
We can now show that the firm’s limited enforcement constraints are equivalent to
the following collateral constraints
(θi − θ)k(1 − δ) ≥ p0m

θk(1 − δ) ≥ p0 + p0a .

(C.19)
(C.20)

We need to show that (C.19) and (C.20) are equivalent to (C.16) and (C.17). First, note
that (C.20) and (C.17) are identical. Second, observe that adding (C.19) and (C.20) yields
(C.16) which establishes the first direction. To establish the other direction, suppose that
(C.19) does not hold, i.e., (θi − θ)k(1 − δ) < p0m . Then (C.20) must be slack as otherwise
adding (C.19) and (C.20) would imply that (C.16) is violated. Thus, θk(1 − δ) > p0 + p0a .
Consider the alternative payments p̂0m = p0m −ε and p̂0a = p0a +q 0 /R−1 ε which satisfy (C.4),
(C.19), and (C.20) by construction, and dˆ0 = d0 + (1 − q 0 /R−1 )ε ≥ d0 , which is a (weak)
improvement (and a strict improvement and hence contradiction whenever q 0 < R−1 ).
Therefore, (C.19) holds without loss of generality. This establishes the equivalence of the
economies with limited enforcement and with collateral constraints.
To recover the formulation in Section 4 of the paper set p0a = p̄0a = 0, that is, the
firm makes no payments to the intermediary in the afternoon, and change notation by
letting Ri0 ≡ (q 0 )−1 , b ≡ −p, bi ≡ (Ri0 )−1 p0m , l ≡ −ph , and li ≡ (Ri0 )−1 p̄0m , where {b, bi }
are the amounts the firm borrows from the household and intermediary and {l, li } are
the amounts the intermediary lends to the household and firm. Using the fact that the
participation constraints for the intermediary and the household, (C.4) and (C.5), bind,
we can rewrite the firm’s problem as maximizing (C.1) by choosing {d, d0 , k, b, bi } subject
to the constraints
w ≥ d + k − b − bi

A0 f (k) + k(1 − δ) ≥ d0 + Rb + Ri0 bi
(θi − θ)k(1 − δ) ≥ Ri0 bi
θk(1 − δ) ≥ Rb
d, d0 , bi ≥ 0.

(C.21)
(C.22)
(C.23)
(C.24)
(C.25)

Similarly, using the fact that the participation constraints for the firm and the household,
(C.12) and (C.13), bind, we can rewrite the intermediary’s problem as maximizing (C.9)
by choosing {di , d0i , l, li } subject to the constraints
wi ≥ di + l + li

0 ≥ d0i − Rl − Ri0 li
l ≥ 0

di , d0i , li

≥ 0.
4

(C.26)
(C.27)
(C.28)
(C.29)

Appendix -- For Online Publication
We refer to this implementation as the direct implementation as all afternoon loans to
the firm are extended by the household directly. The intermediary has hence no income
from collateralized loans in the afternoon and thus cannot make pledges to the household and can lend to but not borrow from the household. This can be seen from the
collateral constraint (C.28) which reduces to a non-negativity constraint on lending to
the household.
Alternatively, let, as before, Ri0 ≡ (q 0 )−1 , bi ≡ (Ri0 )−1 p0m , and li ≡ (Ri0 )−1 p̄0m , but now
let b ≡ R−1 p0a , l ≡ R−1 p0h , and la0 ≡ R−1 p̄0a , and set p = p0 = 0, that is, the firm does
not borrow from the household directly. Then (C.4), which holds with equality, implies
that pa = −(bi + b), and substituting into (C.2), (C.3), (C.19), and (C.20), we obtain the
constraints of the firm’s problem which are identical to equations (C.21) through (C.25).
However, now we interpret b as loans extended by the intermediary to be repaid in the
afternoon. Similarly, for the intermediary, (C.13) at equality implies that ph = −l and
(C.12) at equality implies that p̄a = −(li +la ) which yields the following set of constraints:
wi ≥ di + l + li + la

(C.30)

la ≥ −l

(C.32)

0 ≥ d0i − Rl − Ri0 li − Rla

(C.31)

and (C.29). This is the indirect implementation in which the intermediary extends morning and all afternoon loans to the firm and in turn borrows from the household against its
collateralized loans. The afternoon collateral constraint (C.32), similar to equation (C.18),
implies that the intermediary can borrow from the household up to the amount that the
firm is due to repay in the afternoon. We emphasize that the firm needs to repay morning
loans (bi ) in the morning.

Appendix C.2: Effect of intermediary capital on spreads
The equilibrium spread on intermediated finance depends on both firm and intermediary net worth. Given firm net worth, spreads are higher when the intermediary is less
well capitalized. Importantly, the spread on intermediated finance depends on the relative capitalization of firms and intermediaries. Spreads are particularly high when firms
are poorly capitalized and intermediaries are relatively poorly capitalized at the same
time. Poor capitalization of the corporate sector does not per se imply high spreads, as
firms’ limited ability to pledge may result in a reduction in firms’ loan demand which
intermediaries with given net worth can more easily accommodate.22
22

Note that in contrast to our model in Holmström and Tirole (1997) aggregate investment only
depends on the sum of firm and intermediary capital.

5

Appendix -- For Online Publication
The representative firm solves (C.1) by choosing {d, d0 , k, b, bi } subject to the constraints (C.21) through (C.25). The representative intermediary solves (C.9) by choosing
{di , d0i , l, li } subject to the constraints (C.26) through (C.29). An equilibrium is defined
in Definition 1 of the paper. In addition to the equilibrium allocation, the spread on
intermediated finance, Ri0 − R, is determined in equilibrium.
The following proposition summarizes the characterization of the equilibrium spread.
Figure C.1 illustrates the results. The key insight is that the spread on intermediated
finance depends on both the firm and intermediary net worth. Importantly, low capitalization of the corporate sector does not necessarily result in a high spread on intermediated
finance. Indeed, it may reduce spreads. Similarly, while low capitalization of the intermediation sector raises spreads, spreads are substantial only when the corporate sector
is poorly capitalized and intermediaries are poorly capitalized relative to the corporate
sector at the same time.
Proposition C.1 (Firm and intermediary net worth). (i) For wi ≥ wi∗ , intermediaries
are well capitalized and there is a minimum spread on intermediated finance βi−1 − R > 0
for all levels of firm net worth. (ii) Otherwise, there is a threshold of firm net worth w(wi )
(which depends on wi ) such that intermediaries are well capitalized and the spread on
intermediated finance is βi−1 −R > 0 as long as w ≤ w(wi ). For w > w(wi ), intermediated
finance is scarce and spreads are higher. For wi ∈ [w̄i , wi∗ ), spreads are increasing in w
until w reaches ŵ(wi ), at which point spreads stay constant at R̂i0 (wi ) − R ∈ (βi−1 −
R, β −1 − R]. For wi ∈ (0, w̄i ), spreads are increasing in w until w reaches ŵ(wi ), then
decreasing in w until w̄(wi ) is reached, at which point spreads stay constant at β −1 − R.
As wi → 0, ŵ(wi ) → 0.
Proof of Proposition C.1. First, consider the intermediary’s problem. The first-order
conditions, which are necessary and sufficient, are
µi = 1 + η d ,

(C.33)

µi = Rβi µ0i + Rβi η 0 ,

(C.34)

µi = Ri0 βi µ0i + Ri0 βi ηi0 ,

(C.35)

µ0i = 1 + ηd0 ,

(C.36)

where the multipliers on the constraints (C.26) and (C.27) are µi and βi µ0i , and ηd , βi ηd0 ,
Rβi η 0 , and Ri0 βi ηi0 are the multipliers on the non-negativity constraints on dividends and
direct and intermediated lending. Since (C.27) holds with equality, the non-negativity
constraints on l0 and li0 render the non-negativity constraint on d0i redundant and hence
µ0i = 1. Using (C.34) we have η 0 = (Rβi )−1 µi − 1 ≥ (Rβi )−1 − 1 > 0 (and l0 = 0) and
6

Appendix -- For Online Publication
similarly using (C.35) ηi0 > 0 as long as Ri0 < βi−1 . Therefore, for li0 > 0 it is necessary
that Ri0 ≥ βi−1 . If Ri0 > βi−1 , then µ0i > 1 (and li0 = wi ) while if Ri0 = βi−1 , 0 ≤ li0 ≤ wi .
Now consider the representative firm’s problem. The first-order conditions, which are
necessary and sufficient, are
µ = 1 + νd ,

(C.37)

µ = β (µ0 [A0 fk (k) + (1 − δ)] + [λ0 θ + λ0i (θi − θ)] (1 − δ)) ,
0

0

µ = Rβµ + Rβλ ,
µ =

Ri0 βµ0

+

µ0 = 1 + νd0 ,

Ri0 βλ0i

−

Ri0 βνi0 ,

(C.38)
(C.39)
(C.40)
(C.41)

where the multipliers on the constraints (C.21) through (C.24) are µ, βµ0 , βλ0 , and βλ0i ,
and νd , βνd0 , and Ri0 βνi0 are the multipliers on the non-negativity constraints on dividends
and intermediated borrowing. By the Inada condition, (C.38) implies that k > 0 and
using (C.22) at equality and (C.23) and (C.24) we have d0 ≥ A0 f (k) + k(1 − θi )(1 − δ) > 0
and µ0 = 1. Suppose νi0 > 0 (and hence b0i = 0). Since k > 0, (C.23) is slack and λ0i = 0.
Using (C.37) and (C.40) we have 1 ≤ µ < Ri0 β which implies that Ri0 > β −1 . But at such
an interest rate on intermediated finance li0 = wi > 0, which is not an equilibrium as b0i = 0.
Therefore, νi0 = 0 and Ri0 ≤ β −1 . Moreover, if Ri0 < β −1 , then λ0i = (Ri0 β)−1 µ − 1 > 0 and
hence b0i = (Ri0 )−1 (θi − θ)k(1 − δ) > 0. Since li0 = 0 if Ri0 < βi−1 , we have Ri0 ∈ [βi−1 , β −1 ]
in equilibrium. Defining ℘i (Ri0 ) = 1 − [R−1 θ + (Ri0 )−1 (θi − θ)](1 − δ) and using equations
(C.38) through (C.40) the firm’s investment Euler equation is
1 A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
1=β
.
µ
℘i (Ri0 )

(C.42)

Given the interest rate on intermediated finance, the firm’s problem induces a concave
value function and thus µ (weakly) decreases in w, implying that k (weakly) increases.
We first show that intermediaries are well capitalized and there is a minimum spread
on intermediated finance βi−1 − R > 0 for all levels of firm net worth when wi ≥ wi∗ and
for levels of firm net worth w ≤ w(wi ) when wi < wi∗ . If Ri0 = βi−1 , a well capitalized firm
invests k ∗ which solves (C.42) specialized to 1 = β[A0 fk (k ∗ ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/℘i (βi−1 ),
while less well capitalized firms invests k ≤ k ∗ . The intermediary can meet the required
demand for intermediated finance for any level of firm net worth w if wi ≥ wi∗ ≡ βi (θi −
θ)k ∗ (1 − δ). Suppose instead that wi < wi∗ . In this case the intermediary is able to
meet the firm’s loan demand at Ri0 = βi−1 only if the firm is sufficiently constrained;
the constrained firm invests k = w/℘i (βi−1 ) using (C.21), (C.23), and (C.24) at equality,
and thus b0i = βi (θi − θ)k(1 − δ); the intermediary can meet this demand as long as
w ≤ w(wi ) ≡ ℘i (βi−1 )/[βi (θi − θ)(1 − δ)]wi .
7

Appendix -- For Online Publication
Suppose now that wi < wi∗ and w > w(wi ) as defined above. First, consider wi ∈
[w̄i , wi∗ ) where w̄i ≡ β(θi − θ)k̄(1 − δ) and 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘, that is, w̄i
is the loan demand of the well capitalized firm when the cost of intermediated finance
is Ri0 = β −1 . Note that Ri0 < β −1 on (w̄i , wi∗ ) since the intermediary has more than
enough net worth to accommodate the loan demand of the well capitalized firm (and
thus any constrained firm) at Ri0 = β −1 . Thus, the firm’s collateral constraint binds,
that is, wi = (Ri0 )−1 (θi − θ)k(1 − δ). If the firm is poorly capitalized, d = 0 and (C.21)
implies w + wi = ℘k, and Ri0 = (θi − θ)(1 − δ)(w/wi + 1). If the firm is well capitalized,
µ = 1 and k̄(wi ) solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄(wi )) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)]/[℘ − wi /k̄(wi )]. Moreover,
w̄(wi ) ≡ ℘k̄(wi ) − wi and for w ≥ w̄(wi ) the cost of intermediated finance is constant
at R̄i0 (wi ) = (θi − θ)k̄(wi )(1 − δ)/wi . Note that R̄i0 (wi∗ ) = βi−1 and w̄(wi∗ ) = ℘k ∗ − wi∗ =
℘i (βi−1 )k ∗ = w(wi∗ ), that is, the two boundaries coincide at wi∗ . In contrast, at w̄i we
have w(w̄i ) = ℘i (βi−1 )/[βi (θi − θ)(1 − δ)]w̄i = ℘i (βi−1 )β/βi k̄ = ℘k̄β/βi − w̄i < w̄(w̄i ) and
R̄i0 (w̄i ) = β −1 .
Finally, consider wi ∈ (0, w̄i ) and w > w(wi ) as defined above. If the firm is well
capitalized (C.40) implies λ0i = (Ri0 β)−1 −1 ≥ 0. Moreover, since wi < w̄i the intermediary
cannot meet the well capitalized firm’s loan demand at Ri0 = β −1 and thus the cost of
intermediated finance is in fact β −1 and λ0i = 0, that is, the collateral constraint for
intermediated finance does not bind. Thus, the firm’s investment Euler equation (C.42)
simplifies to 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄)+(1−θi )(1−δ)]/℘i (β −1 ) which is solved by k̄ as defined earlier in
the proof. Define w̄(wi ) ≡ ℘k̄−wi ; the firm is well capitalized for w ≥ w̄(wi ). Suppose w <
w̄(wi ) and hence µ > 1. If the collateral constraint for intermediated finance does not bind,
then (C.40) implies Ri0 = β −1 µ > β −1 and (C.42) implies Ri0 = [A0 fk (k)+(1−θ)(1−δ)]/℘,
while (C.21) yields w + wi = ℘k. Observe that k < k̄ and Ri0 decreases in w. If instead
the collateral constraint binds, then Ri0 = (θi − θ)k(1 − δ)/wi and w + wi = ℘k (so
long as w > w(wi )). Note that k and Ri0 increase in w in this range. The collateral
constrain is just binding at ŵ(wi ) ≡ ℘k̂(wi ) − wi where [A0 fk (k̂(wi )) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ =
(θi − θ)k̂(wi )(1 − δ)/wi .
We now show that if the collateral constraint for intermediated finance binds at some
w < w̄(wi ) then it binds for all w− < w. Note that d = 0 in this range and w + wi = ℘k.
−1
−1
0−
0
−1 −
At w− , either b0−
and hence λ0−
i < wi and Ri = βi
i = (βi β) µ − 1 > 0 or bi = wi
and w− + wi = ℘k − , implying k − < k. Suppose the collateral constraint for intermediated
−
0 0
finance is slack at w− . Then Ri0− b0−
i < (θi − θ)k (1 − δ) < (θi − θ)k(1 − δ) = Ri bi and
0−
0−
0
0 0
0
0
since b0−
i = wi and bi ≤ wi by above Ri wi < Ri bi ≤ Ri wi which implies Ri < Ri . But
Ri0− β

A0 fk (k) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
A0 fk (k − ) + (1 − θi )(1 − δ)
>β
= µ > Ri0 β
=µ =β
0− −1
0 −1
℘ − (Ri ) (θi − θ)(1 − δ)
℘ − (Ri ) (θi − θ)(1 − δ)
−

8

Appendix -- For Online Publication
or Ri0− > Ri0 , a contradiction.
Moreover, w(wi ) < ŵ(wi ) < w̄(wi ) on wi ∈ (0, w̄i ). Suppose, by contradiction,
that ŵ(wi ) ≤ w(wi ) and recall that w(wi ) + wi = ℘k and ŵ(wi ) + wi = ℘k̂(wi ),
so k̂(wi ) ≤ k. But R̂i0 (wi ) = (θi − θ)k̂(wi )(1 − δ)/wi ≤ (θi − θ)k(1 − δ)/wi = βi−1 .
But if R̂i0 (wi ) ≤ βi−1 , then at ŵ(wi ) we have µ = R̂i0 (wi )β < 1 (since the collateral constraint is slack), a contradiction. Thus, w(wi ) < ŵ(wi ). Suppose, again by
contradiction, that w̄(wi ) ≤ ŵ(wi ) and hence k̄ ≤ k̂(wi ). Recall that k̂(wi ) solves
[A0 fk (k̂(wi )) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ = (θi − θ)k̂(wi )(1 − δ)/wi . At w̄i this equation is solved
by k̄ (and R̂i0 (w̄i ) = β −1 ), but since wi < w̄i , k̂(wi ) < k̄, a contradiction. Moreover, as
wi → 0, k̂(wi ) → 0 and ŵ(wi ) = ℘k̂(wi ) − wi → 0. 2
Panel A of Figure C.1 displays the cost of intermediated finance as a function of firm
net worth (w) and intermediary net worth (wi ). Panel B of Figure C.1 displays the
contours of the various areas in Panel A. When intermediary capital is below wi∗ and
the corporate sector is not too poorly capitalized (w > w(wi )), spreads on intermediated finance are higher. Indeed, when intermediary capital is in this range, higher firm
net worth initially raises spreads as loan demand increases (until firm net worth reaches
ŵ(wi )). This effect can be substantial when wi < w̄i ; indeed, interest rates spike when
financial intermediary net worth is very low. If firm net worth is still higher, spreads
decline as the marginal product of capital and hence firms’ willingness to borrow at high
interest rates declines. When corporate net worth exceeds w̄(wi ), the cost on intermediated finance is constant at β −1 , which equals the shadow cost of internal funds of well
capitalized firms.
To sum up, spreads are determined by firm and intermediary net worth jointly.
Spreads are higher when intermediary net worth is lower. But firm net worth affects
both the demand for intermediated loans and, via investment, the collateral available to
back such loans. When collateral constraints bind, lower firm net worth reduces spreads.

Appendix C.3: Intermediated vs. direct finance in cross section
To show that our model has plausible implications for the choice between intermediated
and direct finance in the cross section of firms, consider the static environment without
uncertainty analyzed above, but now taking the spread on intermediated finance Ri0 −R as
given. Each firm maximizes (C.1) subject to the constraints (C.21) through (C.25) given
its net worth w. Assume that Ri0 > β −1 .23 Severely constrained firms borrow as much as
We consider the case in which Ri0 > β −1 since one can show that Ri0 < β −1 would imply that λ0i > 0
and thus the cross sectional financing implications would be trivial as all firms would borrow the maximal
23

9

Appendix -- For Online Publication
possible from intermediaries while less constrained firms borrow less from intermediaries
and dividend paying firms do not borrow from intermediaries at all, consistent with
the cross sectional stylized facts. These cross-sectional results are similar to the ones
in Holmström and Tirole (1997), although in their model all firms that borrow from
intermediaries raise the same amount of intermediated finance.
Proposition C.2 (Intermediated vs. direct finance across firms). Suppose Ri0 > β −1 .
(i) Firms with net worth w ≤ wl borrow as much as possible from intermediaries, firms
with net worth wl < w < wu borrow a positive amount from intermediaries but less
than the maximal amount, and firms with net worth exceeding wu do not borrow from
intermediaries, where 0 < wl < wu . (ii) Only firms with net worth exceeding w̄ pay
dividends at time 0, where wu < w̄ < ∞. (iii) Investment is increasing in w and strictly
increasing for w ≤ wl and wu < w < w̄.
Proof of Proposition C.2. The first-order conditions are (C.37)-(C.41). By the Inada
condition, (C.38) implies that k > 0 and using (C.22) at equality and (C.23) and (C.24)
we have d0 ≥ A0 f (k) + k(1 − θi )(1 − δ) > 0 and µ0 = 1. But (C.37) and (C.39) imply
1 ≤ µ = Rβ + Rβλ0 and thus λ0 > 0 since Rβ < 1 by assumption; that is, all firms raise
as much financing as possible from households.
Suppose the firm pays dividends at time 0. Then µ = µ0 = 1 and (C.40) implies
0 > 1 − Ri0 β = Ri0 βλ0i − Ri0 βνi0 and thus νi0 = 1 − (Ri0 β)−1 > 0, b0i = 0, and λ0i = 0; thus,
the firm does not use intermediated finance. Note that the problem of maximizing (C.1)
subject to the constraints (C.21) through (C.25) has a (weakly) concave objective and a
convex constraint set and hence induces a (weakly) concave value function. Thus, µ is
(weakly) decreasing in w and let w̄ be the lowest value of net worth for which µ = 1; by
the Inada condition, such a w̄ < +∞ exists. At w̄, d = 0, w̄ = k̄℘ (using (C.21)), and k̄
solves 1 = β[A0 fk (k̄) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ (using (C.38)). For w ≥ w̄, d = w − w̄ while the
rest of the optimal policy is unchanged.
Suppose λ0i = 0 and νi0 = 0. Then µ = Ri0 β > 1. Moreover, rearranging (C.38) we have
1 = β/(Ri0 β)[A0 fk (k) + (1 − θ)(1 − δ)]/℘ which defines k < k̄. Define wu such that investment is k and b0i = 0; then wu = k℘. Similarly, define wl such that investment is k and
b0i = (Ri0 )−1 (θi −θ)k(1−δ); then wl = k[℘−(Ri0 )−1 (θi −θ)(1−δ)]. Note that wl < wu < w̄.
So firms below wl raise as much financing as possible from intermediaries (since µ > Ri0 β
by concavity and hence λ0i > 0). Firms with net worth between wl and wu pay down
intermediary financing linearly. Firms with net worth above wu do not borrow from intermediaries and scale up until k̄ is reached at w̄, at which point they initiate dividends. 2
amount from intermediaries. When Ri0 = β −1 , this would also be true without loss of generality.

10

Appendix -- For Online Publication
Intermediated finance is costlier than direct finance. Indeed, under the conditions of
the proposition, intermediated finance is costlier than the shadow cost of internal finance
of well capitalized firms. Thus, well capitalized firms, which pay dividends, do not borrow
from financial intermediaries. In contrast, firms with net worth below wu have a shadow
cost of internal finance which is sufficiently high that they choose to borrow a positive
amount from intermediaries. For severely constrained firms, with net worth below wl ,
the shadow cost of internal funds is so high that they borrow as much as they can
from intermediaries, that is, their collateral constraint for intermediated finance binds.
Moreover, more constrained firms have lower investment and are hence smaller.
The cross-sectional capital structure implications are plausible: smaller and more
constrained firms borrow more from financial intermediaries and have higher costs of
financing, while larger and less constrained firms borrow from households, for example in
bond markets, and have lower financing costs.

11

Appendix -- For Online Publication

Figure C.1: Role of Firm and Financial Intermediary Net Worth
This figure displays the equilibrium of the static economy. Panel A shows the interest rate on
intermediated finance Ri0 − 1 (percent) as a function of firm (w) and intermediary net worth (wi ).
Panel B shows the contour of area where spread exceeds βi−1 − R: wi∗ (dash dotted) and w(wi ) (dash
dotted); ŵ(wi ) (dashed); contour of area where spread equals β −1 − R: w̄i (solid) and w̄(wi ) (solid).
The parameter values are: β = 0.90, R = 1.05, βi = 0.94, δ = 0.10, θ = 0.60, θi = 0.80, A0 = 0.20, and
f (k) = k α with α = 0.80.

Cost of intermediated funds

Panel A: Interest rate on intermediated finance Ri0 − 1
50
40
30
20
10

0
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0

0.1

0.05

Intermediary net worth

0.15

0.2

0.25

Firm net worth

Panel B: Contours of regions with different equilibrium interest rate

12

