NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-FULFILLING DEBT CRISES, REVISITED:
THE ART OF THE DESPERATE DEAL
Mark Aguiar
Satyajit Chatterjee
Harold Cole
Zachary Stangebye
Working Paper 23312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23312

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We thank Manuel Amador for numerous discussions and suggestions throughout the process. We
also thank seminar and conference participants; our discussants Giancarlo Corsetti, Ramon
Marimon, Luigi Paciello, and Vivian Yue; and Fernando Alvarez, Stephen Morris, and Jesse
Schreger for helpful comments. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mark Aguiar, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold Cole, and Zachary Stangebye. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises, Revisited: The Art of the Desperate Deal
Mark Aguiar, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold Cole, and Zachary Stangebye
NBER Working Paper No. 23312
April 2017
JEL No. E6,F34
ABSTRACT
We revisit self-fulfilling rollover crises by introducing an alternative equilibrium selection that
involves bond auctions at depressed but strictly positive equilibrium prices, a scenario in line with
observed sovereign debt crises. We refer to these auctions as “desperate deals,” the defining
feature of which is a price schedule that makes the government indifferent to default or
repayment. The government randomizes at the time of repayment, which we show can be
implemented in pure strategies by introducing stochastic political payoffs or external bailouts.
Quantitatively, auctions at fire-sale prices are crucial for generating realistic spread volatility.

Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com
Satyajit Chatterjee
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
chatterjee.satyajit@gmail.com

Harold Cole
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
160 McNeil Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu
Zachary Stangebye
711 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
zstangeb@nd.edu

1

Introduction

In this paper, we explore a novel class of self-fulfilling sovereign debt crisis equilibria. We
build on the familiar Cole and Kehoe (2000) framework in which a coordination failure can
lead to a “failed auction” and subsequent default.1 We extend this to incorporate selffulfilling equilibria in which the sovereign auctions bonds at fire-sale – but strictly positive –
prices. Such “desperate deals” are consistent with the experiences of emerging markets and
recent European crisis countries, in which spreads are high and volatile but default remains
relatively rare. The standard Cole-Kehoe equilibrium has difficulty explaining such episodes
given the stark assumption that a crisis results in a price of zero for new issuances and default
with probability one. We explore quantitatively the differences between our framework and
the canonical model and show that including fire-sale auctions as part of the equilibrium
path is crucial for understanding the high volatility of spreads.
The framework we explore builds on the standard Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) model and
the recent quantitative versions beginning with Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano
(2008). In particular, the government of a small open economy faces endowment risk and
issues non-contingent (but defaultable) bonds to a pool of competitive foreign investors.
As in Cole and Kehoe (2000), our timing convention allows the sovereign to default in
the same period as a successful auction. Cole and Kehoe used this timing to support an
equilibrium price of zero for any amount of bonds sold at auction, which in turn is supported
by immediate default due to the inability to roll over maturing bonds. Cole and Kehoe
considered an equilibrium selection in which bonds are auctioned at positive prices in noncrisis periods but, conditional on the realization of a sunspot, creditors coordinate on the
zero-price equilibria, triggering default.
As mentioned, the failed auctions of the standard Cole-Kehoe model shed light on how
creditor beliefs can play a role in generating defaults and how this prospect affects government
policy ex ante. However, in practice, sovereigns in crisis frequently escape default by issuing
a minimal amount of bonds at low prices. As a motivating example, consider the case of
1

There are two main traditions in the self-fulfilling debt crisis literature, one associated with Calvo (1988)
and the other with Cole and Kehoe (2000). Loosely speaking, the former tradition focuses on the link between
prices today and budget sets (and incentives to default) tomorrow. See Lorenzoni and Werning (2013) and
Ayres, Navarro, Nicolini, and Teles (2015) for recent papers in the Calvo tradition. The Cole and Kehoe
(2000) model features multiple pairs of prices and contemporaneous default decisions that satisfy equilibrium
conditions, with multiplicity reminiscent of a bank run. Recent papers in this tradition include Conesa and
Kehoe (2011) and Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2015).

1

Portugal.2 Yields on Portugal’s bonds increased in 2010. By the start of 2011, Portugal was
in distress and having difficulty rolling over its maturing bonds. In January 2011, it issued
one billion euros in a “private placement” that was reportedly purchased by China.3 This was
not sufficient to stem the crisis, and in May of that year Portugal began to draw on emergency
funding from the European Union (EU). In late 2012, the prospect of bonds maturing in
2013 loomed. In anticipation, the Portuguese debt agency repurchased bonds maturing
in September 2013 while issuing bonds maturing in 2015. This swap was accomplished
not through default, negotiation, and restructuring but rather was implemented via a dual
auction.4 The OECD Sovereign Borrowing Outlook 2013 5 referred to this type of transaction
as “market-friendly solutions to resume market access and to ease near-term redemption
pressures.” A benefit of the operation was avoiding the risk of a failed auction in 2013 when
the original bonds matured.6 As it turned out, Portugal did successfully auction bonds in
2013 but did so without the threat of a rollover crisis due to the maturity swap.
This narrative gives a sense of the rich menu of possibilities, even in the absence of
outright default and renegotiation, that is observed in many sovereign debt crises, both in
Europe and emerging markets. We capture some of this richness in a tractable manner
by incorporating desperate deals as part of the equilibrium outcome during a coordination
failure. In particular, we follow Cole and Kehoe and introduce a sunspot that coordinates
creditor beliefs between a relatively high equilibrium price schedule and a crisis price schedule. However, rather than the latter involving zero prices and immediate default, we consider
an equilibrium price schedule that makes the government indifferent to default or repayment
immediately after the auction. In our quantitative model, such prices typically imply spreads
that are roughly 500 basis points higher than they are during non-crisis periods, which is in
line with many real-world episodes. This price schedule is rationalized by allowing the government to play a mixed strategy over post-auction default, with the probability of default
consistent with that period’s equilibrium price schedule.
2
We are grateful for conversations with Pedro Teles regarding Portugal’s debt management during the
crisis.
3
See http://ftalphaville.ft.com/2011/01/11/453471/p-p-p-ick-up-a-portuguese-private-placement/
and http://uk.reuters.com/article/portugal-bonds-idUSLDE7061QG20110107.
4
See
http://www.igcp.pt/fotos/editor2/2013/Relatario_Anual/Financiamento_Estado_Port_
uk.pdf, page 6.
5
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/sov_b_outlk-2013-en, page 120.
6
The Portuguese debt agency annual report for 2012 ( http://www.igcp.pt/gca/?id=108) notes that
“the management of the debt portfolio takes into account the refinancing profile of (IGCP) the debt, so as to
avoid an excessive concentration of redemptions...” Its 2013 report states that its various operations “enabled
the IGCP to accumulate levels of liquidity,” which it used in part to reduce additional future commitments.

2

We extend the model to discuss how the desperate deals price schedule can be supported
in an equilibrium in which the government plays pure strategies. In the spirit of Harsanyi
(1973), we introduce a shock to the default payoff at the time of settlement that is orthogonal
to income and debt. A natural interpretation of this shock is the incumbent party’s political
payoff to default versus repayment conditional on fundamentals. An alternative extension
considers bailouts from a supranational institution, such as the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) or EU, that has an unpredictable component. From the perspective of the lenders,
the bonds sold during a crisis are lottery tickets whose payoff depends on short-run political
outcomes, either domestically or in foreign capitals. The movement in these external forces
may be small, but they have a large impact on bond prices when the government is close
to indifference, providing a potential source of high-frequency volatility in secondary market
prices. In this sense, our approach corresponds to a worldview that debt crises push a
sovereign to the brink of default, but whether default is actually realized is a random outcome
that is independent of fundamentals and, from the creditors’ perspective, a matter of luck.
A few features of this approach are worthy of note. The equilibrium price schedule and
the government’s mixed-strategy response are part of a competitive equilibrium. Although
bargaining and renegotiation are important aspects of sovereign default,7 many emerging
markets and all European crisis countries other than Greece have managed their crises without resorting to outright default. The auctions we consider are arm’s-length transactions
involving competitive prices. Moreover, as the prices are competitive they do not involve
implicit transfers.
Although desperate deals do not involve bargaining or transfers, they do benefit legacy
bondholders (compared with default) and deliver the default value to the government without
the associated deadweight costs of default. In this sense, conditional on the occurrence of
a crisis, the deals raise the efficiency of bond markets. Given the competitive nature of the
bond market, the sovereign reaps this gain ex ante through better prices. We show that
this has important implications for welfare as well as the willingness of the government to
borrow despite the prospect of crises. An important analytical insight of the Cole-Kehoe
(2000) model is that the potential of a crisis and the associated ex ante equilibrium price
schedule induce the government to deleverage in order to avoid being vulnerable to a selffulfilling run. Replacing failed auctions with desperate deals mitigates this tendency. In
fact, one can construct a scenario in which the government rolls over bonds at fire-sale
7

See Benjamin and Wright (2008), for example.

3

prices for a protracted period that ends in default at a random point in time. This is a
perspective on prolonged crises that is an alternative to Conesa and Kehoe’s (2011) “gambling
for redemption” and Lorenzoni and Werning’s (2013) “slow moving” debt crises.
The paper introduces and discusses the theoretical concepts buttressing the desperate
deals equilibria in a simple one-period bond framework similar to Eaton and Gersovitz (1981).
We then enrich the model to include longer maturity bonds and risk-averse lenders to evaluate
the quantitative implications of desperate deals. We calibrate the model to Mexico and
quantitatively contrast our benchmark model with desperate deals to the canonical ColeKehoe framework in which crises generate certain default. With desperate deals, we match
key bond market regularities, including the average and standard deviation of bond spreads,
average debt-to-income ratios, and a default frequency of twice every one hundred years,
the latter being consistent with broad historical samples. In the Cole-Kehoe version of the
model, the standard deviation of bond spreads is a factor of twenty-five times too small.
While that model generates frequent enough defaults, the sovereign never borrows into high
spreads. In our benchmark model, the government is more willing to accumulate debt and,
more important, to issue bonds at fire-sale prices when faced with the crisis price schedule.
Using our benchmark model, we also contrast defaults due to a coordination failure versus
“fundamental” defaults in which the government defaults despite the creditors coordinating
on the better equilibrium price schedule. The latter have a distinct boom-bust pattern, in
which default is preceded by abnormally high growth followed by a large negative growth
realization. The high growth generates high bond prices, inducing the government to leverage up. The relatively high level of debt leaves the sovereign unwilling to repay when an
abnormally low growth outcome is realized. This pattern shares something in common with
the data, but recent empirical work suggests booms followed by large recessions represent
only a fraction of debt crises in practice.8 Moreover, fundamental defaults do not generate
an ex ante spike in spreads, as the low growth realization is largely unanticipated given the
persistence of the endowment process.
The model’s defaults associated with coordination failures do not have an anticipatory
boom and coincide with a relatively moderate contraction of endowment. Relatively high
debt levels are also a necessary component of default, but in our benchmark model these
are frequently observed in the ergodic distribution due to the reasons previously discussed.
Given this vulnerability, a coordination failure generates a spike in spreads as the government
8

See the handbook chapter of Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye (2016) for more details.

4

issues bonds at desperate deal prices. The benchmark simulations rationalize why large
recessions may not yield large jumps in spreads, while smaller recessions can be associated
with extremely adverse outcomes, a pattern observed in many sovereign debt crises.
We also consider crisis equilibria in which the government repurchases non-maturing
bonds at fire-sale prices. As legacy bondholders prefer this outcome to default, ex ante
prices are higher when such events are likely to occur. We show that this has ambiguous
effects on ex ante government welfare. On the one hand, a better outcome in the event of a
crisis increases the efficiency of bond markets, which the government captures via prices due
to competitive markets for its bonds. On the other hand, more efficient markets encourage
the sovereign to borrow more, raising the likelihood of a crisis going forward, which may
lower prices.
The idea that some factor other than domestic fundamentals, such as creditor beliefs
about the equilibrium behavior of other lenders, is compelling. Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole,
and Stangebye (2016) document a number of supporting facts regarding emerging market
and European bonds. First, as is well known, emerging market spreads over benchmark riskfree bonds are volatile. Second, while large spikes in spreads are correlated with declines
in output, the correlation is relatively weak. In fact, a sizable proportion of such spikes
occur when growth is positive and in line with historical means. The same holds in the
shorter sample of European crisis countries (Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Spain, and Greece).
While the literature has shown some of the variation in spreads can be explained by shifts in
measures of global risk premia, there remains a large and time-varying unexplained residual
component. One possible interpretation of this residual source of risk is shifts in creditors
beliefs about the behavior of other creditors. Recently, Bocola and Dovis (2016) performed
an accounting exercise on the Italian debt crisis and found that shifts in the probability of
a self-fulfilling crisis played a non-negligible role in explaining the spike in spreads.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out a simple model to
introduce the concept of desperate deals; Section 3 augments and calibrates the model to
explore its quantitative implications; Section 4 presents the quantitative results; and Section
5 concludes.

5

2

Model

We present the model in two phases. In this section, we consider a simple model that will
allow a clear exposition of the paper’s novel crisis equilibrium. In Section 3, we extend the
model for quantitative analysis.

2.1

Environment

We consider a single-good, discrete-time environment. There is a small open economy that
receives a stochastic endowment and (initially) has access to international capital markets.
We assume that the economy’s aggregate consumption and saving decisions are made by a
sovereign government.9 The economy is small in the sense that its endowment realizations
and its fiscal policy do not affect the world risk-free interest rate.
The economy receives a stochastic endowment Yt ∈ Y ≡ [Y , Y ], with 0 < Y < Y . For
this section, we assume Yt is iid over time. The sovereign’s preferences over the sequence of
aggregate consumption {Ct }∞
t=0 is given by:
E0

∞
X

β t u(Ct ),

t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) and u : R+ → R is continuous, strictly increasing, and concave.
The rest of the world is populated by risk-neutral lenders who discount at the rate
R−1 = (1 + r∗ )−1 . In this section, financial markets are restricted to a one-period, noncontingent discount bond. Let B denote the outstanding stock of bonds at the start of a
period; note that B > 0 indicates the government is a net debtor, and B < 0 a net creditor.
To rule out Ponzi schemes, we place an upper bound on debt: B ∈ (−∞, B].
The timing of events within a period is depicted in Figure 1. The government enters with
a debt payment due in the current period of B. At the start of the period, the endowment
Y is realized. A sunspot that coordinates creditor beliefs, ρ, is also realized. The sunspot is
iid over time and will be discussed in detail in Section 2.2. After observing the exogenous
states (Y, ρ), the government decides how much debt to issue (or assets to buy), denoted by
9

That is, we assume that the sovereign has enough instruments to implement any feasible consumption
sequence as a domestic competitive equilibrium and therefore abstract from the problem of individual residents of the domestic economy. This does not mean that the government necessarily shares the preferences
of its constituents but rather that it is the relevant decision maker viz-à-viz international financial markets.

6

B 0 . After issuing new debt, the government decides whether to repay B at “settlement.” If
it defaults, the creditors receive zero, and the government is excluded from financial markets
going forward. In the quantitative model, we allow for stochastic re-entry.
Figure 1: Timing Within a Period
No Default

Initial
State: s

Auction
B 0 at price
q(s, B 0 )

V R (s, B 0 )

Next
Period: s0

Settlement

V D (s)

Default

Note that the default decision takes place after new debt is issued. This timing follows
Cole and Kehoe (2000) and differs from Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and the existing quantitative literature. An important implication of our timing is that holders of newly issued
bonds are not fully compensated if the government defaults immediately after the auction.
Different from Cole and Kehoe, if B 0 > 0 and the government defaults, we assume the government does not receive the auction revenue. For this section, we assume that the period’s
auction revenue is lost to both creditors and the government.10 In the quantitative model,
this revenue is split pro rata among the government’s creditors (old and new). For B 0 ≤ 0,
the government is purchasing assets, which are risk free.11
Let s = (Y, ρ, B) denote the vector of exogenous and endogenous states at the start
of the period, and S the set of all possible states. We shall consider equilibria such that
the equilibrium outcome is a function of s and the credit history. If the government has not
defaulted in the past, it faces an equilibrium price schedule for new debt B 0 given by q(s, B 0 ).
The government takes the schedule as given but recognizes that the price of its debt may
vary with B 0 . In that sense, the government is large in its own debt market.
10

One interpretation of this assumption is that the legal battles following a default result in the dissipation
of any revenue raised in the auction or any foreign assets held by the government.
11
In equilibrium, it will always be the case that the government does not default if it purchases assets at
auction. However, off equilibrium there may an asset level that is not feasible given the endowment. We
assume that these carry the risk-free price, which can be rationalized by having the assets written off if the
government fails to pay for them at settlement.

7

After the auction, the government decides whether to default or repay. If the government
defaults, it simply consumes its endowment every period thereafter. Let V D (s) denote this
value:
V D (s) = u(Y ) +

βEu(Y 0 )
.
1−β

(1)

Note that in the model without re-entry, V D does not depend on the rest of the equilibrium,
and for clarity we will write V D (Y ) in place of V D (s) for the remainder of this section. If
the government repays, it obtains value:
V R (s, B 0 ) = u(Y + q(s, B 0 )B 0 − B) + βE [V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ]

(2)

if Y + q(s, B 0 )B 0 − B ≥ 0. If Y + q(s, B 0 )B 0 − B < 0, then repayment is infeasible, and we
set V R (s, B 0 ) = −∞; obviously, default will always dominate this value. In (2), the value
function V (s0 ) denotes the value at the start of next period. In particular,


R

0

D



V (s) = max max V (s, B ), V (s) .
B 0 ≤B

(3)

Note that the expectation in (2) incorporates that B 0 is in the government’s information set
at the time of repayment in the current period. The expectation is not explicitly conditional
on s due to the iid assumption for Y and ρ.
Given an equilibrium price schedule q, equations (1),(2), and (3) characterize the government’s problem. Let B : S → (−∞, B] denote the government’s optimal debt-issuance
policy function12 and D : S × (−∞, B] → [0, 1] the default policy function. Note that D
depends on B 0 as well as s, as discussed, and takes values in the interval [0, 1] to allow for
randomization over the default decision, which will play a role in our crisis equilibrium.
Given the small open economy and risk-neutral lenders’ assumptions, prices must satisfy a
break-even condition. Specifically, given the government’s policy functions, the price schedule
q : S ×(−∞, B] → [0, R−1 ] must equate the expected return on sovereign debt to the risk-free
12

As we shall see, the government may be indifferent across alternative levels of debt issuance; that is, its
optimal policy is a correspondence. However, prices depend on which element of the correspondence is chosen;
therefore, equilibrium outcomes are sensitive to how we break ties. Hence, equilibrium selection involves a
rule for debt issuance when indifferent. This will be discussed in detail in our quantitative implementation.

8

rate:

R−1 (1 − D(s, B 0 ))E [1 − D(s0 , B(s0 ))|B 0 ∈ s0 ] if B 0 ∈ (0, B]
q(s, B 0 ) =
R−1 if B 0 ≤ 0.

(4)

In the first line, note that our timing implies that bondholders are vulnerable to two default
decisions, one in the current period immediately after auction and one after next period’s
auction. Since next period’s default probability depends on next period’s debt choice, the
pricing also depends on the government’s borrowing policy function.13 The second line states
that assets are always sold at the risk-free price.
The definition of equilibrium is standard:
Definition 1. An equilibrium consists of a price schedule q and government policy functions
B and D such that: (i) B and D and the induced value functions solve the government’s
problem given q; and (ii) q satisfies the break-even condition (4) given D and B.

2.2

Equilibrium Selection

Other than the timing of the auction and default decisions, the environment described has
the same elements as the simplest version of the Eaton-Gersovitz model. The one-period
Eaton-Gersovitz model has a unique equilibrium (Auclert and Rognlie, 2016). However,
under the Cole-Kehoe timing, the fact that the government cannot commit to repaying
outstanding bonds at the time it auctions new bonds opens the door to multiplicity. We
now discuss how we select an equilibrium and construct crises that involve desperate deals.
For expositional purposes, we will construct equilibria as the fixed point of an iterative
scheme.14 Consider a candidate equilibrium (q0 , B0 , D0 ) with associated value functions
V0 and V0R . We take V0R to be decreasing in debt due, a property that we prove to be
true in equilibirium at the end of the section. From next period onward, agents assume
these functions will describe equilibrium behavior going forward. Given this continuation
equilibrium, we will construct alternative prices and policies that satisfy the equilibrium
conditions, with the alternatives indexed by the sunspot ρ. In this sense, we focus on a
The fact that the break-even condition is imposed for all B 0 – even those that occur off equilibrium – is
a perfection requirement: It ensures that if the government were to deviate from B and issue a suboptimal
amount of debt, these bonds would be priced in a manner consistent with equilibrium behavior going forward.
14
This approach also tracks how the quantitative model is solved.
13

9

“static” multiplicity, by which we mean that we can support multiple equilibrium outcomes
in the current period holding constant equilibrium behavior going forward. We shall consider
three possible beliefs: ρ ∈ {EG, CK, DD}, where EG stands for “Eaton-Gersovitz,” CK
for “Cole-Kehoe,” and DD for “Desperate Deals.” The assumption that ρ is iid over time
allows us to hold constant expectations of future equilibrium behavior as we vary the current
period’s beliefs.
Eaton-Gersovitz Beliefs
Given the continuation equilibrium, suppose that in the current period the government
could commit not to default at the time of the auction. This intraperiod commitment is
what distinguishes the Eaton-Gersovitz timing from the Cole-Kehoe timing. To be precise,
suppose that the government has such commitment only in the current period and then
follows the candidate equilibrium behavior going forward. We will later verify if and when
this is credible absent commitment. Let qEG denote the price schedule that would satisfy
the lenders’ break-even condition under this scenario:

R−1 E [1 − D (s0 , B (s0 ))|B 0 ∈ s0 ] if B 0 ∈ (0, B]
0
0
(5)
qEG (B 0 ) ≡
R−1 if B 0 ≤ 0.
Contrasting (5) with (4), we see the difference is the assumption that the current period’s
default policy is set to zero for all B 0 . This makes qEG an upper bound on the equilibrium
price schedule conditional on the continuation equilibrium. Given the iid assumptions and
the fact that qEG is determined by next period’s default decisions, qEG is a function only of
B 0 . With this price schedule, we can define the government’s associated repayment value:

u (Y + q (B 0 )B 0 − B) + βE [V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] if Y + q (B 0 )B 0 ≥ B
EG
0
EG
R
0
VEG (Y, B, B ) ≡
−∞ otherwise.
We can now construct an equilibrium price schedule and value function that are consistent
with the Eaton-Gersovitz beliefs. To aid in the exposition, we introduce Figure 2. Panel
(a) depicts the value of repayment as a function of B 0 holding constant (B, Y ), which is
R
suppressed in the figure’s notation. The solid hump-shaped line depicts VEG
(Y, B, B 0 ) as
we vary B 0 . The peak of this curve indicates the optimal issuance policy given qEG .15 For
15

We cannot state analytically that the function is single peaked (although it is in the quantitative model).
The non-monotonicity comes from the fact that as we increase B 0 current consumption increases (subject to

10

reference, we include the value of default given Y , which is the horizontal line labeled V D in
the figure.
The set B(Y, B) consists of debt issuances B 0 such that the government finds it optimal
to repay at settlement:

R
(Y, B, B 0 ) ≥ V D (Y ) .
B(Y, B) ≡ B 0 ∈ (0, B]|VEG

(6)

R
When B 0 ∈ B(Y, B), then VEG
(Y, B, B 0 ) ≥ V D (Y ), and the belief that the government
will not default in the current period can be made self-confirming. That is, qEG can be
rationalized as an equilibrium outcome.16

Figure 2: Values and Prices
(b) Price Schedules

(a) The Value of Repayment

R−1
qEG
VD

qDD

R
VEG

0

B

qCK

0

R
VCK

B0

0

B

B0

Note: Panel (a): Heuristic diagram of value of repayment when prices are qEG (solid line denotes
R
R
VEG
) and qCK (dashed line denotes VCK
). Functions are drawn for a fixed (Y, B). B is short-hand
D
for B(Y, B), and V is short-hand for V D (Y ). The desperate deals value of repayment is identical
to V D on the domain B. Panel (b): Price schedules. The downward sloping dashed line is qEG , the
horizontal dotted line at 0 is qCK , and the intermediate solid line on domain B is qDD . The shaded
line that equals R−1 for B 0 ≤ 0, qEG for B 0 ∈ B, and zero otherwise traces out the equilibrium
price schedule when ρ = EG. The equilibrium price schedule for ρ = DD differs from ρ = EG
only on the domain B.

In particular, let ρ = EG indicate that agents believe the government will not default
being on the upward part of the debt Laffer curve; that is, d[q(B 0 )B 0 ]/dB 0 > 0), but the continuation value
R
declines. Once B 0 reaches the downward sloping part of the Laffer curve, VEG
unambiguously declines in B 0 .
16
R
Of course, for some (Y, B) it will be the case that B(Y, B) = ∅. In Figure 2, that case would have VEG
D
0
lying strictly below V for all B .

11

at the current period’s settlement whenever B 0 ∈ B(B, Y ). Specifically, define a new price
schedule q1 for ρ = EG by:

q (B 0 ) if B 0 ∈ B(Y, B) ∪ (−∞, 0]
EG
q1 ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) ≡
0 otherwise.

(7)

The first line states that the price schedule is equal to qEG when the government can credibly
promise not to default in the current period. This occurs when the government purchases
assets (B 0 ≤ 0) or when B 0 ∈ B(Y, B). Otherwise, the government will default immediately
after the auction, and hence the only equilibrium price that can be supported is zero. The
ρ = EG price schedule therefore tracks the intraperiod commitment price schedule when
such a price is time consistent given the lack of commitment within the period; otherwise,
the price is zero.
We depict prices in Panel (b) of Figure 2. The downward sloping dashed line is qEG ,
which equals R−1 for B 0 < 0 and decreases in B 0 for B 0 > 0 (see Section 2.3 Proposition 1).
The equilibrium price for ρ = EG is the shaded line that equals qEG for B 0 ∈ B, R−1 for
B 0 ≤ 0, and zero otherwise.
Facing this price schedule, the government’s repayment value is:



V R (Y, B, B 0 ) if B 0 ∈ B(Y, B) ∪ (−∞, 0]

 EG
V1R ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) ≡ u(Y − B) + βE [V0 (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] if B 0 ∈
/ B(Y, B) ∪ (−∞, 0] & B ≤ Y



−∞ otherwise.
R
The first line states that the value is VEG
whenever q1 = qEG . The second line states that,
if the government were to issue debt at zero price, then it pays outstanding debt out of its
current endowment. The final line assumes an infinite loss if the government attempts to
repay bonds when infeasible.

The associated policy functions are B1 ([Y, EG, B]) ∈ argmaxB 0 ≤B V1R ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) and

0 if B 0 ∈ B(Y, B)
0
D1 ([Y, EG, B], B ) =
1 otherwise.
Cole-Kehoe Beliefs

12

(8)

Given the continuation equilibrium, the price schedule q1 for ρ = EG is the highest
price that can be supported in the current period as it rules out immediate default whenever
possible. We can also consider the worst possible price as a candidate equilibrium, which will
form the basis of our Cole-Kehoe equilibrium. In particular, assume that the government
will default with probability one at settlement if B 0 ≥ 0. Let

0 if B 0 ∈ (0, B]
0
qCK (B ) ≡
R−1 if B 0 ≤ 0.

(9)

That is, debt is issued at zero price, but assets are purchased at the risk-free rate. We depict
qCK in Figure 2 Panel (b) with the dotted horizontal line equal to 0 for B 0 > 0.
As before, we can define the associated repayment value:

R
VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ) ≡




u(Y − B) + βE [V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] if B 0 ∈ (0, B] & B ≤ Y


R
(Y, B, B 0 ) if B 0 ≤ 0
VEG



−∞ if B 0 ≥ 0 & B > Y.

(10)

The first line indicates that all debt issuances occur at price zero, and hence inherited debt
must be paid out of the current endowment when feasible. If the government purchases assets
(B 0 < 0), then it pays the risk-free price, which is the same as under the Eaton-Gersovitz
beliefs. The final line concerns the case when repayment is not feasible under zero prices.
R
R
R
VCK
is depicted in Figure 2 by the dashed line. For B 0 < 0, VCK
tracks VEG
as both
0
R
assume risk-free prices for purchasing assets. For B > 0, VCK is strictly decreasing and less
R
(on the domain such that qEG > 0). The strict monotonicity in this case follows
than VEG
from the fact that additional debt lowers the continuation value (a property proved later),
but does not increase current consumption.
R
If VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y ), then a price of zero can be supported as an equilibrium
outcome. We denote the beliefs of the worst price schedule by ρ = CK. In particular, define
an equilibrium price schedule under these beliefs by:

q1 ([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) ≡


q

CK (B

q

0
EG (B ) otherwise.

0

R
) if VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y )

(11)

The first line states that prices are zero if default is weakly preferable to repayment when
13

faced with zero prices. However, if the government prefers to repay even when debt has a
zero price (or buys assets), then prices are the same as under the Eaton-Gersovitz beliefs.
The associated repayment value function is:

V R (Y, B, B 0 ) if V R (Y, B, B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y )
CK
CK
R
0
V1 ([Y, CK, B], B ) ≡
V R ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) otherwise.

(12)

1

The default policy rationalizes the price schedule and is consistent with whether V1R ≷
V D:

1 if V R ([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y )
1
(13)
D1 ([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) =
0 otherwise.
Comparing q1 for ρ = EG with ρ = CK, we see that there are pairs (Y, B) in which
beliefs matter as to whether the government will default in the current period. In particular,
we define the “crisis zone” as:


R
0
D
R
0
C ≡ (Y, B) ∈ Y × (0, B] max VCK (Y, B, B ) ≤ V (Y ) ≤ max VEG (Y, B, B ) .
(14)
B 0 ≤B

B 0 ≤B

If the initial states are in this set, when the government can issue debt at the ρ = EG price
it will not default. However, if it faces the ρ = CK price, it will default. For fundamentals
(Y, B) ∈ C, the government is vulnerable to a Cole-Kehoe self-fulfilling rollover crisis.
The scenario depicted in Figure 2 is one in which (Y, B) ∈ C. This can be seen by the
R
fact that at B 0 = 0 the value of repayment is less than V D , while the peak of VEG
is above
V D . If the intercept at B 0 = 0 were above V D , then the government prefers to repay even at
R
zero prices, while if the peak of VEG
were below V D , then the government prefers to default
even when facing the best price schedule.
Desperate Deal Beliefs
We now turn to our third set of equilibrium beliefs, the desperate deal beliefs. These
beliefs are relevant in the crisis zone C; that is, when (Y, B) are such that creditor beliefs
determine whether the sovereign repays or defaults. Given (Y, B) ∈ C, we construct a price
R
for each B 0 ∈ B(Y, B). By definition of B, the value VEG
is weakly greater than V D on
R
this set. By the definition of C, the value VCK
is below V D on B (and for any B 0 > 0).

14

Thus, the value of repayment is weakly greater than default when facing qEG but weakly less
when facing qCK = 0. By continuity of the utility function, there is a price that makes the
government indifferent to repayment and default. Specifically, for a given (Y, B, B 0 ), with
(Y, B) ∈ C and B 0 ∈ B(Y, B), we can define qDD (Y, B, B 0 ) ∈ [0, qEG (Y, B, B 0 )] as the unique
solution to:
u (Y + qDD (Y, B, B 0 )B 0 − B) + βE[V0 (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] = V D (Y ).

(15)

R
Note that for B 0 ∈ B such that the inequality in (6) is strict and VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ) < V D (Y ),
we have 0 < qDD (Y, B, B 0 ) < qEG (Y, B, B 0 ). In particular, prices are non-zero but strictly
below the ρ = EG price.
R
To see how this works, consider the hump-shaped VEG
curve in Figure 2 Panel (a). On
0
the domain B ∈ B(Y, B), the value of repayment is weakly greater than V D when bonds
are issued at price qEG . A lower price, holding constant the amount issued, lowers the value
of repayment. As we vary the price from qEG to qCK = 0, we lower the value of repayment
R
R
from VEG
toward VCK
in a continuous fashion. The desperate deals price is reached when
the value of repayment equals V D .

In Figure 2 Panel (b), we include qDD on the domain B 0 B(B, Y ). At the boundaries
R
R
R
, we have
> V D > VCK
= V D , and hence qDD = qEG . For B 0 such that VEG
of B, VEG
qDD ∈ (0, qEG ). As we will discuss, qDD is not necessarily monotonic in B 0 . We depict it as
such for expositional ease.
We use qDD as the basis for our third “static” equilibrium. In particular,
q1 ([Y, DD, B], B 0 ) ≡


q

DD (Y, B, B

0

) if (Y, B) ∈ C & B 0 ∈ B(Y, B)

q ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) otherwise.
1

(16)

The value of repayment follows directly from the construction of qDD :

V D (Y ) if (Y, B) ∈ C & B 0 ∈ B(Y, B)
R
0
V1 ([Y, DD, B], B ) ≡
V R ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) otherwise.

(17)

1

For (Y, B) ∈
/ C or for B 0 ∈
/ B, prices and repayment values are the same as under the EatonGersovitz beliefs. On this domain, either the government will default even when facing the
highest possible prices or the government will repay even when facing a zero price. In both
15

cases, prices are independent of beliefs.
To rationalize the desperate deals price, we need to ensure that the lenders’ break-even
condition is satisfied. We do this by allowing the government to randomize over default and
repayment at settlement when indifferent. We will provide our motivation for randomization
in Section 2.5, but to define the equilibrium, we have:

1 − qDD (Y,B,B 0 ) if (Y, B) ∈ C & B 0 ∈ B(Y, B)
qEG (B 0 )
0
D1 ([Y, DD, B], B ) ≡
D ([Y, EG, B], B 0 ) otherwise.

(18)

1

By definition of B, the first line is always between zero and one, and strictly so when
R
R
VEG
(Y, B, B 0 ) > VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ). The second line is the counterpart to the corresponding
price schedule and repayment value when outside of the crisis zone or when B 0 ∈
/ B.
To complete the equilibrium construction, we have B1 (s) ∈ argmaxB 0 ≤B V1R (s, B 0 ) for
all s ∈ S. For desperate deals, there may be a range of B 0 along which the government
is indifferent; that is, all B 0 ∈ B generate a repayment value of V D (Y ) by construction
(but with different prices and default probabilities). In our quantitative implementation,
we will look at various alternative selections from the optimal policy correspondence. As
the desperate deal price schedule and the associated default probability vary with B 0 , the
selection will have significance for ex ante equilibrium prices and policies.17
Given the initial continuation equilibrium {q0 , V0R , D0 , B0 }, we have now constructed
{q1 , V1R , D1 , B1 } that also satisfy the equilibrium conditions for the current period. A fixed
point of this mapping is therefore an equilibrium.

2.3

Properties of the Equilibrium

For ρ 6= DD, the equilibrium shares many of the intuitive properties of the canonical EatonGersovitz model. We will state these properties, and then discuss to what extent they carry
over to the desperate deals scenario. All proofs are in the Appendix.
Proposition 1. In an equilibrium, for any s = [Y, ρ, B] ∈ S such that ρ 6= DD and for any
B 0 ∈ (−∞, B]:
17
We have not shown analytically that V R has a unique maximum for ρ 6= DD, although this is the case in
our quantitative model. However, if there were multiple optimums, which B 0 that is chosen does not change
the default probabilities for ρ 6= DD. Hence, simple tie-breaking rules are without loss.

16

(i) The repayment value V R (s, B 0 ) is weakly increasing in Y and weakly decreasing in B,
with strict monotonicity in both cases if repayment is feasible (that is, Y + q(s, B 0 )B 0 >
B);
(ii) The default policy function D(s, B 0 ) is weakly increasing in B and weakly decreasing in
Y ; and
(iii) The price schedule q(s, B 0 ) is weakly decreasing in B and weakly increasing in Y .
The first statement (i) follows immediately from the budget set. The monotonicity of
default in debt due follows immediately from part (i) plus the fact that V D is invariant to B.
The monotonicity of default in endowment depends more sensitively on how V D (Y ) varies
with Y ; in the simple case of iid shocks and no re-entry, the result of Arellano (2008) carries
through almost directly. The price schedule monotonicity result mirrors that of default policy
through the break-even condition.
We now turn to the case of ρ = DD, which in some instances operates differently than
the canonical model. First, from our discussion of Figure 2, we have an ordering of V R ,
default policy, and q across belief states:
Proposition 2. For any Y ∈ Y and (B, B 0 ) ∈ (−∞, B]2 , we have:
(i) V R ([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) ≤ V R ([Y, DD, B], B 0 ) ≤ V R ([Y, EG, B], B 0 );
(ii) D([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) ≤ D([Y, DD, B], B 0 ) ≤ D([Y, EG, B], B 0 ); and
(iii) q([Y, CK, B], B 0 ) ≤ q([Y, DD, B], B 0 ) ≤ q([Y, EG, B], B 0 ).
In terms of comparative statics with respect to inherited debt B and endowment Y , the
value of repayment is monotonic, all else equal:
Proposition 3. For any s ∈ S such that ρ = DD, V R (s, B 0 ) is weakly increasing in Y and
weakly decreasing in B. The monotonicity is strict in Y whenever Y + q(s, B 0 )B 0 > B.
Note that the monotonicity is not strict in B even when consumption is interior, as
desperate deal prices keep V R equal to V D , which is invariant to B.
In contrast to Proposition 1, default policies and prices are not weakly monotonic in Y
and B when ρ = DD. Recall that qDD is the price that makes the government indifferent
to repayment or default. If B increases, holding all else constant (including B 0 > 0), then
17

the desperate deal price must be higher to maintain indifference. Similarly, an increase in
the endowment raises the value of repayment, and thus qDD must be lower to maintain
indifference. That is, to generate a crisis when debt is low or endowment is high requires a
relatively low price of debt.

2.4

Notable Features of Desperate Deals

The defining feature of the Cole-Kehoe crisis is the inability to raise any money at auction.
In contrast, the desperate deals price schedule is positive for debt issuances but less than
the price under the non-crisis beliefs for the same fundamentals. From the government’s
perspective, the price schedule leaves them indifferent to default. From the lenders’ perspective, they are purchasing a lottery ticket that immediately loses value with some positive
probability but otherwise pays off the value that the bond would trade at under non-crisis
beliefs (qEG ). In this way, the equilibrium reflects the situation in which bond prices are
positive but depressed, pushing the government up against its indifference condition. It then
becomes a random outcome whether the bonds retain their value into the next period.
Another feature of desperate deals is that they occur at equilibrium prices. This is not
a bargaining outcome in which creditors or the government threaten to “walk away.” The
lenders have no incentive to hold out from the auction, as at the margin they are indifferent
to participating or not. Thus, while this results in a positive price for legacy lenders who
are selling their bonds at the same time, this is not a partial default or haircut in the usual
sense.
While the government is indifferent to the amount issued in a crisis at the “indifference”
price schedule, the legacy lenders are not. In particular, they would like the government to
choose an amount that maximizes the probability of repayment. However, given these are
arm’s-length transactions, there is no market mechanism to induce the government to select
the surplus maximizing policy. This is the natural counterpart of the competitive assumption
that there is no way for the government to “select” the Eaton-Gersovitz equilibrium price
schedule that does not involve a rollover crisis.
The ability to issue bonds in a crisis reduces the deadweight losses associated with rollover
crises. In particular, depending on the realization of the mixed-strategy randomization,
some rollover crises are not followed with immediate default. Given a certain probability
of a rollover crisis next period, the ability to engage in desperate deals will therefore raise

18

bond prices ex ante. We shall see in the quantitative implementation that this encourages
the government to borrow more in equilibrium and makes the bond market a more efficient
provider of intertemporal smoothing and insurance.
In our equilibrium construction, we assumed that ρ is iid over time. There are natural
ways to enrich the process for ρ. For example, suppose that ρ = DD were an absorbing
state. Then the government would simply continue to issue bonds at desperate deal prices
until, eventually, it defaulted at settlement. This follows from the fact that, when faced
with desperate deal prices, the government has no incentive to reduce its level of debt once
the crisis has begun. This speaks to episodes in which bond market participants feel that
the level of debt is unsustainable, yet the government neither defaults nor attempts a fiscal
correction over an extended period while continuing to roll over debt. This provides an
alternative narrative to Conesa and Kehoe’s (2011) “gambling for redemption” in which
participants anticipate a possible economic recovery. It also contrasts with Lorenzoni and
Werning’s (2013) “slow moving” debt crises in which debt builds gradually over time.

2.5

Purification: Politics and Bailouts

At the core of the desperate deals equilibrium is the government’s indifference to default and
the subsequent randomization at the time payment is due. However, this is not as “knife
edge” as it may first appear. The strict indifference is not necessary with a straightforward
extension in the spirit of Harsanyi (1973). We view the mixed strategy as capturing other
facets of the government’s repayment decision that generate default risk. A primary example
is the political payoff to the current incumbent party regarding the popularity of repayment
versus default, which may vary stochastically and generate uncertainty between an auction
and the repayment of maturing bonds. An alternative source of uncertainty is whether an
international institution, such as the IMF or EU, bails out the sovereign at settlement. These
sources of risk can serve as rationales for desperate deals even in environments where the
government plays pure strategies.
Consider an extension of the model in which the payoff to default is V D (Y ) plus an
additional shock . This latter shock only becomes known when the government is making
its default decision (and after the auction).18 A natural interpretation of  is the realization
18
There is a long history of such random payoffs to default. See the handbook chapters of Eaton and Fernandez (1995) and Aguiar and Amador (2014) as well as more recent papers by Aguiar, Amador, Hopenhayn,
and Werning (2016) and Chatterjee, Corbae, Dempsey, and Rios-Rull (2016).

19

of political payoffs to default that are orthogonal to output and the quantity of debt due.
Let  be distributed iid over time with continuous cdf F on support [, ¯].
Given (Y, B, B 0 ), suppose there exists a threshold ∗ such that the government strictly
prefers to default at settlement if  > ∗ and strictly prefers to repay if  < ∗ . Hence,
the lenders’ break-even condition requires the auction price to be F (∗ )qEG (B 0 ). This is
consistent with ∗ being the indifference threshold as long as:
u (Y − B + F (∗ )qEG (B 0 )B 0 ) + E [V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] = V D (Y ) + ∗ .

(19)

R
R
Now consider (Y, B, B 0 ) such that VEG
(Y, B, B 0 ) > V D (Y ) > VCK
(Y, B, B 0 ), which is
the relevant scenario for our desperate deals equilibrium. Suppose the support of  is small
enough that
R
R
− V D,
VCK
− V D <  < ¯ < VEG

where we omit the arguments of the value functions for clarity. Then there exists an ∗ ∈ [, ¯]
that satisfies (19). To see this, note that the left-hand side minus the right-hand side of (19)
R
at
is continuous in ∗ ; is strictly positive when ∗ = ¯, as the left-hand side becomes VEG
R
− V D − ¯ > 0; and is strictly negative when ∗ = , as the left-hand
F (¯) = 1 and VEG
R
R
side becomes VCK
at F () = 0 and VCK
− V D −  < 0. Therefore, there exists a threshold
∗ ∈ [, ¯] that satisfies (19).19
An alternative interpretation of  is bailouts from a third party. Many debt crises end
either in default or by some sort of outside intervention, typically involving an international
institution such as the IMF or a supranational institution such as the European Central
Bank. In the Mexican debt crisis of 1994-95, it was the U.S. government that extended
emergency credit. Bailouts and self-fulfilling crises were recently analyzed by Roch and
Uhlig (2016).
Such a bailout would imply that resources at settlement are the endowment Y plus thirdparty funds . We assume the bailout is received only if the government repays. Again, there
is a threshold for the size of bailout ∗ such that the government repays if  > ∗ and defaults
otherwise. The price at auction is therefore (1−F (∗ ))qEG (B 0 ), and the indifference condition
19

Our mixed-strategy equilibria can be considered the limit of a pure-strategy equilibrium as we shrink
the support [, ¯].

20

becomes:
u (Y + ∗ + (1 − F (∗ ))qEG (B 0 )B 0 − B) + E [V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] = V D (Y ).
Again, for an appropriate choice of support, there exists an indifference threshold ∗ ∈ [, ¯].
In this case, desperate deals are bets on the size of the intervention.
One nice feature of either version of the extended model is it can explain why one might
see large, high-frequency changes in the secondary market price of the government’s debt
during a crisis. To see this, imagine that news about the realization of  could become
public between the auction and the government’s default decision. This news would change
creditors’ posterior regarding , which would shift the price of the outstanding debt that
had just been auctioned as well as the old debt that is coming due. Note that with a small
support for , this news could be minor in its impact on the government’s incentives but
nevertheless have a large impact on the spread.

3

Quantitative Model

In this section, we demonstrate that an augmented quantitative version of our model generates equilibrium outcomes that match the data. A now well-established puzzle in the
quantitative sovereign debt literature is the difficulty in replicating the observed volatility of
spreads due to the government’s willingness to avoid extremely high interest rates through
small adjustments in bond issuances or outright default. The challenge of generating realistic spread volatility is discussed thoroughly in our recent handbook chapter (Aguiar,
Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye, 2016). The chapter discusses the limitations of existing
fixes, such as combining nonlinear default costs with highly volatile trend-stationary endowment processes.20 We show in this section how desperate deals generate realistic volatility
in sovereign spreads combined with an empirically plausible probability of default. The link
between desperate deals and the existing approaches to spread volatility is discussed as well.
To illustrate the ease with which the model can match the data, we posit a stochastic
growth process for the endowment, calibrate it to Mexico – a medium-volatility country –
and dispense with nonlinear default costs. We do this because Mexico’s crisis in 1995 was the
20

For example, see Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), and
Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012).

21

motivation for Cole and Kehoe (2000). We choose stochastic growth rather than a trendstationary process because it is a more realistic process for developing countries (Aguiar
and Gopinath, 2007). We dispense with nonlinear default costs because Mexico entered a
decade of depressed economic conditions after its debt crisis in 1982, despite starting out in
a recession, suggesting that the costs of default are severe in recessions as well as in booms.21
The major changes relative to the model of Section 2 are (i) a persistent stochastic
growth process for the endowment; (ii) longer maturity bonds; (iii) risk-averse creditors;
(iv) a richer default state, including re-entry and output loss; and (v) no destruction of
auction revenues in the case of default. The longer maturity bonds allow us to consider
buybacks, which have been an important element in many crises. The addition of risk-averse
lenders allows us to separate movements in risk premia from default risk. As the elements
of the quantitative model are straightforward extensions of the model described in Section
2, we keep the exposition streamlined and include most of the details in the Appendix.

3.1

Overview of Additional Features

For the quantitative analysis, we allow the endowment to follow a stochastic trend plus cycle
P
process as in Aguiar and Gopinath (2007). In particular, Yt = Gt ezt , where ln Gt ≡ ts=1 gs is
the cumulation of period growth rates gt and zt represents fluctuations around trend growth.
We assume the growth rate process is governed by
gt+1 = (1 − ρg )ḡ + ρg gt + εt+1 ,
where ε ∼ N (0, σg2 ). The transitory component of output zt is assumed to be iid, orthogonal
to εt and to have mean zero and variance σz2 .
We incorporate longer maturity bonds in a tractable manner by introducing random
maturity bonds, as in Leland (1994).22 In particular, each bond matures next period with
a constant hazard rate λ ∈ [0, 1].23 The expected maturity of a bond is 1/λ periods, and
so λ = 0 is a console and λ = 1 is one-period debt. We also assume bonds pay a coupon
21

See http://users.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe/papers/mexico-chile.pdf.
See also Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), and Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012).
23
We let the unit of a bond be infinitesimally small and let maturity be iid across individual bonds, such
that with probability one a fraction λ of any non-degenerate portfolio of bonds matures each period. The
constant hazard of maturity implies that all bonds are symmetric before the realization of maturity at the
start of the period, regardless of when they were purchased.
22

22

every period up to and including the period of maturity, which, without loss of generality,
we normalize to the risk-free rate r∗ . With this normalization, a risk-free bond will have an
equilibrium price of one.
If the government defaults, we assume that in the period of default the sovereign’s payoff
is:
V D (s) ≡ u(Y D ) + βEV E (s0 ),

(20)

where Y D = Gez̄ and V E denotes the continuation value while in the default (exclusion)
state:


V E (s) = u((1 − φ)Y ) + β(1 − ξ)E V D (s0 )|s + βξE [V (s0 )|s, B 0 = 0] .

(21)

With probability ξ the sovereign regains access to debt markets with zero debt and a clean
credit history. Note that in the period of default, we evaluate Y D at the mean iid endowment
shock z = z̄. This is done for computational reasons and makes V D (but not V R ) independent
of the current z realization. Given the low variance of our calibrated z, this is not a crucial
assumption. For expositional reasons, we do not impose the output punishment φ until
the period after default. This simplifies the comparison of endowment growth in periods of
default with repayment and is innocuous given that φ can be scaled accordingly.
In the simple model of Section 2, we assumed that if the government defaults at settlement, all revenues raised at the prior auction are lost. In the quantitative model, we treat
this scenario in a more realistic manner, laid out in detail in the Appendix. In brief, auction
revenue is held in escrow until settlement. At settlement, the government can use proceeds
to repay maturing debt. However, in the event of default, the proceeds are distributed across
all bondholders, both old and new. The assumption that bondholders receive payments (if
any) in proportion to the face value of their claims reflects the pari passu and acceleration
clauses typically included in sovereign bond contracts. The important element carried over
from the model of the previous section is that bonds purchased in that period’s auction are
at risk immediately, as existing bondholders can claim a fraction of the auction revenue in
the event of within-period default.
For the quantitative model, we introduce risk-averse lenders. This allows us to separately
target the average spread and the probability of default. In particular, we assume that
financial markets are segmented and that only a subset of foreign agents participate in the
23

sovereign debt market. This assumption allows us to introduce risk premia on sovereign
bonds while treating the risk-free rate as parametric. For tractability, we assume that a
set of lenders has access to the sovereign bond market for one period and then exits, to
be replaced by a new set of identical lenders. The short horizon of the specialist lenders is
for tractability, avoiding the need to solve an infinite horizon portfolio problem and carry
another endogenous state variable.
Specifically, each period a unit measure of identical lenders enters the sovereign debt
market. Let W denote the aggregate wealth of the agents that can participate in the current
period’s bond market. The entering “young” lenders allocate their wealth across sovereign
bonds and a risk-free asset that yields 1 + r∗ . As noted previously, the risk-free rate is
pinned down by the larger world financial market, and specialists in the sovereign bond
market can freely borrow and lend at this rate. Let R̃ denote the realized one-period return
on sovereign bonds. As in the one-period bond model, the return is determined in part by
the government’s default policies. However, with longer maturity debt, future realizations
of (Y, ρ) as well as future debt-issuance decisions induce capital gains and losses on nonmaturing debt. The expression for R̃ in terms of these factors is detailed in the Appendix.
Lenders have preferences over wealth when old, Wo , given by:
v(Wo ) =

Wo1−γ
.
1−γ

The young lenders’ problem is to allocate a fraction µ of their wealth in sovereign bonds,
and the remainder in risk-free bonds. Given the homogeneity of preferences, the optimal
decision conditional on s and B 0 is defined by:
 


∗
0
µ (s, B ) = argmax E v (1 − µ)(1 + r ) + µR̃ s, B .
∗

0

(22)

µ

In equilibrium, the market for bonds must clear. In particular,
µ∗ (s, B 0 )W = q(s, B 0 )B 0 .

(23)

As B 0 increases, lenders devote more of their wealth to sovereign bonds, and therefore prices
must fall to generate the appropriate risk premium to clear the market.
The definition of an equilibrium in the augmented model is the natural extension of the
one given for the simple model of Section 2:
24

Definition 2 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium consists of a price schedule q, government policy functions B and D, and a lender portfolio policy function µ∗ such that: (i) B and D
solve the government’s problem, conditional on q and µ∗ ; (ii) µ∗ solves the representative
lender’s problem (22) conditional on q and the government’s policy functions; and (iii) market clearing: equation (23) holds for all (s, B 0 ) such that s ∈ S and B 0 /Y ≤ B.
R
R
The functions {qEG , qDD , VEG
, VCK
} and the sets C and B defined in Section 2 can be redefined for the augmented model in a direct fashion. See the Appendix for formal definitions.
The fact that the endowment is persistent implies that Y and g are relevant for forecasting
future equilibrium behavior. Thus, we need to add them as arguments to the functions
and include them as elements of the set C and the index of B. For expositional simplicity,
we simply include s as the additional argument when the endowment states are relevant
arguments.

3.2

Calibration

To calibrate the model, we set a number of parameters prior to simulation and then select
others to match simulated moments with their empirical counterparts.
The pre-set parameters are reported in Table 1. We estimate the endowment process using
Mexican data, the details of which are in the Appendix. We assume the government has
power utility with a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 2. We set the lenders’ risk aversion
coefficient to 2 as well. The risk premium will depend on the lenders’ wealth relative to the
size of the bond market. We calibrate W by matching moments in a procedure discussed
later. We set the risk-free interest rate at 1 percent quarterly (hence 4 percent annually).
The average maturity length is set to 8 quarters; that is, λ = 1/8, which implies a Macaulay
duration of 6.4 quarters.24 We set the re-entry probability after default to 0.125 quarterly;
that is, the average duration of default is 2 years.25
24

This is shorter than the average maturity (or duration) observed in many emerging markets. However,
maturity length is not constant over time and tends to shorten when the probability of a crisis is high (Arellano and Ramanarayanan, 2012, Broner, Lorenzoni, and Schmukler, 2013). Moreover, much of a country’s
short-term debt is issued domestically (whether in dollars or local currency) and thus is not reflected in the
average maturity of external debt. For simplicity, our model only has external debt of constant maturity,
raising the question of how to accurately capture a world in which maturity varies over time and the amount
due (and to whom) in any given quarter is not uniform. Given our focus on crises, we set the average
maturity length to a value that is relatively short.
25
This is in the range documented by Gelos, Sahay, and Sandleris (2011) for the 1990s but lower than
Tomz and Wright’s (2013) median of 6.5 years using a much longer sample. Again, this is not crucial given

25

As noted in the previous section, the sovereign is indifferent over a range of debt issuances
when facing the desperate deal price schedule. In our benchmark model, we set the debtissuance policy to be half the value of maturing debt:


λ
B(s) = 1 +
B,
2
when ρ = DD and fundamentals are in the crisis zone. Later, we also explore an alternative
in which the government repurchases non-maturing debt in a crisis.
In our benchmark model, we consider beliefs that fluctuate between ρ = EG and ρ = DD
and put zero mass on ρ = CK. We will also report results for an alternative that shifts the
mass from ρ = DD to ρ = CK and puts zero probability mass on ρ = DD. The former
model is referred to as “benchmark” and the latter as “CK.”
Table 1: Parameters I: Set Prior to Simulation

Parameter

Value

Source

Endowments:
ḡ
ρg
σg
σz

0.0034
0.445
0.012
0.003






2
2

Standard
Standard

0.01
0.125
0.125

Standard
N/A
Gelos et al (2011)

Preferences:
Sovereign CRRA (σ)
Creditor CRRA (γ)
Financial Markets:
Quarterly Risk-Free Rate (r∗ )
Reciprocal of Avg. Maturity (λ)
Default Re-entry Prob (ξ)

Mexico GDP Data
1980Q1–2015Q1




Note: Pre-set parameters for calibrated model. CRRA refers to coefficient of relative risk aversion and GDP refers to gross domestic
product.

We calibrate the remaining parameters by simulating the model and matching targeted
empirical moments. In particular, the remaining parameters of the benchmark model are the
that we scale the value of default by choosing the parameter φ.

26

probability of transiting from ρ = EG to ρ = DD, and vice versa; the government’s discount
factor; the wealth of the creditors, which we assume is a constant proportion of endowment
w=W
; and the proportion of output lost during default. We assume that beliefs follow an
Y
iid process over time; that is, Pr(ρ0 = DD|ρ = EG) = Pr(ρ0 = DD|ρ = DD). This leaves
one transition probability and three parameters. We set these to match the average debtto-income ratio, the average spread defined by (24), and the standard deviation of spreads,
using Mexico as our empirical counterpart, as well as an average default rate of 2 percent
per annum, which is in line with the estimates of Tomz and Wright (2013) using a broad
sample of countries over a relatively long time period.
Specifically, we match the average external Mexican debt to annual GDP (both in U.S.
dollars) for the period 2002Q1 through 2014Q3. The average over this period is 16.4 percent,
which translates into a quarterly debt-to-income ratio of 65.6 percent. This measure of debt
includes external debt by the government as well as banks. A longer time series exists for
a narrower stock of debt issued by the federal government. This series suggests that debt
levels were higher in the 1990s and have been falling in the 2000s and 2010s. Hence, our
measure of 65 percent may be an understatement.
We also match the mean and standard deviation of the spread over U.S. bonds for Mexican
debt. The average Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) spread for Mexico over the entire
period is 3.4 percent, with a standard deviation of 2.5 percent. For the simulated model, we
compute the spread implied by the equilibrium price. Specifically, we denote by r(s, B 0 ) the
implicit yield of a risk-free bond paying r∗ each period and maturing with probability λ that
is purchased at a price q(s, B 0 ):26
r(s, B 0 ) =

r∗ + λ
− λ.
q(s, B 0 )

(24)

The implied quarterly spread is then r(s, B 0 )−r∗ , which we annualize before comparing with
the EMBI data.27
While moment matching involves simultaneously matching four moments using four varyP∞
That is, q(s, B 0 ) = k=1 (1 + r(s, B 0 ))−k (1 − λ)k−1 [r∗ + λ].
27
In the simulated model, the mean debt-to-income ratio and the spread are conditional on not being in
the default state. More specifically, we compute the mean conditional on being out of the default state for at
least 25 quarters. The reason we condition on being in good credit standing for a significant period of time
is that the government exits default status with zero debt. Zero debt after default is not a realistic feature
of the model, and hence we focus on the ergodic distribution conditional on having sufficient time to rebuild
debt.
26

27

ing parameters, we can provide a heuristic guide regarding which moments are particularly
important for determining which parameter based on how the model behaves when we have
varied parameters. In particular, the debt-to-income ratio is sensitive to the choice of the
punishment φ. Given a level of debt-to-income, the propensity to default is sensitive to the
discount factor β. As we will discuss in detail later, the risk of a rollover crisis is important
for generating the empirical volatility of spreads, which pins down the probability ρ = DD.
Finally, given the risk of default and spread volatility, the average spread reflects an average
risk premium that is sensitive to lenders’ wealth.
These four targets, the model counterparts (under the column “Benchmark Model”), and
the associated parameters are reported in Table 2. The model is simulated 1.5 million times,
as default is a rare event. The model is able to hit all four targets precisely. To do so,
the probability of a rollover crisis is 10 percent. As we shall see, this does not mean that
a crisis occurs every ten quarters on average. In particular, a crisis requires that the debt
is high enough and other fundamentals bad enough that a rollover crisis can be supported
in equilibrium; that is, s ∈ C. As debt is an endogenous state variable, the government has
the ability to avoid a rollover crisis. This will be a key element of the discussion to follow.
Given the vulnerability to default in general and a rollover crisis in particular, we need a
fairly low discount factor (0.84 quarterly) to ensure the government accumulates the target
debt levels. Upon default, the government loses 6.8 percent of its endowment. The final
parameter, creditor wealth to GDP, is a factor of 3.75.

4

Discussion of Quantitative Results

With the calibrated model in hand, we can discuss how the introduction of desperate deals
changes equilibrium outcomes. It is useful to contrast our model of crises with a model in
which rollover crises end in immediate default, as in Cole and Kehoe (2000). In Table 2, we
add the moments from the alternative model in the column labeled “CK.” This model has
the same parameters as the benchmark but with a bond issuance policy of zero during crises
(that is, B 0 = (1 − λ)B). Recall that the government is indifferent to the amount issued
(or defaulting) when faced with the rollover crisis price schedule, and thus zero issuance and
default are also an equilibrium outcome of the model, as discussed in Section 2. In the “CK”
equilibrium selection, conditional on a crisis the equilibrium price for issuances is zero, and
the sovereign defaults with probability one at settlement.
28

Table 2: Parameters II: Simulated Method of Moments

Target Moment

Data

Benchmark
Model

Debt-to-Income (Quarterly)
Mean Annualized Spread r(s, B 0 ) − r∗
Quarterly Std Dev of Annualized Spread
Default Frequency (Annually)

65.6%
3.4%
2.5%
2.0%

65.6%
3.4%
2.5%
2.0%

Parameter

Value

Crisis Probability Pr(ρ = DD)
Discount Factor (β)
Default Cost (φ)
Creditor Wealth Relative to Y (w =

10%
0.84
6.8%
3.75

W
Y )

CK
(No Deals)
63.9%
3.5%
0.1%
2.3%

Note: The top panel reports the empirical moments and the model counterparts for our benchmark
model and the alternative without desperate deals. The bottom panel shows the values of the four
parameters calibrated from matching the benchmark moments in the top panel with their empirical
counterparts.

4.1

Spread Volatility

Contrasting the moments of the two models reported in Table 2, the major difference is the
volatility of spreads. In the benchmark model, we match the empirical standard deviation of
2.5 percent, while the CK model has a standard deviation of only 0.1 percent. While Table 2
does not recalibrate the CK model to target the volatility of spreads, we have searched over a
large parameter space seeking values that generate spread volatility similar to that observed
in the data while also matching the other empirical moments. This exercise demonstrated
that a well-calibrated CK model does not generate volatile spreads despite having frequent
rollover crises. Indeed, the difference in volatility reported in Table 2 is striking given that
average spreads and default frequency are similar across the two models.
To understand this difference in spread volatility as well as how the model works more
generally, we begin with the price schedule, depicted in Figure 3. The figure is the quantitative counterpart to Figure 2 Panel (b). The figure is drawn for a specific s ∈ C, with B 0 on
the horizontal axis and q on the vertical axis. The solid vertical line identifies the amount of
non-maturing debt, (1 − λ)B, which indicates the B 0 associated with zero issuances today.
29

Figure 3: Equilibrium Price Schedule: Crisis

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

qDD
qEG

0.5

0.6

0.7

B0
Y

Note: Crisis bond price schedule, qDD (solid), and non-crisis
schedule, qEG (dashed), as a function of B 0 /Y evaluated at
g = −0.0212, z = −0.0008, and B/Y = 0.652. The solid vertical
line is (1 − λ)B/Y , and the dashed vertical line is (1 − λ/2) B/Y .

To the left of the this line, the sovereign is repurchasing bonds. To the right, the sovereign
is issuing bonds. The dashed vertical line is B 0 = (1 − λ/2)B, which is our benchmark
equilibrium issuance policy.
The nonlinear, downward sloping dashed line is qEG . The solid line depicts qDD , that
is, the price that makes the government indifferent to repayment and default at settlement.
Different from Figure 2 and the model of Section 2, with longer term bonds we have a region
that represents the repurchasing of non-maturing bonds. In particular, to the left of the
vertical line the government is repurchasing non-matured debt. We postpone discussion of
the buyback region until Section 4.5.
As is familiar from the quantitative sovereign debt literature, the qEG price schedule is
highly nonlinear. This plays an important role in debt dynamics. The government, as a
monopolist in its own debt, internalizes the impact of bond issuance on prices. The impact
of reducing debt issuances at the margin is the slope of qEG times the quantity issued. That
is, any increase in price the government secures by reducing debt at the margin applies to
all inframarginal debt issuances. In equilibrium, therefore, the government remains on the
30

flatter portion of the price schedule, with impatience pushing debt issuances toward the start
of the “bend” in the price schedule. In the Appendix, we report the ergodic distribution of
debt-to-income, which is tightly clustered around this point.
This behavior generates stable prices during non-crisis periods. Any shift in qEG due to
shocks to the endowment are matched by small movements in debt issuances to prevent a
sharp decline in prices. This generates stable spreads absent crises. In Figure A2 in the
Appendix, we report the ergodic distribution of non-crisis spreads, which is tightly clustered
around the targeted average spread of 3.4 percent.
Figure 3 sheds light on how the model generates sharp spikes in spreads during a crisis.
The gap between qDD and qEG potentially represents a large increase in spreads (and a decline
in prices). Differently than during non-crisis periods, the government has no incentive to
counter this decline by reducing debt issuances. Recall that the government is indifferent
across all B 0 along the qDD price schedule. Therefore, it is willing to pay the high spreads
without altering its level of debt. In the CK model, the government defaults during a crisis.
Thus, we never observe in equilibrium the government issuing bonds at high (but finite)
spreads.
Figure 4 considers spreads during crisis events in the benchmark model. Panel (a) plots
the distribution conditional on a rollover crisis. We separate the events that result in repayment from those in which the randomization comes up as default. As required by equilibrium,
the crises with a higher spread are more likely to generate a subsequent default. Moreover,
the distribution covers a range of spreads that encompass magnitudes observed during events
such as Mexico 1994 and Greece 2012. Panel (b) depicts the distribution of the randomization probabilities during crises. The mean of this distribution is 0.20; that is, conditional on
a rollover crisis, the sovereign defaults 20 percent of the time.
A crisis in the benchmark model generates a positive price for non-maturing bonds. This
contrasts with the CK model, in which a crisis generates prices of zero. The government
captures this through better ex ante prices in the benchmark model (see Appendix Figure
A1). In this sense, the bond market with desperate deals is more efficient as it economizes
on the deadweight costs of default.
There are other ways to improve the efficiency of the bond market in models of this
type. Looking at equilibria absent rollover crises is one approach, but this removes the high
volatility at the same time. For example, Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) explore default in a
model with a similar endowment process but no self-fulfilling crises and find a very stable
31

Figure 4: Crisis Spreads
(b) Randomization Probabilities D(s, B 0 )

Density

Frequency

(a) Annualized Spreads

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Spread
Default Unrealized

0

Default Realized

.1

.2
Default Probability

.3

Note: Panel (a) depicts the histogram of spreads in the benchmark model conditional on a rollover crisis. The
unfilled bars denote episodes that did not result in a default, while the shaded bars depict the distribution
conditional on a subsequent within-period default at settlement. Panel (b) depicts the simulated distribution
of the government’s mixed-strategy probability of default, D, during rollover crises.

spread.
Contrasting with this is the approach taken by Arellano (2008), who introduces nonlinear
default costs. Specifically, defaults occurring during low endowment realizations are not
associated with an output loss, reducing the deadweight costs of default. Moreover, this
makes non-contingent bonds better insurance, as default is partially “forgiven” when output
is low (which is the typical default scenario). The sovereign is thus willing to borrow at fairly
high spreads, generating empirical volatility of spreads. However, this requires a volatile
output process (Arellano calibrates to Argentina). Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye
(2016) calibrate an Arellano-type nonlinear default cost using Mexican data and find much
of the volatility in spreads disappears. Moreover, as default costs are sensitive to output,
this increases the importance of income in spread fluctuations, contrasting with the modest
role of fundamentals in explaining spreads (see Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye,
2016).
Efficiency could also be enhanced by renegotiating under the threat of default. If bargaining is efficient, this eliminates the deadweight costs of default. Yue (2010) explores such
a model using an endowment calibration similar to Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and gen32

.4

erates volatile spreads. Yue’s renegotiations happen immediately, and thus the sovereign is
never punished for default on the equilibrium path. However, Benjamin and Wright (2008)
document that in practice it takes many years for defaults to be resolved. Thus introducing
bargaining during default may not spare the sovereign the costs of default. However, in
practice defaults are resolved through partial repayment, which compensates creditors. Our
desperate deals scenario shares this aspect, although the partial payments occur through
competitive secondary market trades rather than default resolution. This feature is compelling, as many crisis episodes are not associated with default.
This discussion of making bond markets more efficient highlights a key aspect of the models. While adding a sunspot and self-fulfilling crises conceivably could generate a volatile
bond market, the sovereign always has the option of avoiding the drama by not borrowing.
This is what happens in our CK alternative model. While the government defaults in response to a combination of high debt, low output, and a run on its bonds, the sovereign never
ventures into the region of the state space in which spreads are particularly volatile. Impatience is not enough, as the nonlinear prices essentially ration government debt. Viewed in
this way, the volatility associated with real-life markets must be relatively benign to support
creditors willing to lend and governments willing to borrow. In this study, the mitigating
factor is the ability to issue bonds at fire-sale prices in crisis episodes.
The higher ρ = EG prices in the benchmark model relative to the CK alternative model
imply that the government’s welfare is higher in the benchmark. Although in the midst of the
crisis the government is indifferent to default or issuance at desperate deal prices, the legacy
lenders are not. As prices are competitive, the government captures this difference when it
issues bonds in non-crisis times. We have computed welfare gains at various points in the
state space. The gains are positive for the benchmark model over the CK model, although the
magnitudes are very small (on the order of one-quarter of one percent additional consumption
in perpetuity). Such small welfare gains are not unusual in models of uninsurable business
cycle risk. What is perhaps more striking is that the dramatic increase in spread volatility
represents a net positive gain in welfare.

4.2

Frequency of Crises

The preceding discussion highlights that the government controls its vulnerability to a
rollover crisis through its debt dynamics. In the benchmark, the sovereign is in a crisis

33

0

20

Density

40

60

Figure 5: Growth and Rollover Crises

-.04

-.02

0
.02
Quarterly Growth

No Rollover Crisis

.04

.06

Rollover Crisis

quarter (i.e., ρ = DD and s ∈ C) only 1.3 percent of the time. This is despite the fact that
the exogenous probability of ρ = DD is calibrated to be 10 percent. The rarity of rollover
crises therefore reflects the fact that the government avoids the crisis zone. In particular,
the sovereign is in the crisis zone only 13.0 percent of the non-excluded quarters. Exposing
itself to a rollover crisis is costly ex ante due to the equilibrium price schedule. A rollover
crisis therefore requires both a high level of debt and a relatively negative growth shock.
To see this, Figure 5 depicts the distribution of growth conditional on a rollover crisis;
that is, conditional on s ∈ C and ρ = DD. The crisis distribution is shifted to the left,
indicating that self-fulfilling crises in our model involve a combination of a shift in beliefs
and a negative output realization. The mean growth conditional on a crisis is -1.4 percent,
compared with 0.4 percent for non-crisis quarters. Moreover, 97 percent of rollover crises are
associated with negative growth.

4.3

Non-crisis Dynamics

As previously noted, the interesting spread dynamics in our quantitative model are generated
by desperate deals. To obtain a better sense of dynamics during non-crisis periods, Figure
6 Panel (a) depicts qEG for three values of g, namely, the mean endowment realization and
plus or minus three standard deviations of the unconditional distribution of g. The figure
34

zooms into the relevant debt levels surrounding the ergodic distribution’s mean level of debtto-income. A high realization of g bodes well for future endowment, and thus future bond
prices. Thus, the price schedule shifts up and out for high realizations of g. This reflects
that, in an incomplete markets environment, default is relatively attractive during low output
realizations (see Proposition 1).
Figure 6: Non-crisis (ρ = EG) Behavior: Response to g
(b) Debt-Issuance Policy

(a) Price Schedule
q0.960

B0
Y

0.955

0.70

0.68

0.66

0.950

0.64

0.945
0.62

0.940
0.60

0.935

0.58

0.56

0.930
0.54

0.925
0.52

0.920
0.64

0.64

0.65

0.65

0.66

0.66

0.67

0.67

0.68

0.68

0.50
0.500

0.69

<g

g = g7 ! 3 q

1 ! ;2g

g = g7
<g
g = g7 + 3 q
1 ! ;2g

0.520

0.540

0.560

0.580

0.600

0.620

0.640

0.660

0.680

0.700

<g

g = g7 ! 3 q

B0
Y

1 ! ;2g

g = g7
<g
g = g7 + 3 q
1 ! ;2g

B
Y

Note: Panel (a) depicts the benchmark qEG (g, B 0 ) as a function of B 0 for different values of g. The top
(dashed) schedule is the highest g in our discretization, specifically, three standard deviations of the unconditional g distribution above the mean. The lowest (solid line) is three standard deviations below the mean,
and the middle schedule corresponds to the mean g. The schedule is evaluated at z = 0, ρ = EG, and
B/Y = 0.656, the ergodic mean. Panel (b) depicts the benchmark model’s bond issuance policy function B,
normalized by Y , as a function of B/Y for various realizations of g, evaluated at z = 0 and ρ = EG.

The fact that the price schedule shifts up and out in a boom generates pro-cyclical debt
issuances in equilibrium. From Figure 6 Panel (a), we see that the nonlinear portion shifts
to the right in response to high g realizations, as default is less likely going forward. This
encourages additional borrowing, given the government’s impatience. Panel (b) of the figure
depicts the policy function for the same three values of g as Panel (a). The high-g policy
lies above the mean-g policy, which in turn lies above the low-g policy. Moreover, near
the 45-degree line, the policy functions are very flat. This indicates that the government
leverages up and down very quickly in this region in response to shocks to g. Finally, the
35

nonlinear price schedule results in the government not borrowing enough to raise spreads
substantially, as high spreads (low q) are associated with regions in which the price is highly
elastic. This discourages borrowing and lowers the volatility of spreads. This generates a
fairly low volatility of spreads absent desperate deals.

4.4

Default Postmortems

We now turn to default episodes in the benchmark model. Table 3 reports simulated moments
conditional on default in the current quarter. For the benchmark model, we can see that
spreads spike during a default episode and growth is relatively low. Moreover, we see that
two-thirds of defaults coincide with a rollover crisis. In the CK alternative, this fraction is
nearly 94 percent.
To obtain a better sense of the nature of rollover crisis defaults, in Figure 7 we perform
an event study analysis in the benchmark model’s simulation. In particular, we normalize
t = 0 as the quarter of default and then explore mean behavior in the preceding five quarters.
The solid line depicts default events that occur with a rollover crisis (ρ = DD and s ∈ C),
which we label “self-fulfilling” defaults. The dashed line depicts defaults that occur outside
a rollover crisis (ρ = EG or s ∈
/ C). We label the latter defaults as “fundamental” defaults,
as the default would occur that period regardless of the realization of ρ; of course, the fact
that future crises could occur play a role in the default decision today, as these events are
embedded in the value of repayment.
Panel (a) of Figure 7 plots the mean growth leading up to a default event. For fundamental defaults, we see a boom-bust pattern. Two quarters prior to default tends to be
associated with high growth, which is then followed by a mediocre growth realization the
period before default. The default itself coincides with a large negative growth realization.
This pattern is the classic fundamental driven default; the high growth induces the government to borrow, and then if a large negative growth shock occurs while the economy is so
highly leveraged, the sovereign defaults. For self-fulfilling defaults, ex ante growth is not
particularly elevated, and default itself coincides with a mildly negative growth realization.
The self-fulfilling defaults are thus associated with relatively minor recessions.
Panel (b) depicts the trajectory of debt before default. We see the increase in debt typical
before a fundamental default, which reflects the boom period just discussed. In particular,
debt-to-income ratios are relatively high once lower growth rates are realized. A relatively

36

Table 3: Defaults

Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional

Mean r − r
Mean ∆(r − r∗ )
Mean ∆y
Fraction ∆y < 0
Mean YB
Fraction ρ = DD

Benchmark

CK

26.8
23.6
-1.8
95.7%
67.0%
62.8%

NA
NA
-1.8
98.8%
65.0%
93.9%

high debt level is also necessary to sustain a self-fulfilling crisis in equilibrium, although the
average level at the time of default is less than that associated with a fundamental default.
Finally, Panel (c) depicts spreads. For fundamental defaults, there is hardly any increase
in spreads prior to the default, and spreads are undefined in the period of default. The
fundamental defaults combine the shift up in the price schedule during the boom period and
the sovereign’s best response of adding debt in response, keeping spreads largely unchanged.
The default then occurs because an unusually large negative growth rate is realized after
a relatively large positive growth rate; as low growth is relatively unlikely to follow high
growth, spreads do not anticipate the fundamental default (other than the unconditional
risk in all quarters). This contrasts with self-fulfilling crises, in which spreads spike in the
quarter of the default as the government issues debt at very low prices. Creditors understand
the risk of imminent default and charge accordingly.

4.5

Debt Buybacks, Revisited

As noted in the introduction, Portugal repurchased bonds during the crisis. Greece also
repurchased outstanding debt in 2012. A well-known critique by Bulow and Rogoff (1988)
argued that such buybacks are welfare-reducing for the sovereign. We now explore buybacks
in two variants on our benchmark model. Both alternatives have the sovereign buying back
debt when default is imminent.
We first discuss prices during debt buybacks, which were not possible in the one-period
bond model of Section 2. Consider the domain to the left of B 0 = (1 − λ)B in Figure
37

Figure 7: Default Event Studies
(b) Debt/Income

(c) Spreads

-.03

Spread
.15

.655

.05

.66

-.02

.1

Growth
-.01

Debt/Income
.665
.67

.2

0

.675

.25

.01

(a) Growth

-5

-4

-3

-2
Time to Default

Fundamental

-1
Self-Fulfilling

0

1

-5

-4

-3

-2
Time to Default

Fundamental

-1
Self-Fulfilling

0

1

-5

-4

-3

-2
Time to Default

Fundamental

-1

0

Self-Fulfilling

3. The cost of repurchases is reduced consumption, and the benefit is reduced debt going
forward. At B 0 = (1 − λ)B, the government prefers to default as s ∈ C. Therefore, for
small repurchases, the sovereign needs a very low price to make it indifferent. For arbitrarily
small buybacks, the price would need to be negative, which is therefore not sustainable in
equilibrium. The only price sustainable in equilibrium in the neighborhood to the left of
B 0 = (1 − λ)B is zero (regardless of beliefs), and the government defaults at settlement with
probability one. Of course, if ρ = EG, the government would never choose to issue B 0 in
this region.
For large enough buybacks, there is a price low enough that the government is indifferent
between default and repurchasing its debt at fire-sale prices. This price is qDD . Note that
on this domain (0 < B 0 < (1 − λ)B), qEG cannot be supported in equilibrium given our
timing convention. Repurchases at a price higher than qDD , by definition, generate default
at settlement. Therefore, qEG is not credible absent commitment. On this domain, qDD is
also the equilibrium price schedule for ρ = EG, although, again, the sovereign would never
choose to issue on this domain. Note, as well, for buybacks we have a non-monotonic qDD .
We now consider buybacks under two scenarios. In the first alternative, we assume
the government repurchases non-maturing debt during a desperate deal crisis. Like the
benchmark model’s issuances, these repurchases take place at the qDD price schedule that
leaves the government indifferent. We posit that the government repurchases 10 percent of
its non-maturing debt.28
Specifically, consider a period in which ρ = DD and s ∈ C. The government then sets B 0 = 0.9(1 − λ)B
as long as 0.9(1 − λ)B ∈ B(s). If 0.9(1 − λ)B ∈
/ B(s), the government defaults.
28

38

1

Figure 8: Equilibrium Price Schedule: Alternative Models

1.000

0.900

0.800

0.700

0.600

0.500

0.400

0.300

0.200

0.100

0.000
0.500

0.550

0.600

0.650

0.700

0.750

Note: This figure depicts qEG (s, B 0 ) as a function of B 0 /Y , with g = ḡ, z = 0, ρ = EG and
B/Y = 0.656. As discussed in the text, the Eaton-Gersovitz price schedule assumes no default in
the current period and ρ = EG. The solid line is the benchmark schedule, the dashed line is the
CK model, the dotted line indicates the alternative with repurchases during rollover crises, and
the dash-dotted line indicates repurchases during fundamental defaults.

The second alternative concerns behavior during a fundamental default. Recall that a
fundamental default is defined as a default that occurs even if the government faces the
Eaton-Gersovitz price schedule, qEG ; that is, s such that B(s) = ∅. These defaults occur
when debt is relatively high and a low endowment is realized. Such defaults are the focus
of the quantitative sovereign debt literature. For a fundamental default, there is no level
of issuances that is sustainable in equilibrium at positive prices, as the government strictly
prefers to default rather than issue at the best possible price schedule qEG . For this exercise,
we explore what happens when the government repurchases debt at fire-sale prices. In
particular, we extend ρ = EG prices into the buyback region using the same mixed-strategy
approach as is the case for desperate deals, having the government repurchase debt at qDD .
Like in the first buyback alternative, we assume the sovereign repurchases 10 percent of the
non-maturing bonds during fundamental default episodes.
Figure 8 shows the government’s price schedules under various scenarios. As we can see
39

from the figure, debt issuances or buybacks through desperate deals during rollover crises
shift up the equilibrium price schedule fairly uniformly relative to the no-deals scenario
(over the range in which there is some risk of default). However, desperate buybacks during
rollover crises do so by less than debt issuances.
In contrast, desperate buybacks during fundamental crises have very little impact on the
price schedule for the low-risk portions of the schedule (where q is only moderately below
the risk-free level). However, it shifts it out quite a bit for high-risk portions. As a result, it
actually twists the price schedule relative to the benchmark desperate deals scenario.
The reason that desperate buybacks during rollover crises do not impact the price schedule
as much as desperate issuances can be understood from Figure 3. Buybacks do not raise the
price as much as issuances and hence result in smaller gains to the legacy lenders.
The reason for twisting of the schedule with buybacks during fundamental crises is twofold: (i) these crises occur only in fairly extreme portions of the debt-output space, and
(ii) the fact that they reduce the incentive to deleverage in these events means that they
encourage the country to borrow slightly more during adverse regions of the state space.
The first factor is salient in extreme portions of the state space where the debt level is high,
and this pushes out the price schedule. However, in more moderate portions of the state
space, the second factor and the threat of future dilution are key, which explains why the
buybacks-during-fundamental-crises schedule is actually slightly below the no-deals schedule
right where the two schedules bend.
We have computed the welfare gains or losses across these various alternatives, comparing
the respective value functions evaluated at zero debt and mean growth. The welfare ordering
of desperate buybacks versus issuances during rollover crises tracks the ordering of the price
schedules. The desperate issuance benchmark has the best price schedule of these three
and has the largest ex ante welfare level, the environment with desperate buybacks during
rollover crises has the next best schedule and welfare, and the no-deals CK model has the
lowest prices and welfare.
The fact that the price schedule for desperate buybacks during fundamental crises is
twisted relative to the benchmark makes welfare gains or losses less transparent. However,
because the extreme portion of the price schedule where prices are higher under this scenario
is rarely reached, welfare ends up lower than either of the other desperate deals scenarios.
The surprise here is that welfare in the model with desperate buybacks during fundamental
crises is lower than the CK model, albeit the difference is small in magnitude.
40

Our results on implications and efficacy of debt buybacks have interesting implications for
a long-standing debate on their benefits. Buybacks of debt emerged as a potential policy tool
during the Latin American crisis of the late 1980s, with Brazil, Chile, and Mexico undertaking
large billion-dollar-plus repurchases. In a classic article, Bulow and Rogoff (1988) pointed
out that the very low prices on sovereign debt before a buyback was proposed did not reflect
the price at which the buyback would actually occur. They argued that the debt would be
bought back at the equilibrium price after the buyback, and thus the lenders would receive
most or all of the gains from the buyback.
In our model, the government is indifferent in the midst of a crisis between issuances,
default, or buybacks. However, dynamically speaking, the prospect of future transfers to
creditors under these scenarios does generate equilibrium effects (fundamentally, the transfers occur because the government avoids the deadweight losses from default with some
probability). In particular, they have the potential to be welfare-improving, where this improvement comes via a more favorable price schedule for government debt. However, a better
price schedule also exacerbates the time-consistency problem of the government: With a better price schedule, investors rationally expect the government to borrow more in the future,
which works to push down the price schedule via the dilution effect. What we see in our
quantitive results is exactly the sort of mixed results that this calculus suggests, with buybacks during rollover crises being ex ante welfare-improving and those during fundamental
crises welfare-reducing.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we extended the nature of self-fulfilling crises to include bond issuances and
buybacks at fire-sale prices during a rollover crisis. This was motivated by the fact that
crises in practice are often associated with positive issuances (and occasional repurchases)
at abnormally high spreads. The addition of these desperate deals changes the nature of
equilibrium spreads in the quantitative model, primarily increasing the volatility of spreads.
Absent such deals, the volatility of spreads is an order of magnitude too small, despite
the presence of self-fulfilling crises and defaults as frequent as in the benchmark model.
In the no-deals model, the sovereign either deleverages or defaults in response to adverse
credit conditions. With deals, the government is willing to endure the high and volatile
spreads associated with crises as it is indifferent to repayment and default in such situations.
41

However, creditors strictly prefer the positive prices of such deals, conditional on a crisis,
and thus are willing to purchase bonds ex ante at more favorable prices for the issuer. This
latter effect induces more borrowing on the part of the government as well as higher ex ante
welfare, despite the volatility of spreads. The nature of desperate deals in the model and
the associated equilibrium behavior provide a lens to interpret the interest rate spikes and
debt dynamics observed in recent sovereign debt crises.

42

References
Aguiar, M., and M. Amador (2014): “Sovereign Debt,” in Handbook of International
Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, vol. 4, pp. 647–687. NorthHolland Elsevier.
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath (2015): “Coordination and
Crisis in Monetary Unions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4), 1727–1779.
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, H. Hopenhayn, and I. Werning (2016): “Take the Short
Route: Equilibrium Default and Debt Maturity,” working paper.
Aguiar, M., S. Chatterjee, H. L. Cole, and Z. R. Stangebye (2016): “Quantitative
Models of Sovereign Debt,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor, and H. Uhlig,
vol. 2, pp. 1697–1755. North-Holland Elsevier.
Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2006): “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rate and the Current
Account,” Journal of International Economics, 69(1), 64–83.
(2007): “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the Trend,” Journal of
Political Economy, 115, 69–102.
Arellano, C. (2008): “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Markets,”
American Economic Review, 98(3), 690–712.
Arellano, C., and A. Ramanarayanan (2012): “Default and the Maturity Structure
in Sovereign Bonds,” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 187–232.
Auclert, A., and M. Rognlie (2016): “Unique Equilibrium in the Eaton-Gersovitz
Model of Sovereign Debt,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 134–146.
Ayres, J., G. Navarro, J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2015): “Sovereign Default: The
Role of Expectations,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 723.
Benjamin, D., and M. Wright (2008): “Recovery Before Redemption: A Model of Delays
in Sovereign Debt Renegotiations,” UCLA Working Paper.
Bocola, L., and A. Dovis (2016): “Self-fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis,”
working paper.

43

Broner, F., G. Lorenzoni, and S. Schmukler (2013): “Why Do Emerging Economies
Borrow Short Term?,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 11, 67–100.
Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff (1988): “The Buyback Boondoggle,” in Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2, pp. 675–698. Brookings Institutions.
Calvo, G. (1988): “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
Economic Review, 78(4), 647–661.
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, K. Dempsey, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2016): “A Theory
of Credit Scoring and the Competitive Pricing of Default Risk,” working paper.
Chatterjee, S., and B. Eyigungor (2012): “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,”
American Economic Review, 102(6), 2674–2699.
Cole, H., and T. Kehoe (2000): “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(1), 91–116.
Conesa, J. C., and T. Kehoe (2011): “Gambling for Redemption and Self-Fulfilling Debt
Crises,” working paper.
Eaton, J., and R. Fernandez (1995): “Sovereign Debt,” in Handbook of International
Economics, ed. by G. Grossman, and K. Rogoff, vol. 3, pp. 2031–2077. North-Holland Els.
Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz (1981): “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2), 289–309.
Gelos, G., R. Sahay, and G. Sandleris (2011): “Sovereign Borrowing by Developing
Countries: What Determines Market Access?,” Journal of International Economics, 83(2),
243–254.
Harsanyi, J. C. (1973): “Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A New Rationale for
Mixed-Strategy Equilibrium Points,” International Journal of Game Theory, 2(1), 1–23.
Hatchondo, J. C., and L. Martinez (2009): “Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign
Defaults,” Journal of International Economics, 79(1), 117–125.
Leland, H. (1994): “Bond Prices, Yield Spreads, and Optimal Capital Structure with
Default Risk,” IBER Finance Working Paper 240.

44

Lorenzoni, G., and I. Werning (2013): “Slow Moving Debt Crises,” NBER Working
Paper 19228.
Roch, F., and H. Uhlig (2016): “The Dynamics of Sovereign Debt Crises and Bailouts,”
IMF Working Paper 16/136.
Tomz, M., and M. Wright (2007): “Do Countries Default in Bad Times?,” Journal of
the European Economics Association, 5(2-3), 352–360.
(2013): “Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default,” Annual Reviews of
Economics, 5, 247–272.
Yue, V. Z. (2010): “Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiations,” Journal of International
Economics, 80(2), 176–187.

45

Appendix
A1

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
Throughout, consider (Y0 , B0 ) and (Y1 , B1 ), both in Y × (−∞, B], with Y0 ≤ Y1 and
B0 ≥ B1 , and with at least one of the inequalities strict.
R
R
We begin with some properties of VEG
and VCK
.
R
R
R
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) ≤ VEG
Lemma A1. For any B 0 ≤ B, we have (i) VEG
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ); and (ii) VCK
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) ≤
R
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ). Moreover, the inequality in part (i) is strict if qEG (B 0 )B 0 > B1 −Y1 , and the
VCK
inequality in part (ii) is strict if either (a) B 0 > 0 and B1 < Y1 or (b) B 0 ∈ (R(B1 − Y1 ), 0].

Proof. Part (i): Recall that qEG (B 0 ) is independent of (Y, B). Hence, for any B 0 ≤ B, the
R
immediately implies the weak monotonicity result. If qEG (B 0 )B 0 > B1 − Y1 ,
definition of VEG
then consumption upon repayment is interior and the strict inequality follows immediately
R
. Part (ii): Recall that qCK (B 0 ) is also independent of (Y, B). For
from the definition of VEG
R
R
B 0 ≤ 0, VCK
= VEG
, and hence Part (i) implies the weak monotonicity in general, the strict
monotonicity if qEG (B 0 )B 0 = R−1 B 0 > B1 − Y1 , where the first equality follows from the
R
depends on (Y, B) only through u(Y − B).
definition of qEG for B 0 ≤ 0. For B 0 > 0, VCK
This is weakly increasing, and the inequality is strict as long as Y1 > B1 .
Another useful property that is a straightforward extension of Arellano (2008) is:
R
R
Lemma A2. For any B 0 ≤ B, we have: (i) If VEG
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) < V D (Y1 ), then VEG
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) <
R
R
V D (Y0 ), and (ii) If VCK
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y1 ), then VCK
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y0 ).

Proof. We first prove that, if default is optimal, then the sovereign is making a net payment
at settlement. Specifically, for B 0 ≤ B, if u(Y − x) + βE[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] ≤ V D (Y ), then x ≥ 0,
and if u(Y − x) + βE[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] < V D (Y ), then x > 0. To see this, recall that V D (Y ) =
u(Y ) + βEu(Y 0 )/(1 − β)= u(Y ) + βEV D (Y 0 ). Moreover, E[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] ≥ EV D (Y 0 ) as it is
always feasible to default next period. Thus, u(Y − x) + βE[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] ≤ V D (Y ) implies
u(Y − x) ≤ u(Y ). If the first inequality is strict, then so is the second. As u is strictly
increasing, we have the result that x ≥ (>)0.

46

R
To apply this result to the lemma, suppose VEG
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) < V D (Y1 ). Rearranging we
have:

u (Y1 − B1 + qEG (B 0 )B 0 ) − u(Y1 ) < βEu(Y 0 )/(1 − β) − E[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ].

(25)

Let x = B1 − qEG (B 0 )B 0 , and the above implies x > 0. Taking the case of Y0 < Y1 and
∆B ≡ B0 − B1 ≥ 0, we have:
u (Y0 − B0 + qEG (B 0 )B 0 ) − u(Y0 )
= u(Y0 − x − ∆B) − u(Y0 )
≤ u(Y0 − x) − u(Y0 )
< u(Y1 − x) − u(Y1 ),
where the last inequality follows from the strict concavity of u and the fact that Y0 < Y1
and x > 0. If Y0 = Y1 and B0 > B1 , then ∆B > 0 and the second-to-last inequality is strict.
This plus (25) implies:
u (Y0 − B0 + qEG (B 0 )B 0 ) − u(Y0 ) < βEu(Y 0 )/(1 − β) − E[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ].

(26)

R
Hence, VEG
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) < V D (Y0 ). This proves Part (i) of the lemma.

Part (ii) is proved in an identical fashion with x = B1 if B 0 > 0. If B 0 ≤ 0, then
R
R
VCK
= VEG
and the results of Part (i) apply.
Lemmas A1 and A2 have the following corollary, which follows directly from the definition
of B:
Corollary A3. Given Y0 ≤ Y1 and B0 ≥ B1 , we have B(Y0 , B0 ) ⊂ B(Y1 , B1 ).
We are now ready to prove Proposition 1. We begin with the case ρ = EG:
Proof. Recall that by definition we have V R = VEG if ρ = EG and B 0 ≤ 0, where we
omit the arguments for simplicity. Hence, for B 0 ≤ 0, the monotonicity of V R in (Y, B)
follows from Lemma A1 Part (i). Now suppose B 0 > 0 and B 0 ∈ B(Y0 , B0 ) ⊂ B(Y1 , B1 ),
where the subset follows from Corollary A3. Then by definition V R = VEG and monotonicity follows from Lemma A1 Part (i). If B 0 ∈
/ B(Y0 , B0 ) and B0 > Y0 , then repayment

47

is not feasible at (Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) and V R ([Y0 , EG, B0 ], B 0 ) = −∞. Weak monotonicity follows immediately. If repayment is feasible for B 0 ∈
/ B(Y0 , B0 ), then V R ([Y0 , EG, B0 ], B 0 ) =
R
u(Y0 − B0 ) + βE[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] < u(Y1 − B1 ) + βE[V (s0 )|B 0 ∈ s0 ] ≤ VEG
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ). The
latter two expressions define V R ([Y1 , EG, B1 ], B 0 ) depending on whether B 0 is not or is a
member of B(Y1 , B1 ), respectively. This completes the proof of Part (i) of the proposition
for ρ = EG.
Part (ii) follows immediately from Corollary A3. Part (iii) follows immediately from Part
(ii) and the lenders’ break-even condition.

Proof of Proposition 1 for ρ = CK:
Proof. To see the monotonicity of V R when ρ = CK, we appeal to the definition from
R
Section 2.2 under Cole-Kehoe beliefs. Suppose VCK
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y ). Then Lemma A2
R
R
implies that VCK
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y ) as well. Thus V R = VCK
at both points. Lemma A1
0
D
R
Part (ii) then implies monotonicity. If VCK (Y0 , B0 , B ) > V (Y ), then Lemma A1 Part (ii)
R
R
for both points. Lemma
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) > V D (Y ) as well. In this case, V R = VEG
implies VCK
R
A1 Part (i) implies monotonicity in this case. The remaining case is VCK
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) >
R
R
V D (Y ) ≥ VCK
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ). In this case, V R ([Y1 , CK, B1 ], B 0 ) = VEG
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) > V D ≥
R
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) = V R ([Y0 , CK, B0 ], B 0 ). Hence, V R is monotone in (Y, B) for ρ = CK.
VCK
To see the weak monotonicity of D, we need to show that, if D([Y1 , CK, B1 ], B 0 ) = 1,
R
(Y1 , B1 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y1 ).
then D([Y0 , CK, B0 ], B 0 ) = 1. The former condition implies that VCK
R
Lemma A2 then implies that VCK
(Y0 , B0 , B 0 ) ≤ V D (Y0 ) as well. By definition of V R for
ρ = CK, this implies D([Y0 , CK, B0 ], B 0 ) = 1. The monotonicity of the price schedule then
follows from the lenders’ break-even condition.

Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Part (iii) of the proposition follows immediately from the construction of prices under
alternative beliefs laid out in Section 2.2. Part (i) follows immediately from this fact and the
implications for consumption conditional on repayment. Part (ii) follows immediately from
Part (i) and the tie-breaking assumptions under the different belief regimes when indifferent
to default.
48

Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. Consider Y0 ≤ Y1 and B0 ≥ B1 , with one inequality strict. Suppose (Y0 , B0 ) ∈ C and
B 0 ∈ B(Y0 , B0 ). By definition of the desperate deals value function, we have V R ([Y0 , DD, B0 ], B 0 ) =
V D (Y0 ). From Corollary A3, we also have B 0 ∈ B(Y1 , B1 ). If (Y1 , B1 ) ∈ C, we have
R
V R ([Y1 , DD, B1 ], B 0 ) = V D (Y1 ); otherwise, VCK
(Y1 B1 ], B 0 ) > V D (Y1 ). In either case,
V R ([Y1 , DD, B1 ], B 0 ) ≥ V R ([Y0 , DD, B0 ], B 0 ),
with strict inequality if Y1 > Y0 .

A2

Details of Quantitative Extension and Calibration

In this Appendix, we flesh out the details of the quantitative model and the calibration. In
particular, we provide details on (i) the calibration of the endowment process, (ii) a fuller
discussion of the default value, (iii) a detailed description of settlement in the quantitative
model, and (iv) a detailed description of the lenders’ problem.
Endowment
We assume the growth rate process is governed by
gt+1 = (1 − ρg )ḡ + ρg gt + εt+1 ,
where ε ∼ N (0, σg2 ). The transitory component of output zt is assumed to be iid, orthogonal
to εt and to have mean zero and variance σz2 . The implied growth rate of log output is
yt+1 − yt = gt+1 + zt+1 − zt + εt+1 .
We estimate this model using quarterly Mexican constant-price GDP for the period 1980Q1
through 2015Q1. The estimated parameter vector is reported in Table 1. The estimates
suggest that the stochastic trend is the primary driver of GDP fluctuations for Mexico,
consistent with Aguiar and Gopinath (2007).
With these parameters in hand, we discretize the process for g using Tauchen’s method
p
using 50 grid points spanning ±3σg / 1 − ρ2g . The iid z shock is drawn from a continuous
Normal distribution truncated at ±3σz . When taking expectations, we numerically integrate
49

over z’s continuous distribution by evaluating at 11 grid points. For computational reasons,
we approximate ez ≈ 1 + z and exploit the linearity of z in the budget set. Given the small
variance of z, this is not a bad approximation.
Given the non-stationarity of income, our No-Ponzi upper bound on end-of-period debt
is now expressed as a ratio of current income: BYt+1
≤ B̄, ∀t. Our state vector s is augmented
t
to include g as well as Y in order to correctly forecast future income.
To compute the model, we exploit the homogeneity of the government and lender preferences and normalize by Gt to render the problem stationary. We place normalized debt on a
grid of 350 points distributed uniformly over the domain B
∈ [0, 1.25]. The boundaries are
G
not binding in equilibrium given the government’s impatience and the incentive to default
at high debt levels (and hence q → 0 as B 0 → ∞).
Default
As noted in the text, the value of default in the quantitive model is given by:
V D (s) ≡ u(Y D ) + βEV E (s0 ),
where Y D = Gez̄ , and V E denotes the continuation value while in the default (exclusion)
state:


V E (s) = u((1 − φ)Y ) + β(1 − ξ)E V D (s0 )|s + βξE [V (s0 )|s, B 0 = 0] .
Note that the cost of default is linear in output, as in Aguiar and Gopinath (2006). In
contrast, Arellano (2008) introduced a non-linear cost of default, which made default disproportionately more costly in good endowment states and “forgiven” – at least in terms of
output costs – in low endowment states. The Arellano specification amplifies the impact of
endowment fluctuations in the decision to default while also making default a better insurance option in low endowment states. This helps the model generate additional volatility
of spreads and frequency of default but does so by making endowment risk more important
rather than less. The empirical facts outlined in work like Tomz and Wright (2007) suggest
that this pulls the model in the wrong direction relative to the data.29
29
Moreover, Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye (2016) show the Arellano non-linear cost requires a
very volatile endowment process to generate volatile spreads. In particular, the endowment process calibrated
to Mexico used here is not sufficiently volatile. This indicates that the typical calibration to Argentina’s
more volatile output process is not representative of other emerging markets.

50

The government’s budget set conditional on repayment becomes:
C ≤ Y + q(s, B 0 ) [B 0 − (1 − λ)B] − (r∗ + λ)B.

(27)

The government’s problem, the associated value functions {V (s), V R (s, B 0 ), V D (s)}, and
policy functions {B(s, B 0 ), D(s, B 0 )} are the immediate extensions of those from Section
2 to the augmented environment. We assume u(C) = C 1−σ /(1 − σ), with σ = 2. The
government’s discount factor is set through the moment matching procedure described in
the text.
Auction Proceeds
In the simple model of Section 2, we assumed that if the government defaults at settlement
all revenues raised at the prior auction are lost. We now treat this scenario in a more realistic
manner.
It is useful to define x(s, B 0 ) as the equilibrium amount raised at auction per endowment,
if positive, given an amount auctioned B 0 and a price schedule q(s, B 0 ):
x(s, B 0 ) ≡ max {q(s, B 0 )(B 0 − (1 − λ)B), 0} .

(28)

The proceeds from auction are held in escrow until the government makes a repayment
decision. The government can use these funds to pay its outstanding liabilities but cannot
draw on them for consumption unless all such payments are made. In particular, given
outstanding debt B, the government is contractually obligated to pay λB in principal and
r∗ B in interest payments. These payments are financed through current endowment as well
as the revenue raised by the auction of new debt. If the government makes its contracted
payments, it consumes according to (27) and continues on to the next period with the new
debt state implied by B 0 .
If the government defaults, the amount in settlement x(s, B 0 ) is disbursed to all claimants
on the basis of the face value of their claims. In particular, there are holders of current
liabilities, totaling (r∗ + λ)B, as well as holders of future liabilities, with a face value B 0 . In
the period of default, each unit of such claims receives a payout RD :
RD (s, B 0 ) =

x(s, B 0 )
.
B 0 + (r∗ + λ)B

(29)

If B 0 < (1 − λ)B, then the government has repurchased bonds on net. In this case, we
51

assume that the original holders of the repurchased bonds receive their payment at the time
of the auction and that there are no funds left in escrow at the time of default. In this case,
RD (s, B 0 ) = 0.
Risk-Averse Lenders
Recall that each period a unit measure of identical lenders enters the sovereign debt
market with wealth W and decides to invest a fraction µ in sovereign bonds. The realized
return on sovereign bonds is R̃. To see how R̃ is determined in equilibrium, recall the
timing of Figure 1. “Old” lenders enter a period with B units of debt. A fraction λ of the
representative portfolio matures, which is to be paid at settlement. We also assume that all
coupon payments (on both maturing and non-maturing bonds) are to be paid at settlement.
The remaining (ex-coupon) non-matured bonds, (1 − λ)B, are sold to “young” lenders at
the time of auction. In particular, new lenders purchase from the legacy lenders the stock
of non-maturing bonds plus any new bonds the government auctions at the same time.30 At
the end of the auction, new/young lenders hold all non-maturing bonds.
With this timing, we can compute the return on bonds purchased in the current period
by young lenders in state s when the government’s end-of-auction stock of debt is B 0 . In
particular, consider a young lender that purchases a unit-measure portfolio today, paying
q(s, B 0 ) at auction. If the government defaults in the current period, the young lender
receives RD (s, B 0 ), where RD is defined by (29). As the lender is still young, it can invest
this amount in risk-free bonds. If the government does not default this period, the young
lender holds the sovereign bonds into the next period.
Next period, the lender is now “old.” It sells 1−λ at auction and receives q(s0 , B 00 ), where
B 00 reflects next period’s debt-issuance decisions. In equilibrium, this will be B 00 = B(s0 ).
The lender receives q(s0 , B 00 )(1−λ) for these bonds regardless of the government’s subsequent
default decision. In addition, if the government does not default, the lender receives r∗ + λ
at settlement. Otherwise, it receives RD (s0 , B 00 )(r∗ + λ) at settlement.
Let δ and δ 0 denote indicator functions that take the value of one if the government
defaults in the current or next period, respectively, and zero otherwise. The preceding
implies that the realized return on a sovereign bond, denoted R̃, purchased at price q(s, B 0 )
30

Our auction assumption is that payments due within the period, that is, coupons and matured bonds,
are not sold to new lenders. This is done for tractability, as currently due payments will sell at a different
price than new bonds.

52

is given by:

1
R̃ =
(1 − δ)q(s0 , B 00 )(1 − λ)
q(s, B 0 )

(30)

+ δRD (s, B 0 )(1 + r∗ )
+ (1 − δ)δ 0 RD (s0 , B 00 )(r∗ + λ)

0
∗
+ (1 − δ)(1 − δ )(r + λ) .
The first term on the right is the sale of non-maturing bonds at next period’s auction, which
occurs only if there is no default this period; the second term is the payment at settlement
in case of immediate default, which is then invested at the risk-free rate; the third term is
the payment at settlement next period in case of default, scaled by the claims on coupons
and matured principal; and the final term is the payment of coupon and principal absent
default in either period. In the first line, note that, while next period’s price incorporates
the government’s default policy that period, the sale takes place before next period’s default
decision is made. Hence, it is not multiplied by 1 − δ 0 .
In forming expectations over R̃, the lender uses the equilibrium policy functions of the
government:
δ = 1 with probability D(s, B 0 );
δ 0 = 1 with probability D(s0 , B 00 ) in state s0 ; and
B 00 = B(s0 ).
The first-order condition for the lender’s problem is the usual condition:
EM (R̃ − (1 + r∗ )) = 0,
where M = v 0 ((1 − µ∗ )(1 + r∗ ) + µ∗ R̃) is the stochastic discount factor. If lenders are riskneutral, then ER̃ = 1 + r∗ . When γ > 0, we will have a positive risk premium. In particular,
q(s, B 0 ) will be such that lenders receive the appropriate compensation for the probability of
default plus any additional risk premium required to bear such risk. Note that the stochastic
discount factor depends on µ∗ . Note as well that the government has an incentive to adjust
the level of debt to manipulate the risk premium via the term R̃. This is the risk premium
complement to the government’s incentive to manipulate the risk-neutral price by adjusting
53

the probability of default at the margin.

A3

Additional Quantitative Results

In this appendix, we report additional results from the quantitative model. In Figure A1
Panel (a) we plot qEG (s, B 0 ) as a function of B 0 /Y . Recall from Section 2 that qEG is the
price schedule assuming the government does not default in the current period, given the
continuation equilibrium behavior. Given that the growth shock is persistent, g is relevant
for forecasting future states, and hence qEG is also a function of g. We evaluate qEG at the
mean of g.
As is usual in these models, the price schedule is highly nonlinear. The relevant region
is in the neighborhood of the mean debt-to-income level of 65.6 percent. Figure A2 depicts
the ergodic distribution of debt-to-income in our simulated model, conditional on at least
25 quarters having passed since the most recent default. The figure indicates a fairly tight
distribution around the calibrated mean, a point we discuss below. In Panel (b) of Figure
A1, we plot the price schedule over the tighter range relevant for the equilibrium debt
distribution.
Figure A3 depicts debt policy functions in non-crisis periods evaluated at the mean
growth rate.
The government’s policy function, the equilibrium price schedule, and the stochastic
processes for endowment combine to generate a spread distribution. The ergodic distribution
is depicted in Panel (a) of Figure A4. Most of the distribution is concentrated around
the mean spread of 3.4 percent, with a long right tail during rollover crises. Panel (b)
zooms in on the non-crisis part of the distribution by plotting the distribution conditional
on q(s, B 0 ) = qEG (s, B 0 ), that is, no crisis. Absent a crisis, there is a fairly tight distribution
of spreads. In Panel (b) we also plot the spread distribution of the CK alternative. Absent
deals, the figure depicts the full distribution of spreads absent default, as crisis periods always
generate defaults and a price of zero. The CK distribution is similar to the conditional
distribution of the benchmark model, indicating the importance of crisis deals in generating
the volatility of the spread in the benchmark model.

54

Figure A1: Equilibrium Price Schedule: No Crisis
(b) Relevant Debt Domain

(a) Entire Debt Domain
q

q 0.960

1.0

0.9
0.955
0.8
0.950
0.7
0.945
0.6

0.940

0.5

0.4
0.935
0.3
0.930
0.2
0.925
0.1

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Benchmark
CK (No Deals)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

B0
Y

0.920
0.610

0.620

0.630

0.640

0.650

0.660

0.670

0.680

Benchmark
CK (No Deals)

Note: This figure depicts qEG (s, B 0 ) as a function of B 0 /Y , with g = ḡ, z = 0, ρ = EG, and B/Y = 0.656.
As discussed in the text, the Eaton-Gersovitz price schedule assumes no default in the current period and
ρ = EG. The solid line is the benchmark schedule and the dashed line is the CK alternative. Panel (a) depicts
the entire debt domain, while Panel (b) zooms into the domain that is relevant in the ergodic distribution.

55

0.690

B0
Y

Density

Figure A2: Ergodic Distribution of Debt

.6

.62

.64
Debt/Y

Benchmark

.66

.68

CK (No Deals)

Note: This figure depicts the kernel density of debt-to-income for the benchmark model simulation (solid
line) and the CK alternative. The distributions are conditional on no default within the last 25 quarters.

56

Figure A3: Debt-Issuance Policy Functions
(b) Relevant Domain

(a) Full Domain

B0
Y

0.70

B0
Y

0.60

0.68

0.66

0.64
0.50

0.62

0.40
0.60

0.30

0.58

0.56
0.20

0.54

0.10
0.52

0.00
0.000

0.100

0.200

0.300

0.400

Benchmark
CK (No Deals)

0.500

0.600

0.700

B
Y

0.50
0.500

0.520

0.540

0.560

0.580

0.600

0.620

0.640

0.660

Benchmark
CK (No Deals)

Note: This figure depicts the bond-issuance policy function B, normalized by Y , as a function of B/Y . The
solid line is the benchmark policy, and the dashed line is the CK alternative. The schedules are evaluated
at the mean values of g and z and for ρ = EG. Panel (a) depicts the policy function over the entire debt
domain, while Panel (b) focuses on the part of the domain relevant for the ergodic distribution.

57

0.680

B
Y

Figure A4: Ergodic Distribution of Annualized Spreads
(b) Conditional on No Crisis

Density

Density

(a) Unconditional

.025
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.03

.035
Spread
Benchmark

Spread

.04

.045

CK (No Deals)

Note: This figure depicts the simulated distribution of spreads. Panel (a) depicts the distribution of spreads
in the benchmark model including rollover crises. Panel (b) depicts the distribution of spreads conditional
on no rollover crisis for the benchmark model (solid line) and the CK alternative (dashed line).

58

