NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF FEDERAL RESERVE FORWARD GUIDANCE
AND ASSET PURCHASES ON FINANCIAL MARKETS
Eric T. Swanson
Working Paper 23311
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23311

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

I thank Mike Woodford for encouraging me to start this project, and Sof´a Bauducco, Joe Gagnon,
SungJun Huh, Youngseung Jung, Don Kim, Ken Kuttner, Pascal Paul, Matt Roberts-Sklar, Alexandre
Ziegler, and seminar participants at the Banca d’Italia, Banque de France, Boston College, Cal State
Fullerton, the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, and Kansas City, London School of Economics,
National Bank of Belgium, Norges Bank, Swiss National Bank, UC Irvine, UC Riverside, UC Santa
Cruz, University of Southern California, University of Zurich, the California Macroeconomics Conference,
Central Bank of Chile Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Board Conference on Empirical Monetary
Economics, Joint Conference of the Korean Economic Association and Social Science Korea Research
Team, NBER Summer Institute Forecasting and Empirical Methods and Monetary Economics Workshops,
Society for Computational Economics, Society for Economic Dynamics, and EABCN Conference
on Unconventional Monetary Policy for helpful discussions, comments, and suggestions. Earlier work
on this project was supported in part by the Central Bank of Chile. The views expressed in this paper,
and all errors and omissions, are my own and are not necessarily those of the individuals or groups
listed above, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Eric T. Swanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial
Markets
Eric T. Swanson
NBER Working Paper No. 23311
April 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. E44,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
I extend the methods of G¨urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) to separately identify the effects of
Federal Reserve forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) during the 2009–15 U.S.
zero lower bound (ZLB) period. I find that both forward guidance and LSAPs had substantial and
highly statistically significant effects, comparable in magnitude to the effects of the federal funds rate
before the ZLB. Forward guidance was more effective than LSAPs at moving short-term Treasury
yields, while LSAPs were more effective than forward guidance and the federal funds rate at moving
longer-term Treasury and corporate bond yields. I estimate that the effects of LSAP announcements
were very persistent, with the exception of the very large and perhaps special March 2009 “QE1” announcement.
The effects of forward guidance are slightly less persistent, but the difference is not statistically significant
and is likely due to the FOMC’s forward guidance announcements having a relatively shorter horizon.

Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu

1

1. Introduction
Physical currency carries a nominal return of zero, so it is essentially impossible for a central
bank to set the short-term nominal interest rate—its conventional monetary policy instrument—
substantially below zero.1 This zero lower bound (ZLB) constraint has required many central
banks to pursue unconventional monetary policies to stimulate their economies after the 2007–09
global ﬁnancial crisis. In this paper, I propose a new method to identify and estimate the eﬀects
of these unconventional monetary policies on ﬁnancial markets and, ultimately, the economy. In
particular, I estimate the eﬀects of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s “forward guidance” and “largescale asset purchases” (or LSAPs), which were the two main types of unconventional policies
pursued by the Fed between January 2009 and October 2015, when its traditional monetary
policy instrument, the federal funds rate, was essentially zero.
Understanding the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy is important for both policymakers and researchers. Many central banks have found themselves increasingly constrained by
the zero lower bound in recent years and have turned to a variety of unconventional policies to
stimulate their economies, despite the fact that these policies’ eﬀects are not well understood. In
the present paper, I provide new and improved estimates of these eﬀects and their persistence.
The eﬃcacy of unconventional monetary policy is also an important determinant of the cost of
the ZLB and the optimal inﬂation target for an economy. If unconventional monetary policy
is relatively ineﬀective, then the ZLB constraint is more costly, and policymakers should go to
greater lengths to avoid hitting it in the ﬁrst place, such as by choosing a higher inﬂation target,
as advocated by Summers (1991), Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), Blanchard in The
Wall Street Journal (2010), and Ball (2014). On the other hand, if unconventional monetary
policy is very eﬀective, then the ZLB constraint is not very costly and there is little reason for
policymakers to raise their inﬂation target on that ground.
The zero lower bound period in the U.S. began on December 16, 2008, when the Federal
Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the federal funds rate—its conventional monetary policy instrument—to essentially zero. The U.S. economy was still in a severe
recession, so the FOMC began to pursue unconventional monetary policies to try to stimulate the
1

A few central banks have recently set short-term nominal interest rates slightly below zero by charging banks
a fee to hold electronic cash reserves at the central bank. This implies that the “zero lower bound” is not a hard
constraint that lies exactly at zero. Nevertheless, nominal interest rates cannot fall too far below zero without
leading to widespread conversion of electronic reserves into physical currency. Traditionally, this constraint is still
referred to as the “zero lower bound”.

2
Table 1: Major Unconventional Monetary Policy Announcements
by the Federal Reserve, 2009–2015
March 18, 2009

FOMC announces it expects to keep the federal funds rate between 0 and 25
basis points (bp) for “an extended period”, and that it will purchase $750B
of mortgage-backed securities, $300B of longer-term Treasuries, and $100B of
agency debt (a.k.a. “QE1”)

November 3, 2010

FOMC announces it will purchase an additional $600B of longer-term Treasuries
(a.k.a. “QE2”)

August 9, 2011

FOMC announces it expects to keep the federal funds rate between 0 and 25
bp “at least through mid-2013”
FOMC announces it will sell $400B of short-term Treasuries and use the proceeds to buy $400B of long-term Treasuries (a.k.a. “Operation Twist”)

September 21, 2011
January 25, 2012
September 13, 2012

December 12, 2012

December 18, 2013

December 17, 2014
March 18, 2015

FOMC announces it expects to keep the federal funds rate between 0 and 25
bp “at least through late 2014”
FOMC announces it expects to keep the federal funds rate between 0 and 25
bp “at least through mid-2015”, and that it will purchase $40B of mortgagebacked securities per month for the indeﬁnite future
FOMC announces it will purchase $45B of longer-term Treasuries per month
for the indeﬁnite future, and that it expects to keep the federal funds rate
between 0 and 25 bp at least as long as the unemployment remains above 6.5
percent and inﬂation expectations remain subdued
FOMC announces it will start to taper its purchases of longer-term Treasuries
and mortgage-backed securities to paces of $40B and $35B per month, respectively
FOMC announces that “it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance
of monetary policy”
FOMC announces that “an increase in the target range for the federal funds
rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting”

economy further. By far the two most extensively used such policies were “forward guidance”—
communication by the FOMC about the likely future path of the federal funds rate over the next
several quarters—and “large-scale asset purchases”, or LSAPs—purchases by the Federal Reserve
of hundreds of billions of dollars of longer-term U.S. Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities. The goal of both policies was to lower longer-term U.S. interest rates by methods other
than changes in the current federal funds rate, and thereby stimulate the economy.
Table 1 reports some of the most notable examples of the FOMC’s forward guidance and
LSAP announcements during this period. In addition to the examples in the table, incremental
news about these policies was released to ﬁnancial markets at virtually every FOMC meeting,
such as updates that a policy was ongoing, was likely to be continued, or might be adjusted.
Throughout 2015, for example, the FOMC gave numerous updates about whether a tightening of
the federal funds rate was likely to take place at the next one or two FOMC meetings. Finally, the

3
U.S. zero lower bound period ended on December 16, 2015, when the FOMC raised the federal
funds rate for the ﬁrst time since the ﬁnancial crisis, to a range of 0.25 to 0.5 percent.
It’s apparent from Table 1 that separately identifying the eﬀects of forward guidance and
LSAPs is diﬃcult, because many of the FOMC’s announcements provide information about both
types of policy simultaneously. Moreover, even in the case of a seemingly clear-cut announcement,
such as the LSAP-focused “QE2” announcement on Nov. 3, 2010, both types of policies may still
have been at work: in particular, several authors have argued that LSAPs aﬀect the economy
either partly or wholly by changing ﬁnancial markets’ expectations about the future path of the
federal funds rate (e.g., Woodford, 2012; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011; Bauer and
Rudebusch, 2014). To the extent that this “signaling” channel is operative, even a pure LSAP
announcement would have important forward guidance implications. This makes disentangling
the two types of policies even more diﬃcult than it might at ﬁrst seem.
A second major challenge in estimating the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy announcements is that ﬁnancial markets are forward-looking, and thus should not react to the
component of an FOMC announcement that is expected ex ante; only the unanticipated component should have an eﬀect. But determining the size of the unexpected component of each
announcement in Table 1 is very diﬃcult, because there are no good data on what ﬁnancial
markets expected the outcome of each FOMC announcement to be.2
A third, related challenge is that the FOMC can sometimes surprise markets through its
inaction rather than its actions. For example, on September 18, 2013, ﬁnancial markets widely
expected the FOMC to begin tapering its LSAPs, but the FOMC decided not to do so, surprising
markets and leading to a large eﬀect on asset prices despite the fact that no action was announced.3
This implies that even dates not listed in Table 1 could have produced a signiﬁcant surprise in
ﬁnancial markets and led to large eﬀects on asset prices and the economy.
In this paper, I address these challenges by extending the high-frequency approach of
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005, henceforth GSS). I ﬁrst look at the high-frequency (30minute) response of asset prices to FOMC announcements to identify the immediate causal eﬀect
of those announcements on ﬁnancial markets. I then test for the number of dimensions underlying
2
This is in sharp contrast to the case of conventional monetary policy—changes in the federal funds rate—for
which we have very good data on ﬁnancial market expectations ex ante through federal funds futures and other
short-term ﬁnancial market instruments, as discussed by Kuttner (2001), Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005,
2007), and others.
3
The Wall Street Journal (2013b,c) reported that “No Taper Shocks Wall Street,” and “‘Bernanke had a free
pass to begin that tapering process and chose not to follow [through]. . . The Fed had the market precisely where
it needed to be. The delay today has the eﬀect of raising the benchmark to tapering. . . ”

4
those announcement eﬀects and show that they are well described by three dimensions over the
period from 1991 to 2015. These dimensions represent the three aspects of FOMC announcements that had the greatest systematic eﬀect on asset prices over the sample; intuitively, these
three dimensions are likely to correspond to changes in the federal funds rate, changes in forward
guidance, and changes in LSAPs.
I collect the 30-minute asset price responses to each FOMC announcement between 1991
and 2015 and compute the ﬁrst three principal components of those asset price responses. This
estimates the three factors that had the greatest explanatory power for these ﬁnancial market
responses. I search over all possible rotations of these three principal components to ﬁnd one in
which the ﬁrst factor corresponds to the change in the federal funds rate, the second factor to the
change in forward guidance, and the third factor to the change in LSAPs. I build on the earlier
work of GSS to separately identify changes in the federal funds rate from forward guidance, and
add a new identifying assumption that the LSAP factor is as close to zero as possible during the
pre-ZLB period, which separately identiﬁes the LSAP factor. I show that this identiﬁcation is
robust and produces estimates that agree closely with observable characteristics of major FOMC
announcements. In this way, I separately identify the size of the federal funds rate, forward
guidance, and LSAP component of every FOMC announcement from July 1991 to October 2015.
Once the diﬀerent components of each FOMC announcement are identiﬁed, it’s straightforward to estimate the response of diﬀerent asset prices to each of those components using highfrequency (30-minute or 1-day) regressions. I ﬁnd that both forward guidance and LSAPs had
highly statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects on a wide variety of assets, including Treasuries, corporate
bonds, stocks, exchange rates, and interest rate uncertainty as measured by options. The sizes of
these eﬀects are typically comparable to those of conventional monetary policy—changes in the
federal funds rate—during the pre-ZLB period. Forward guidance was relatively more eﬀective
at moving short-term Treasury yields, while LSAPs were more eﬀective at moving longer-term
Treasury yields, corporate bond yields, and interest rate uncertainty (with an increase in LSAPs
reducing interest rate uncertainty).
Finally, I investigate whether these eﬀects were persistent—i.e., did they die out quickly as
some models of slow-moving capital (e.g., Duﬃe, 2010; Fleckenstein, Longstaﬀ, and Lustig, 2014)
and some empirical work (Wright 2012) suggest, or were the high-frequency impact eﬀects more
permanent? I ﬁnd no signiﬁcant evidence that either forward guidance or LSAPs had eﬀects that
died out over time. The eﬀects of LSAPs seem to be completely persistent, with no tendency

5
to die out over the next several months, with the exception of the very inﬂuential March 2009
“QE1” announcement, after which bond yields fell sharply but then rebounded strongly over the
subsequent weeks as ﬁnancial markets turned around. The eﬀects of forward guidance seem to
be less persistent, with a half-life point estimate of about 1–4 months, but those estimates are
not statistically signiﬁcant and are likely due to the FOMC’s forward guidance announcements
describing the path of the federal funds rate for only the next several quarters.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I describe the data and
extend the analysis in GSS to allow for additional dimensions of monetary policy. I show that
three factors ﬁt the 1991–2015 ﬁnancial market responses to FOMC announcements very well. I
use the identifying assumptions in GSS to separately identify forward guidance from changes in the
federal funds rate, and propose a new identifying restriction to separately identify LSAPs from the
other two factors. In Section 3, I discuss the results of this identiﬁcation strategy and show that
it is robust. I also show that my estimated forward guidance and LSAP factors correspond closely
to identiﬁable features of major FOMC announcements during the ZLB period. In Section 4, I
estimate the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on Treasury yields, stock prices, exchange
rates, and corporate bond yields using high-frequency regressions. In Section 5, I estimate and
discuss the persistence of these FOMC announcement eﬀects over the next several months. In
Section 6, I use options data to estimate the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on ﬁnancial
market uncertainty. Finally, in Section 7, I discuss the broader implications of my ﬁndings for U.S.
monetary policy going forward and for estimating the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy
in other economies. Two technical Appendices contain mathematical details of the identifying
assumptions used in Section 2 and the bootstrap procedure used to calculate standard errors in
Sections 3–6.

1.1 Related Literature
There are now a number of studies that investigate the eﬀects of forward guidance and/or LSAPs
on ﬁnancial markets, especially during the U.S. zero lower bound period. Gürkaynak, Sack, and
Swanson (2005) is an early example that measured the eﬀects of the Federal Reserve’s pre-2005
forward guidance announcements. In contrast to GSS, I also estimate the eﬀects of the Fed’s
LSAP announcements, study the peristence of the announcement eﬀects, and investigate the
eﬀects on corporate bond yields, exchange rates, and ﬁnancial market uncertainty as well as
stocks, Treasury bonds, and interest rate futures.

6
More recently, Gagnon et al. (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2013),
and others use high-frequency event studies around a few of the Fed’s most notable LSAP announcements to show that those announcements had economically and statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀects on a variety of asset prices. In contrast to these papers, I look at every FOMC announcement from 2009–2015 (and 1991–2008), including announcements that focused on forward
guidance rather than, or in addition to, asset purchases. I also separately identify the eﬀects of
LSAPs and forward guidance, to contrast the eﬀects of the two types of policies and investigate
which one was more eﬀective overall.
Wright (2012) uses identiﬁcation by heteroskedasticity in a daily VAR from November 2008
to September 2011 to show that Fed announcements had economically and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects on longer-term Treasury and corporate bond yields. In contrast to Wright (2012),
I distinguish between forward guidance and LSAP announcements and separately estimate the
eﬀects of each type of announcement. Wright also estimates that the eﬀects of these unconventional monetary policy announcements tended to die out over time, with a half-life of about 2–3
months. In contrast to Wright, I ﬁnd that only forward guidance and the very large “QE1” LSAP
announcement had eﬀects that died out over time. LSAP announcements more generally seemed
to have very persistent eﬀects.
Many studies in the literature also devote considerable attention to identifying and estimating the diﬀerent mechanisms by which LSAPs aﬀect ﬁnancial markets. For example, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) decompose the eﬀects of LSAPs into signaling, duration
risk, liquidity, safety, prepayment risk, default risk, and inﬂation channels, while D’Amico et al.
(2012) diﬀerentiate between signaling, local scarcity, and duration risk channels. Campbell et
al. (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) investigate a “Fed information eﬀect” of forward
guidance, through which FOMC announcements convey information to ﬁnancial markets about
the Fed’s internal forecast for real variables (such as unemployment and GDP), which in turn
causes asset prices to move. In the present paper, I do not try to separately estimate the eﬀects
of these diﬀerent channels. Instead, I estimate a “total forward guidance” eﬀect and compare it
to a “total LSAP” eﬀect. This is because my focus here is to compare and contrast the overall
eﬀectiveness of these two types of policies, rather than the eﬀects of idiosyncratic variations in
each type of policy (such as which Treasury or mortgage-backed securities were purchased). While
the eﬀects of these variations are interesting and important in their own right, I leave them to
these other papers and to future research. I do show in my results, however, that my identifying

7
assumptions produce a well-deﬁned and robust average total forward guidance vs. LSAP eﬀect.

2. Data and Identifying Assumptions
To separately identify the forward guidance and asset purchase component of each FOMC announcement, I extend the approach of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). First, I extend the
GSS dataset through October 2015 using data obtained from staﬀ at the Federal Reserve Board.
The extended data includes the date of every FOMC announcement from July 1991 through October 2015 together with the change in a number of asset prices in a 30-minute window bracketing
each announcement.4 The asset prices include federal funds futures (the current-month contract
rate and the contract rates for each of the next six months), eurodollar futures (the current quarter contract rate and the contract rates for each of the next eight quarters), Treasury bond yields
(the 3-month, 6-month and 2-, 5-, 10-, and 30-year maturities), the stock market (S&P 500), and
exchange rates (yen/dollar and dollar/euro).
I collect these asset price responses into a T × n matrix X, with rows corresponding to
FOMC announcements and columns corresponding to n diﬀerent assets; each element xij of X
then reports the 30-minute response of the jth asset to the ith FOMC announcement. As in GSS,
we can think of these data in terms of a factor model,
X = F Λ + ε,

(1)

where F is a T × k matrix containing k ≤ n unobserved factors, Λ is a k × n matrix of loadings
of asset price responses on the k factors, and ε is a T × n matrix of white noise residuals. If
k = 0, the data X would be well described by white noise; if k = 1, X would be well described
as responding linearly to a single factor (such as the change in the federal funds rate) plus
white noise; if k = 2, the data X would be responding to two underlying dimensions of FOMC
announcements plus white noise; and so on. Natural candidates for the columns of F would be:
i) the surprise component of the change in the federal funds rate around each FOMC meeting,
ii) the surprise component of the change in forward guidance, iii) the surprise component of any
4

The window begins 10 minutes before the FOMC announcement was released to the public and ends 20
minutes after the FOMC announcement was released. The dataset also includes the dates and times of FOMC
announcements and some intraday asset price responses going back to January 1990, but the data for Treasury
yield responses begins in July 1991, and those data are an important part of my analysis. Also, as is standard in
the literature, I exclude the FOMC announcement on September 17, 2001, which took place after ﬁnancial markets
had been closed for several days following the September 11 terrorist attacks.

8
LSAP announcements, and iv) any additional dimensions of news about monetary policy or the
economy that are systematically revealed in FOMC announcements.
We are interested in estimating and identifying the columns of F . For the estimation, I
take X to include the ﬁrst and third federal funds futures contracts, the second, third, and fourth
Eurodollar futures contracts, and the 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields, to focus on the assets
that are the most closely related to monetary policy. The ﬁrst and third federal funds futures
contracts provide good estimates of the market expectation of the federal funds rate after the
current and next FOMC meetings.5 The second through fourth Eurodollar futures contracts
provide information about the market expectation of the path of the federal funds rate over a
horizon from about 4 months to 1 year ahead.6 The 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields provide
information about interest rate expectations and risk premia over longer horizons, out to 10
years. The reason for focusing on some rather than all possible futures contracts is to avoid
overlapping contracts, since those are highly correlated for technical rather than policy-related
reasons.7 In the factor model (1), futures contracts that are highly correlated will tend to show
up as a common factor—a column of F —which is not interesting if the correlation is generated
by overlapping contracts rather than the way monetary policy is conducted.
Note that, to estimate the factors F , I do not need to take a stand on why the interest rates
above moved in response to FOMC announcements, only that they did so systematically. For
example, medium- or longer-term interest rates might change because of any of the mechanisms
described in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), D’Amico et al. (2012), and Campbell
et al. (2012). As long as the interest rate responses to FOMC announcements are systematic,
they will be identiﬁed as responses to the monetary policy factors F rather than the residuals εt .
Of course, this implies that my estimates of the eﬀects of the factors F represent the total eﬀect of
the factor on interest rates through all of the possible channels described by these other authors,
as discussed above.
5
As in GSS and Kuttner (2001), these contracts are scaled by the number of days remaining in the month to
provide the best estimate of the surprise change in the federal funds rate after the announcement. See GSS and
Kuttner (2001) for details.
6

I follow GSS and switch from federal funds futures to Eurodollar futures at a horizon of about two quarters
because Eurodollar futures were much more liquid over this sample than longer-maturity fed funds futures and are
thus likely to provide a better measure of ﬁnancial market expectations at those longer horizons (see Gürkaynak,
Sack, and Swanson, 2007).
7
For example, FOMC announcements are spaced 6 to 8 weeks apart, so the second federal funds futures contract
is essentially perfectly correlated with the ﬁrst (once the latter has been scaled to represent the outcome of the
FOMC meeting, as discussed above). Similarly, including the ﬁrst Eurodollar futures contract provides essentially
no additional information beyond the ﬁrst and third federal funds futures contracts.

9
Table 2: Tests for the Number of Factors Underlying Interest Rate
Responses to FOMC Announcements, 1991–2015
H0 : number of
factors equals

degrees of
freedom

Wald
statistic

0
1
2
3

28
20
13
7

88.4
52.7
26.7
11.8

p-value
3.5 ×10−8
.00009
.014
.108

Results from the Cragg-Donald (1997) test for the number of factors k underlying the 213×8 matrix X
of 30-minute asset price responses to FOMC announcements from July 1991 to October 2015. The test
is for H0 : k = k0 vs. H1 : k > k0 . See text for details.

Before estimating F , I ﬁrst investigate its rank following GSS and Cragg and Donald (1997).
Given a null hypothesis of rank k0 versus an alternative k > k0 , the Cragg-Donald test searches
over all possible factor models with k0 factors to ﬁnd the one that brings the residuals ε as close
to white noise as possible; the test then measures the distance between the residuals and white
noise using a Wald statistic. There are 213 FOMC announcements from July 1991 to October
2015, and eight diﬀerent assets in X, so X has dimensions 213 × 8.
The results of the Cragg-Donald rank test are reported in Table 2. The data overwhelmingly
reject the hypothesis of rank zero (white noise), so clearly the yield curve responds systematically
to FOMC announcements. The hypothesis of rank one is also rejected very strongly, which implies
that interest rates respond to FOMC announcements in a multidimensional way—in other words,
the surprise change in the federal funds rate (or any other single dimension of monetary policy) is
insuﬃcient to explain the responses of interest rates to FOMC announcements.8 The hypothesis
that F has rank two is also rejected at standard signiﬁcance levels (p-value of .014), suggesting
that even two dimensions of monetary policy are insuﬃcient to explain the response of the yield
curve. However, the hypothesis of rank three is not rejected at even the 10% level, suggesting
the data are well-explained by three dimensions of monetary policy underlying the FOMC’s
announcements. Intuitively, it’s natural to think of these three dimensions as corresponding to
(the surprise component of) changes in the federal funds rate, forward guidance, and LSAPs, since
these were the features of FOMC announcements that received the most attention in ﬁnancial
markets and the ﬁnancial press.
The results in Table 2 are interesting for several reasons. First, the ﬁnding that monetary
policy cannot be summarized by any one-dimensional model casts doubt on some authors’ use
8

Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) showed that this was also true for their sample, 1991–2004.

10
of changes in the 1- or 2-year Treasury yield as a suﬃcient statistic for monetary policy (e.g.,
Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Hanson and Stein, 2015; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). Monetary
policy seems to have more than one dimension, at least in terms of its eﬀects on ﬁnancial markets.
Second, as noted by GSS, FOMC announcements are potentially very high-dimensional objects,
containing information about the current and future path of interest rates, asset purchases, and
the economy. Despite this potential complexity, the eﬀects of monetary policy on the yield curve
are surprisingly well summarized by a factor model with just three factors. Third, even though
there are many idiosyncratic variations in the way the FOMC described its forward guidance
and conducted its LSAPs over the sample, there is enough commonality across announcements
that one can still identify an “average forward guidance” factor and an “average LSAP” factor,
as I show below. Thus, even though any particular FOMC announcement may have eﬀects that
deviate from these averages, those deviations are not systematic enough to require additional
factors to ﬁt the data.
Now, the factors F are unobserved and must be estimated. The data suggest that F has
rank three, so I begin by extracting the ﬁrst three principal components of the data X.9 These
principal components correspond to the three elements of FOMC announcements that had the
greatest systematic impact on the assets in X over the sample, and together explain about 94%
of the variation in X.
Although principal components explain a maximal fraction of the variation in X, they are
only a statistical decomposition and do not have a structural interpretation. For example, there
is no reason why the ﬁrst principal component should correspond to the surprise change in the
federal funds rate, or forward guidance, or LSAPs—instead, the ﬁrst principal component is likely
to be some combination of two or even all three of these types of announcements. Mathematically,
if F and Λ characterize the data X in equation (1), and U is any 3 × 3 orthogonal matrix, then
 ≡ U  Λ represent an alternative factor model that ﬁts the data
the matrix F ≡ F U and loadings Λ
X exactly as well as F and Λ, since it produces exactly the same residuals ε in equation (1).10
Among all these observationally equivalent factor models, we are looking for one in which
the three columns of F correspond to (the surprise component of) changes in the federal funds
rate, forward guidance, and LSAPs, respectively. This amounts to choosing a rotation matrix U
9
The factors F are not required to have any dynamic relationship over time, so Kalman ﬁltering is not a feasible
approach to estimating F .
10

The scale of F and Λ are also indeterminate: if α is any scalar, then αF and Λ/α also ﬁt the data X exactly
as well as F and Λ. I follow the standard practice of normalizing each column of F to have unit variance.

11
such that the rotated factors F have this structural interpretation. A 3×3 orthogonal matrix U is
 requires
completely determined by three parameters, so identiﬁcation of U (and hence F and Λ)
three restrictions.
First, I impose that changes in LSAPs have no eﬀect on the current federal funds rate—i.e.,
31 = 0, where λ
ij denotes the (i, j)th element of Λ.
 Since the FOMC’s major LSAP announceλ
ments all occurred during the ZLB period after 2008, this should be relatively uncontroversial.
Second, following GSS, I impose that changes in forward guidance also have no eﬀect on
21 = 0. Although there are important examples of forward
the current federal funds rate—i.e., λ
guidance before the ZLB period, as discussed in GSS, this identifying assumption is justiﬁed by
deﬁning forward guidance to be the component of FOMC announcements that conveys information about the future path of short-term interest rates above and beyond changes in the target
federal funds rate itself.11 This is the deﬁnition of forward guidance (or the path factor) used by
GSS and that I also use in this paper.
Third and ﬁnally, I impose the restriction that the LSAP factor is as small as possible in
the pre-ZLB period. In other words, I compute the sum of squared values of the third factor,
F3 = F U3 , where U3 denotes the third column of U , over the subsample from 1991 to 2008, and
choose the elements of U3 to minimize this sum of squares subject to the ﬁrst two constraints
above. The idea is that FOMC announcements before the ZLB period did not have signiﬁcant
LSAP implications in general and thus the LSAP factor should be small during this period.12
Together, these three restrictions uniquely identify U , and hence F (up to a sign normalization for each column).13 Mathematical details of these restrictions are provided in Appendix A.
11
An increase in the federal funds rate is typically not a one-oﬀ decision, but is usually followed by additional
funds rate hikes down the road. Thus, a surprise change in the federal funds rate today has implications for future
values of the federal funds rate as well. What distinguishes the forward guidance factor is that it moves market
expectations of future values of the federal funds rate without any change in the current federal funds rate target.
12

Note that the pre-2009 LSAP factor will still have nonzero values, even though they are small. This could be
due to the Fed’s monetary policy announcements having implications for its open market operations, or simply
because there is some sampling variability in the estimation procedure. Also note that we cannot impose the
 —is as small as possible during the ZLB period,
restriction that the federal funds rate factor—the ﬁrst column of F
because the ﬁrst two restrictions already identify the federal funds rate factor, so this third restriction would not
help to separate forward guidance from LSAPs.
13

 as additional assumptions that help achieve
One can also regard the orthogonality of U and the columns of F
identiﬁcation. Intuitively, this orthogonality assumption is just part of the deﬁnition of each factor—i.e., changes
in the federal funds rate factor typically have implications for future interest rates, but those changes are part
of the eﬀects of the federal funds rate itself; the forward guidance factor captures eﬀects on longer-term interest
rates that are above and beyond the usual eﬀects of changes in the federal funds rate. Similarly, the LSAP factor
captures eﬀects on the yield curve that are above and beyond the usual eﬀects of changes in forward guidance, etc.

12
Table 3: Estimated Effects of Conventional and Unconventional
Monetary Policy Announcements on Interest Rates, 1991–2015

(1) change in federal funds rate
(2) change in forward guidance
(3) change in LSAPs

MP1

MP2

ED2

ED3

ED4

2y Tr.

8.78
0.00
0.00

6.22
1.21
0.85

5.55
4.16
1.42

5.21
5.32
1.37

4.43
3.68
6.02
4.85
1.04 −0.32

5y Tr. 10y Tr.
2.04
0.95
5.09
3.92
−3.71 −5.68

 in basis points per
Coeﬃcients in the table correspond to elements of the structural loading matrix Λ,
standard deviation change in the monetary policy instrument. MP1 and MP2 denote scaled changes in
the ﬁrst and third federal funds futures contracts, respectively; ED2, ED3, and ED4 denote changes in
the second through fourth Eurodollar futures contracts; and 2y, 5y, and 10y Tr. denote changes in 2-, 5-,
and 10-year Treasury yields. See text for details.

3. The FOMC’s Forward Guidance and LSAP Announcements
 that results from the three identifying assumptions above.
Table 3 reports the loading matrix Λ
Each rotated factor is normalized to have a unit standard deviation, so the coeﬃcients in the
table are in units of basis points (bp) per standard deviation change in the monetary policy
instrument.14
A one-standard-deviation increase in the federal funds rate factor is estimated to raise
the current federal funds rate by about 8.8bp, the expected federal funds rate at the next FOMC
meeting by about 6.2bp, the second through fourth Eurodollar futures rates by 5.6, 5.2, and 4.4bp,
respectively, and the 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields by about 3.7, 2, and 1bp, respectively.
The eﬀects of a surprise change in the federal funds rate are thus largest at the short end of the
yield curve and die oﬀ monotonically as the maturity of the interest rate increases, consistent
with the estimates in Kuttner (2001) and GSS.
The eﬀects of forward guidance, in the second row, are quite diﬀerent. By construction, a
shock to the forward guidance factor has no eﬀect on the current federal funds rate. At longer
maturities, however, the forward guidance factor’s eﬀects increase, peaking at a horizon of about
one year and diminishing at longer horizons.15 Again, this is consistent with the estimates in
14
I normalize the scale of the federal funds rate factor to have a unit standard deviation from July 1991 to
December 2008, because the federal funds rate essentially does not change after December 2008. This scale
convention is more intuitive than a full-sample unit standard deviation would be, and also facilitates comparison
to previous results in the literature. Similarly, I normalize the LSAP factor to have a unit standard deviation over
the period from January 2009 to October 2015. I normalize the forward guidance factor to have a unit standard
deviation over the whole sample.
15
Note that these estimates represent an average forward guidance eﬀect over the sample. Some FOMC announcements may have had an earlier or later peak eﬀect than the average estimated in row 2, but these diﬀerences
were not large enough or systematic enough to require another factor to ﬁt the data.

13
GSS and Campbell et al. (2012).
The eﬀects of LSAPs, reported in the third row, are quite diﬀerent from the ﬁrst two rows.
Like forward guidance, a change in the LSAP factor has no eﬀect on the current federal funds
rate, by construction. Unlike forward guidance and changes in the federal funds rate, the eﬀect
of LSAPs is small at short maturities and much larger at the long end of the yield curve. This
is consistent with several authors’ ﬁndings that LSAPs have a substantial impact on longer-term
Treasury yields (e.g., Gagnon et al., 2011; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, 2013;
Swanson, 2011). A one-standard deviation increase in the LSAP factor causes 5- and 10-year
Treasury yields to fall about 3.7 and 5.7bp, respectively, on average.16 An increase in LSAPs also
causes short-term yields to rise slightly, on average, although this eﬀect is quantitatively small
and not statistically signﬁcant, as I show in the next section.
The results in Table 3 are interesting for several reasons. First, as noted above, the coeﬃcients in each row are generally consistent with other estimates in the literature, such as
Kuttner (2001), GSS (2005), Gagnon et al. (2011), and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2011, 2013). This provides some initial conﬁrmation of the identifying assumptions above.
Second, Table 3 shows that unconventional monetary policy was eﬀective, at least in a 30minute window around FOMC announcements. Moreover, both types of unconventional monetary
policy—forward guidance and LSAPs—were about as eﬀective as changes in the federal funds rate,
in the sense that the coeﬃcients have similar magnitudes across the three rows (although each
policy had a peak eﬀect at a diﬀerent point along the yield curve). This is an important initial
ﬁnding of the eﬀectiveness of the two types of unconventional policy.
Third, I estimate that the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs are very diﬀerent from each
other. (Indeed, it is this strong contrast that makes identiﬁcation of the two factors empirically
robust.) These diﬀerences imply that the LSAP factor aﬀected ﬁnancial markets through more
than just a “signaling channel” (e.g., Woodford, 2012; Bauer and Rudebusch, 2014). Recall that,
according to the pure signaling view, LSAPs aﬀect ﬁnancial markets only because they increase
the central bank’s commitment to follow through with its forward guidance (because the bank
would lose money on those LSAPs if it raised interest rates sooner than ﬁnancial markets expect).
If that were the case, then the second and third rows of Table 3 should be much more similar
in terms of their relative eﬀects on yields. This observation is also supported by Table 2, which
16
As with forward guidance, these estimates represent an average LSAP eﬀect over the sample. Some FOMC
announcements may have had a slightly diﬀerent eﬀect than the average estimated in row 3, but these diﬀerences
were not large enough or systematic enough to require another factor to ﬁt the data.

14
showed that no two factors (such as changes in the federal funds rate and forward guidance)
are suﬃcient to explain ﬁnancial markets’ reactions to FOMC announcements—a third factor is
required.
Fourth and ﬁnally, the diﬀerences across the three rows in Table 3 cast doubt on some
authors’ use of the 1- or 2-year Treasury yield as a suﬃcient statistic for monetary policy (e.g.,
Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Hanson and Stein, 2015; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). A 10bp
change in the 2-year Treasury yield has very diﬀerent eﬀects on short- and long-term interest
rates (and other ﬁnancial market assets, as shown below) if it is caused by a change in the current
federal funds rate as opposed to a change in forward guidance or LSAPs. For example, a 23.9bp
(2.7-standard-deviation) change in the federal funds rate has a 10bp eﬀect on the 2-year Treasury
yield and 2.6bp eﬀect on the 10-year yield, while a 2.1-standard deviation change in forward
guidance has the same eﬀect on the 2-year Treasury but more than three times the eﬀect on
the 10-year yield (8.1bp) and on corporate bond yields, as shown below. A change in LSAPs
that causes the 2-year Treasury yield to fall 10bp would cause the 10-year yield to fall 177bp.
Estimates by the above authors capture a weighted average of the eﬀects of these three diﬀerent
types of monetary policy, but the eﬀects of a given change in the 2-year Treasury yield in practice
will depend on how that change in the 2-year yield is implemented.

3.1 Robustness of the Identiﬁed Factors
The federal funds rate, forward guidance, and LSAP factors identiﬁed above are very robust to
reasonable variations in the identifying assumptions. For example, Swanson (2017) considers an
alternative set of assumptions that splits the sample into pre-ZLB and ZLB periods, uses the
GSS (2005) identifying assumptions in the pre-ZLB period to separately identify changes in the
federal funds rate and forward guidance, and then uses the ZLB period to separately identify
forward guidance and LSAPs. The estimated factors from that procedure are very similar to
those estimated here (correlations of 95 to over 99%).
Alternatively, one can simply deﬁne the federal funds rate factor to be the surprise change
in the federal funds rate itself, the forward guidance factor to be any additional movements in the
2-year Treasury yield that are orthogonal to the change in the federal funds rate, and the LSAP
factor to be any additional movements in the 10-year Treasury yield that are orthogonal to the
ﬁrst two factors.17 This very simple set of identifying assumptions produces factors that have a
17

In particular, for this alternate identiﬁcation, I take the 30-minute change in the ﬁrst federal funds futures

15
correlation of 96%, 96%, and 89%, respectively, with the three factors estimated above using my
main identifying assumptions.
Intuitively, the three factors are well identiﬁed in the data because their eﬀects on the yield
curve are so diﬀerent from each other, as can be seen in Table 3. Movements in these three
diﬀerent points along the yield curve are very easy to separate in the data, so variations in the
identifying assumptions have relatively small eﬀects on the estimated factors.

3.2 Correspondence of Factors to Notable FOMC Announcements
Figure 1 reports how well these estimated factors correspond to observable characteristics of major
FOMC announcements during the ZLB period, January 2009 to October 2015. (For a similar
analysis of the federal funds rate and forward guidance factors in the pre-ZLB period, see GSS.)
The dashed blue line in the ﬁgure depicts the full-sample estimate of the forward guidance factor,
and the solid orange line the full-sample LSAP factor multiplied by −1. This sign renormalization
for the LSAP factor makes its behavior in the ﬁgure more intuitive—i.e., positive values in the
ﬁgure correspond to monetary policy tightenings and negative values to monetary policy easings.
Figure 1 also contains brief annotations for some of the larger observations.
The most striking observation in Figure 1 by far is the negative 5.6-standard-deviation
LSAP announcement on March 18, 2009, near the beginning of the ZLB sample. This observation
corresponds to the announcement of the FOMC’s ﬁrst LSAP program, often referred to as “QE1”
in the press.18 The key elements of this program are listed in Table 1, and the announcement
seems to have been a major surprise to ﬁnancial markets, given the huge estimated size of the
factor on that date. According to my identiﬁcation, this announcement is dominated by its LSAP
implications, although I also estimate a negative 1.5-standard-deviation forward guidance easing
as well. Given that this FOMC announcement placed such a large emphasis on asset purchases,
contract, scaled as above, and deﬁne that to be the federal funds rate factor; I take the 30-minute change in the
2-year Treasury yield, regress that on a constant and the federal funds rate factor, and deﬁne the residuals to
be the forward guidance factor; and I take the 30-minute change in the 10-year Treasury yield, regress that on a
constant and the ﬁrst two factors, and deﬁne the residuals to be the LSAP factor. This is essentially the same
approach taken in very recent papers by Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2018) and Gilchrist, Yue, and Zakrajsek
(2018), although the latter authors do not distinguish between changes in the federal funds rate and forward
guidance.
18

The “QE1” program began on November 25, 2008, when the Federal Reserve Board (rather than the FOMC)
announced it would purchase $600 billion of mortgage-backed securities and $100 billion of debt issued by the
mortgage-related government-sponsored enterprises. The term “QE1” typically refers to both this earlier program
and the huge expansion of that program announced on March 18, 2009. My analysis in this paper excludes the
11/25/08 announcement because it is not an FOMC announcement, but my results are not sensitive to its inclusion.

Ͳϲ

Ͳϱ

Ͳϰ

Ͳϯ

ͲϮ

Ͳϭ

Ϭ

ϭ

Ϯ

ϯ

ΗYϭΗ

&KDĞǆƚĞŶĚƐ>^W
ĞŶĚĚĂƚĞĨƌŽŵ
ϮϬϬϵYϰƚŽϮϬϭϬYϭ

ΗŵŝĚͲϮϬϭϯΗ

&KDƐŝŐŶĂůƐĐĂƵƚŝŽŶ
ŝŶƌĂŝƐŝŶŐƌĂƚĞƐ

&KDŚŝŶƚƐĂƚ
ĞĐ͘ƌĂƚĞŚŝŬĞ

ƐƚŝŵĂƚĞĚĨŽƌǁĂƌĚŐƵŝĚĂŶĐĞĨĂĐƚŽƌ
ƐƚŝŵĂƚĞĚ>^WĨĂĐƚŽƌ

&KDĚĞĐŝĚĞƐ
ŶŽƚƚŽƚĂƉĞƌ

ΗKƉĞƌĂƚŝŽŶ dǁŝƐƚΗ

ΗKƉĞƌĂƚŝŽŶ dǁŝƐƚΗ

ΗƚĂƉĞƌƚĂŶƚƌƵŵΗ

Plot of estimated forward guidance (dashed blue line) and LSAP (solid orange line) factors over time. Notable FOMC announcements
are labeled in the ﬁgure for reference. The LSAP factor is multiplied by −1 in the ﬁgure so that positive values in the ﬁgure correspond
to interest rate increases. See text for details.

ƐƚĂŶĚĂƌĚĚĞǀŝĂƚŝŽŶƐ

Figure 1: Estimated Forward Guidance and LSAP Factors, 2009–2015

16

17
these results seem very reasonable.19
Three occasions near the end of the sample—December 17, 2014, March 18, 2015, and
September 17, 2015—are also very striking. On these dates, markets expected the FOMC to
signal that a hike in the federal funds rate would be coming in the near future. In each of these
cases, the FOMC surprised markets by signaling additional caution in raising the funds rate.20
My identiﬁcation attributes each of these announcements to changes in FOMC forward guidance,
which is very much in line with the market commentary.
The last observation in Figure 1, October 28, 2015, is also very supportive. On that date,
the FOMC kept the federal funds rate at zero, but stated that a rate hike in December was being
considered—an unusually explicit signal that signiﬁcantly altered markets’ expectations of a rate
hike at the upcoming meeting (The Wall Street Journal, 2015f,g). The Fed’s statement caused
short- and medium-term interest-rate futures and Treasury yields to jump, and is thus identiﬁed
by my estimation as a signiﬁcant increase in forward guidance, with no change in LSAPs.
The middle of 2013 corresponds to the so-called “taper tantrum” in ﬁnancial markets. On
June 19, I estimate a substantial, two-standard-deviation decrease in the LSAP factor (which is
positive in Figure 1 becuase it represents a monetary policy tightening). There is little change
in the FOMC statement on that date, but as reported by The Wall Street Journal, the FOMC
released economic projections along with the statement that showed a substantial increase in the
FOMC’s economic outlook. Given earlier remarks by then-Chairman Bernanke that the FOMC
could begin tapering its asset purchases soon, markets interpreted this as a signal that a tapering
was imminent.21 The ﬂip side of this announcement occurred on September 18, 2013, when the
19

It’s interesting to note that the FOMC’s subsequent “QE2” program, described in Table 1, does not show
up as a major event in Figure 1, probably becuase it was anticipated by ﬁnancial markets in advance (see, e.g.,
Forbes 2010). Looking at Figure 1 around the November 3, 2010, announcement date of the program, there
is essentially no estimated eﬀect, because the interest rates included in the estimation responded very little to
the announcement. Thus, even though the QE2 announcement was roughly one-half as large as the earlier QE1
announcement in terms of the quantity of purchases, the surprise component of that announcement appears to
have been dramatically smaller.
20

On Dec. 17, 2014, markets expected the FOMC to remove its statement that it would keep the federal funds
rate at essentially zero “for a considerable time”. Not only did the FOMC leave that phrase intact, it announced
that “the Committee judges it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy,” which
was substantially more dovish than markets had expected (e.g., “U.S. stocks surged. . . after the Federal Reserve
issued an especially dovish policy statement,” The Wall Street Journal, 2014). On Mar. 18, 2015, the FOMC
revised its projections for U.S. output, inﬂation, and the federal funds rate substantially below what markets had
expected. The revised forecast was read by ﬁnancial markets “as a sign that the central bank would take its time in
raising [rates]” (The Wall Street Journal, 2015a,b). And on Sep. 17, 2015, the FOMC declined to raise the federal
funds rate, issued a statement that was widely regarded as more dovish than expected, and released interest rate
forecasts that were substantially lower than before (The Wall Street Journal, 2015c,d,e).
21

For example, The Wall Street Journal (2013a) reported that “Bond prices slumped, sending the yield on the
10-year Treasury note to its highest level in 15 months, as the Federal Reserve upgraded its growth projections
for the U.S. economy. . . Stronger U.S. growth is widely perceived in the market as heralding an earlier end to the

18
FOMC was widely expected to begin tapering its asset purchases but opted not to do so. The
Wall Street Journal (2103b,c) reported that “No Taper Shocks Wall Street,” and “The move,
coming after Fed oﬃcials spent months alerting the public that they might begin to pare their
$85 billion-a-month bond-buying program at the September policy meeting, marks the latest in
a string of striking turnabouts from Washington policy makers that have whipsawed markets in
recent days.”22 I estimate this announcement to be a very large, 2.6-standard-deviation LSAP
easing. Thus, both of these “taper tantrum” announcements seem to be correctly identiﬁed as
movements in the LSAP factor.
There are a number of other notable observations in Figure 1 as well. August 9, 2011,
marked the ﬁrst time the FOMC gave explicit (rather than implicit) forward guidance about
the likely path of the federal funds rate over the next several quarters. In that announcement,
described in Table 1, the FOMC stated that it expected the current (essentially zero) level of the
federal funds rate would be appropriate “at least through mid-2013”, a date almost two years
in the future. My estimates imply the announcement on this date was a negative 1.5-standarddeviation surprise in forward guidance, with essentially no LSAP component.
September 21, 2011, corresponds to “Operation Twist”, a program where the FOMC sold
about $400 billion of short-term Treasury securities in its portfolio and used the proceeds to
purchase a like quantity of long-term Treasuries. As can be seen in Figure 1, I estimate this announcement had a negative 1.2-standard-deviation LSAP eﬀect (which is intuitive), and a positive
1-standard-deviation forward guidance eﬀect, which is perhaps surprising. This latter eﬀect is due
to the fact that shorter-maturity interest rates rose in response to the FOMC announcement—
presumably due to a change in risk premia on those securities resulting from the large increase
in expected sales by the Fed. Although this is probably not an example of forward guidance by
the FOMC per se, it nevertheless looks like forward guidance in the data because of the unusual
implication of the announcement for short-term Treasury yields. Thus, even though my identiﬁcation arguably misses some subtleties on this particular date, the estimates coming out of the
identiﬁcation are sensible.
Finally, I estimate a negative two-standard-deviation forward guidance announcement on
September 23, 2009. On this date, the FOMC stated it would extend its asset purchase program
Fed’s program of purchasing $85 billion in bonds each month. . . ”
22
The Wall Street Journal (2013b,c) also reported that “‘Bernanke had a free pass to begin that tapering process
and chose not to follow [through]. . . The Fed had the market precisely where it needed to be. The delay today
has the eﬀect of raising the benchmark to tapering. . . ”

19
by an additional three months, through 2010Q1. From the text of the FOMC statement alone, it’s
unclear whether the announcement should be regarded as forward guidance or LSAPs, or both.
My estimates characterize this announcement as forward guidance, based on the way ﬁnancial
markets responded (i.e., shorter-term interest rates moved more than longer-term interest rates).
It’s important to bear in mind that the U.S. economy was beginning to recover by late 2009 and
ﬁnancial markets expected the FOMC to begin raising the federal funds rate in just a few quarters
(Swanson and Williams, 2014), but not until a few meetings after completing its asset purchase
program. Thus, an extension of the end date of the LSAP program was taken by markets to
imply a correspondingly later liftoﬀ date for the federal funds rate.

3.3 Scale of Forward Guidance and LSAP Factors
The forward guidance and LSAP factors estimated above and plotted in Figure 1 are normalized
to have a unit standard deviation. Similarly, the loadings in Table 3 are for these normalized
factors and thus represent a basis points per standard deviation eﬀect. For policymakers, however,
it’s useful to express these eﬀects in terms of units that are more directly observable.
A natural measure of forward guidance is a 25bp change in the Eurodollar futures rate
one year ahead, ED4. Note that a forward guidance announcement of this size would be very
large by historical standards, about 4.15 standard deviations. Multiplying the coeﬃcients in the
second row of Table 3 by 4.15 implies that the eﬀects on the 5- and 10-year Treasury yields would
be about 21.1 and 16.3bp, respectively. The interpretation is that, if the FOMC gave forward
guidance for the federal funds rate that was about 25bp lower one year ahead, then the 5- and
10-year Treasury yields would decline by about 21 and 16bp, on average.
For LSAPs, we would like the units to be in billions of dollars of purchases, which is a
more diﬃcult transformation. Nevertheless, a number of estimates in the literature suggest that
a $600 billion LSAP operation in the U.S., distributed across medium- and longer-term Treasury
securities, leads to a roughly 15bp decline in the 10-year Treasury yield (see, e.g., the survey of
estimates in Swanson, 2011, and Table 1 of Williams, 2013). Using this estimate as a benchmark
implies that the coeﬃcients in the third row of Table 3 correspond to a roughly $225 billion
surprise LSAP announcement. In other words, if the FOMC announced a new LSAP program
that was about $225 billion larger than markets expected, the eﬀects should be about the same
as those provided in the third row of Table 3, on average.

20
Table 4: Estimated Effects of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate,
Forward Guidance, and LSAPs on U.S. Treasury Yields
6-month

2-year

5-year

10-year

30-year

(A) estimated eﬀects of federal funds rate and forward guidance, Jul. 1991–Dec. 2008
change in federal funds rate
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

4.11∗∗∗
(.223)
[18.42]

3.70∗∗∗
(.267)
[13.85]

2.02∗∗∗
(.264)
[7.66]

0.82∗∗∗
(.239)
[3.44]

−0.15
(.220)
[−0.70]

change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

2.87∗∗∗
(.503)
[5.71]

4.81∗∗∗
(.837)
[5.75]

4.59∗∗∗
(.821)
[5.58]

3.44∗∗∗
(.643)
[5.34]

2.22∗∗∗
(.460)
[4.82]

Regression R2
# Observations

.80
158

.95
158

.87
158

.80
158

.53
158

(B) estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs, Jan. 2009–Oct. 2015
change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

1.19∗∗∗
(.272)
[4.37]

5.14∗∗∗
6.22∗∗∗
(.811)
(1.010)
[6.33]
[6.15]

change in LSAPs
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

0.19
(.179)
[1.08]

0.20
(.332)
[0.59]

.40
55

.93
55

Regression R2
# Observations

3.06∗∗∗
(.627)
[4.88]

0.14
(.308)
[0.45]

−2.92∗∗∗ −6.49∗∗∗ −5.77∗∗∗
(.425)
(.883)
(.840)
[−6.86]
[−7.35]
[−6.87]
.95
55

.98
55

.81
55

t β + εt , where t indexes FOMC announcements, y denotes a
Coeﬃcients β from regressions Δyt = α + F
 denotes the monetary policy factors estimated previously, and Δ is the intraday
given Treasury yield, F
change in a 30-minute window bracketing each FOMC announcement. Coeﬃcients are in units of basis
points per standard deviation change in the monetary policy instrument. Bootstrapped standard errors
in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets; ∗∗∗ and ∗∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1% and
5% levels, respectively. See text for details.

4. The Eﬀects of Forward Guidance and LSAPs on Asset Prices
Once we’ve estimated the forward guidance and LSAP components of each FOMC announcement,
above, it’s straightforward to estimate the eﬀects of those policies on a variety of asset prices using
high-frequency regressions, as follows.

4.1 Treasury Yields
Table 4 reports the responses of 6-month and 2-, 5-, 10-, and 30-year Treasury yields to changes
in the federal funds rate and forward guidance from July 1991 to December 2008, and changes in

21
forward guidance and LSAPs from January 2009 to Occtober 2015.23 Although full-sample point
estimates for the 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields were already reported in Table 3, Table 4
reports standard errors, t-statistics, results for the pre-ZLB and ZLB subsamples, and results for
the 6-month and 30-year Treasury yields. Each column of the table reports estimates from an
OLS regression of the form
Δyt = α + β Ft + εt ,

(2)

where t indexes FOMC announcements, y denotes a particular Treasury yield, Δ the change
in a 30-minute window bracketing each FOMC announcement, F the monetary policy factors
estimated above, and ε a regression residual. As in Table 3, the coeﬃcients in Table 4 are in units
of basis points per standard deviation surprise in the monetary policy tool.
The coeﬃcients in the top panel of Table 4 are very similar to those estimated previously
by GSS (2005) and Campbell et al. (2012) for the pre-ZLB period, and are included here for
completeness and comparability to the earlier literature. Standard errors and t-statistics are
computed using 10,000 bootstrap samples to account for the fact that the monetary policy factors
F are generated regressors (see Appendix B for details). Nevertheless, the responses of Treasury
yields to the federal funds rate and forward guidance factors are typically highly statistically
signiﬁcant, with t-statistics exceeding 5 or even 10. There is essentially no doubt that Treasury
yields respond systematically to FOMC announcements. As discussed in the previous section
and in GSS, the eﬀects of changes in the federal funds rate decline steadily with maturity, while
forward guidance has a hump-shaped eﬀect on the yield curve.
The bottom panel of Table 4 reports results for changes in forward guidance and LSAPs
during the ZLB period, 2009–15. These results are also typically highly statistically signiﬁcant,
with t-statistics often exceeding 4. The regression R2 values are very high in many cases as well
(over 93 percent), so these two factors explain a large share of the variation in Treasury yields
around FOMC announcements. The eﬀects of forward guidance are hump-shaped and generally
very similar to the pre-ZLB period, although the eﬀect on the 6-month Treasury yield is noticeably
smaller, due to that yield being so close to zero and thus much less sensitive to news for much
of the ZLB sample (Swanson and Williams, 2014).24 The eﬀects of forward guidance also fall to
23

Results for the 3-month Treasury yield are not reported, since the 3-month Treasury yield generally did not
respond to news during the ZLB period—see Swanson and Williams (2014)—and is thus less interesting.
24
The peak eﬀect of forward guidance is also a little bit larger and later than in the pre-ZLB period, on average,
which would be consistent with the FOMC’s greater emphasis on longer-dated forward guidance during the ZLB
period.

22
essentially zero for the 30-year yield during this period.
As noted previously, LSAPs had their greatest eﬀect on long-term interest rates, particularly
the 10-year Treasury yield, likely because the FOMC focused its bond purchases around that
maturity. The eﬀect on the 30-year yield is also quite large and highly statistically signiﬁcant.
In contrast, LSAPs had a slight positive eﬀect on the short end of the yield curve, about 0.2bp
per standard deviation, although those eﬀects are not statistically signiﬁcant. One explanation
for this result is that the Federal Reserve may have sold oﬀ or reduced its demand for short-term
Treasuries in order to buy longer maturities, as in the “Operation Twist” period from late 2011
through 2012.
Taken together, these results imply that both forward guidance and LSAPs were eﬀective
during the ZLB period, at least in a 30-minute window around FOMC announcements. As noted
previously in Table 3, their eﬀects are broadly similar in magnitude to those of changes in the
federal funds rate during the pre-ZLB period, although the peak eﬀects occur at diﬀerent points
along the yield curve.

4.2 Stock Prices and Exchange Rates
Table 5 reports analogous results for the S&P 500 stock index and dollar-euro and dollar-yen
exchange rates. The form of the regressions is the same as in equation (2), except the dependent
variable in each regression is now 100 times the log change in the asset price in each column.
As before, results for changes in the federal funds rate and forward guidance in the preZLB period are included for completeness. A one-standard-deviation increase in the federal funds
rate causes stock prices to fall about 0.3 percent and the dollar to appreciate about 0.1 percent,
with bootstrapped t-statistics of 2.5 or greater. A one-standard-deviation tightening of forward
guidance causes stocks to fall a bit less, about 0.15 percent, but the dollar appreciates a bit more,
about 0.15 percent, and these eﬀects are also highly statistically signiﬁcant.
During the ZLB period (bottom panel), the eﬀects of forward guidance were somewhat
larger, leading to a drop in stock prices of about 0.25 percent and an appreciation of the dollar
of about 0.25–0.35 percent, and these eﬀects are highly statistically signiﬁcant. For LSAPs, a
one-standard-deviation increase (which causes interest rates to fall) causes stock prices to rise
about 0.1 percent and the dollar to depreciate 0.2–0.3 percent. The eﬀect of LSAPs on stocks
is not statistically signiﬁcant, but those on the dollar are highly signiﬁcant. Interestingly, the
regression R2 for the dollar are much higher during the ZLB period than before, while the R2 for

23
Table 5: Estimated Effects of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate, Forward
Guidance, and LSAPs on Stock Prices and Exchange Rates
S&P500

$/euro

$/yen

(A) estimated eﬀects of federal funds rate and forward guidance, Jul. 1991–Dec. 2008
change in federal funds rate
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

−0.32∗∗∗
(.044)
[−7.26]

−0.11∗∗
(.044)
[−2.55]

−0.13∗∗∗
(.044)
[−2.91]

change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

−0.16∗∗∗
(.049)
[−3.31]

−0.16∗∗∗
(.049)
[−3.15]

−0.14∗∗∗
(.047)
[−2.91]

Regression R2
# Observations

.31
158

.15
158

.14
158

(B) estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs, Jan. 2009–Oct. 2015
change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

−0.26∗∗∗
(.093)
[−2.79]

−0.37∗∗∗
(.102)
[−3.63]

−0.24∗∗
(.097)
[−2.50]

change in LSAPs
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

0.12
(.074)
[1.59]

0.21∗∗∗
(.078)
[2.72]

0.29∗∗∗
(.076)
[3.82]

Regression R2
# Observations

.28
55

.68
55

.79
55

t β + εt , where t indexes FOMC announcements, x is the
Coeﬃcients β from regressions Δ log xt = α + F

asset price, F denotes the monetary policy factors estimated previously, and Δ is the intraday change
in a 30-minute window bracketing each FOMC announcement. Coeﬃcients are in units of percentage
points per standard deviation change in the monetary policy instrument. Bootstrapped standard errors
in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets; ∗∗∗ and ∗∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1% and
5% levels, respectively. See text for details.

stocks is low in both periods, due to the high and idiosyncratic volatility of stocks after FOMC
announcements.
These results are all intuitive. For the dollar, the eﬀects have the signs one would expect
from uncovered interest parity, given the response of interest rates in Table 4. That is, an increase
in U.S. interest rates makes U.S. dollar investments more attractive relative to foreign investments,
and tends to drive the value of the dollar up. For stocks, the eﬀects are consistent with increases
in interest rates reducing the present value of stocks’ future dividends through both a discounting
channel and a weaker economy.
Most importantly, these results show that forward guidance and LSAPs were eﬀective at

24
moving stock prices and exchange rates as well as Treasury yields. In addition, both of these
unconventional policies had eﬀects that were roughly comparable to those of changes in the
federal funds rate in the pre-ZLB period. The unconventional policies’ eﬀects on the dollar were
a bit greater than for conventional monetary policy, and the eﬀects on stock prices a bit less,
but these diﬀerences are generally not statistically signiﬁcant. Compared to each other, forward
guidance and LSAPs seem to be about equally eﬀective at moving stock prices and exchange
rates, although the eﬀect of LSAPs on stocks is not very precisely estimated.

4.3 Corporate Bond Yields and Spreads
Table 6 reports analogous results for corporate bond yields and spreads. Corporate bonds are
less frequently traded than Treasuries, stocks, and foreign exchange, so the regressions in Table 6
use the one-day change in corporate bond yields and spreads around each FOMC announcement
as the dependent variable, rather than the 30-minute change. To measure corporate yields, I use
the Aaa and Baa indexes of long-term seasoned corporate bond yields from Moody’s.
The top panel reports the eﬀects of changes in the federal funds rate and forward guidance
in the pre-ZLB period. The federal funds rate has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on either corporate bond
yields or spreads. In contrast, the eﬀects of forward guidance on corporate yields are larger and
highly statistically signiﬁcant, with t-statistics of more than 4. Forward guidance has a slight
negative eﬀect on spreads, however, as the 10-year Treasury yield responds to the announcement
by more than corporate yields.
The bottom panel reports the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs during the ZLB period.
Surprisingly, forward guidance had essentially no eﬀect on corporate yields during this period,
although the eﬀect on spreads was negative because 10-year Treasury yields rose modestly in
response to increases in forward guidance. The eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant for the BaaTreasury spread, with a t-statistic of about 2.4.
The eﬀect of LSAPs on corporate bond yields is much larger and more signiﬁcant. An
increase in LSAPs causes Aaa and Baa yields to fall about 5bp per standard deviation, with
t-statistics of more than 4. The eﬀect of LSAPs on the 10-year Treasury yield is even larger, however, so corporate bond spreads rise in response to LSAPs.25 This result echoes Krishnamurthy
25

The 10-year yield response in Table 3 is estimated to be about −6.5bp, while the eﬀect implied in Table 6 is
a bit larger, about −8.1bp. There are two reasons for this diﬀerence: ﬁrst, the responses in Table 3 are 30-minute
responses, while those in Table 6 are one-day responses. Second, Table 3 uses the on-the-run coupon-bearing
10-year Treasury bond, while Table 6 uses the 10-year zero-coupon yield estimate by Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright
(2007). The latter yield has a longer duration than the coupon-bearing 10-year security and thus should be a
better match to the long-term corporate bonds in the Moody’s indexes.

25
Table 6: Estimated Effects of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate, Forward
Guidance, and LSAPs on Corporate Bond Yields and Spreads
Corporate Yields
Aaa
Baa

Spreads
Aaa−10-yr. Baa−10-yr.

(A) estimated eﬀects of federal funds rate and forward guidance, Jul. 1991–Dec. 2008
change in federal funds rate
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

0.32
(.394)
[0.82]

0.41
(.393)
[1.05]

−0.41
(.384)
[−1.08]

−0.32
(.385)
[−0.84]

change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

2.08∗∗∗
(.471)
[4.41]

1.96∗∗∗
(.459)
[4.26]

−0.60∗
(.366)
[−1.65]

−0.72∗
(.371)
[−1.95]

.04
158

.07
158

Regression R2
# Observations

.18
158

.18
158

(B) estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs, Jan. 2009–Oct. 2015
change in forward guidance
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

0.48
(1.002)
[0.48]

−0.51
(.996)
[−0.51]

−1.64
(1.037)
[−1.58]

−2.63∗∗∗
(1.088)
[−2.42]

change in LSAPs
(std. err.)
[ t-stat.]

−4.51∗∗∗
(1.017)
[−4.43]

−5.25∗∗∗
(1.114)
[−4.72]

3.56∗∗∗
(.977)
[3.64]

2.81∗∗∗
(.911)
[3.09]

Regression R2
# Observations

.45
55

.50
55

.53
55

.55
55

t β + εt , where t indexes FOMC announcements, y denotes
Coeﬃcients β from regressions Δyt = α + F
 denotes the monetary policy factors estimated previously, and Δ is
the corporate bond yield or spread, F
the change in a one-day window bracketing each FOMC announcement. Coeﬃcients are in units of basis
points per standard deviation change in the monetary policy instrument. Bootstrapped standard errors
in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets; ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See text for details.

and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2013) and Swanson (2011), who found that the Fed’s LSAP programs pushed down Treasury yields more than private-sector yields, presumably because the Fed
concentrated many of its purchases on longer-term Treasury bonds in particular. Nevertheless,
the eﬀect on corporate yields in Table 6 is larger than those previous studies found—for example,
Swanson (2011) estimated corporate yields fall about 4–5bp in response to a $600 billion LSAP
announcement, while the estimates in Table 6 are closer to 11–12bp for the same size operation.
One reason for the larger estimates here may be that the Fed’s recent LSAP programs often
included a substantial quantity of mortgage-backed securities (MBS), while the smaller, 4–5bp

26
estimate is for the case of a Treasury-only LSAP. Since corporate bonds are closer substitutes for
MBS than they are for Treasuries, we should expect MBS purchases to have a relatively larger
eﬀect on corporate yields.

5. The Persistence of Forward Guidance and LSAP Eﬀects
The regressions above measure the 30-minute or one-day responses of diﬀerent yields and asset
prices to FOMC announcements. If yields and asset prices are martingales, then these very
short-term responses are representative of the responses over longer windows as well. However,
some recent studies suggest the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy may not be persistent.
For example, Duﬃe (2010) cites several examples where large movements of captial (e.g., due to
stocks entering or leaving the S&P500, or auctions of new Treasury securities) can have transitory
eﬀects on asset prices that dissipate over a period of time, up to several months in length. The
idea is that arbitrage capital can be “slow-moving” and is not reallocated instantaneously to take
advantage of asset price distortions caused by idiosyncratic changes in demand or supply for the
asset. Fleckenstein, Longstaﬀ, and Lustig (2014) ﬁnd support for this theory in the pricing of
TIPS securities during the 2007–09 global ﬁnancial crisis.
Taylor (2012) and Woodford (2012) argue against the eﬀectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s
LSAPs for essentially the same reasons. Although the Fed’s announcement of an LSAP causes
high-frequency movements in yields or asset prices around the time of the announcement, the
argument goes, these changes in risk premia will disappear eventually as arbitrageurs react to the
announcement and adjust their positions, but this process takes time because the Fed’s expected
asset purchases are so large, amounting to hundreds of billions of dollars. The empirical evidence
in Wright (2012) supports this view: using a dailiy-frequency VAR, Wright (2012) estimates that
the eﬀects of FOMC unconventional monetary policy announcements on U.S. long-term bond
yields had a half-life of only about 2–3 months.

5.1 Unconstrained h-Day Yield Changes
To examine the persistence of the eﬀects of the FOMC’s forward guidance and LSAP announcements, I run a series of regressions at multiple horizons, of the form
yt−1+h = αh + βh yt−1 + γh Ft + εt ,
(h)

(3)

27
where the horizon h is measured in business days, each forecast horizon h is associated with a
diﬀerent regression, y denotes a given bond yield or log asset price, t takes on the values of the
dates of FOMC announcements from January 2009 through October 2015, F denotes the forward
(h)

guidance and LSAP components of FOMC announcements as estimated above, εt

is a residual,

and αh , βh , and γh are parameters that may vary across regressions h. This is essentially Jordà’s
(2005) local projections method of estimating impulse response functions, with a lag length of
zero for the lagged endogenous variable y on the right-hand side, since I ﬁnd that additional lags
aren’t needed. As discussed by Jordà (2005), the direct projections in (3) have several advantages
over extrapolating the results of a daily-frequency VAR(1) as in Wright (2012). In particular,
the results of extrapolation compound any errors in the parameter estimates as the horizon h
increases, while the local projections method avoids extrapolation and compounding and is thus
more robust to model misspeciﬁcation.
I estimate that the coeﬃcients αh and βh are essentially always close to zero and one,
respectively, so I impose those restrictions in the analysis. Then (3) is just a regression of the
h-day diﬀerence, yt−1+h − yt−1 , on the factors Ft , on the sample of all 55 FOMC announcements
from 2009–15. The estimated coeﬃcients γ̂h vary across forecast horizons h, so we can plot those
coeﬃcients as a function of the horizon h to see whether they tend to diminish as h increases. Of
course, for longer horizons h, there will also be a greater amount of non-monetary-policy news
(h)

that impacts yields and asset prices, so the residuals εt

and standard errors surrounding the

coeﬃcient estimates γ̂h will tend to be larger.
Figure 2 plots the results of these regressions for 2- and 10-year Treasury yields. The solid
blue line in each panel plots the point estimates of γ̂h as a function of horizon h, and dotted red
lines plot bootstrapped ±1.96-standard-error bands around those point estimates (see Appendix B
for details).
The estimated eﬀect of a one-standard-deviation change in forward guidance on the 2year Treasury yield is about 3bp on the ﬁrst day (top-left panel of Figure 2), slightly less than
the estimated eﬀect in Table 4 that used intradaily data, and this one-day response is highly
statistically signiﬁcant. For horizons h out to about 50 business days, the point estimates remain
between 2.5 and 6bp, and are statistically signiﬁcant out to horizons of about 35 days. At horizons
beyond about 50 days, the point estimates are typically smaller.
The eﬀect of forward guidance on the 10-year Treasury yield (top-right panel of Figure 2)
is about 2bp on the ﬁrst day, although it is not statistically signiﬁcant. For horizons out to about

28
Effect of Forward Guidance on 2-Year Treasury Yield

15

Effect of Forward Guidance on 10-Year Treasury Yield

20
15
10

(bp/sd)
coefficient

coefficient

5
0

h

5

h

(bp/sd)

10

0

-5
-10
-15
-20

-5

-25
-10

-30
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

20

40

horizon h (days)
Effect of LSAPs on 2-Year Treasury Yield

80

100

120

Effect of LSAPs on 10-Year Treasury Yield

20
15

6

10

(bp/sd)

8

4

h

2

coefficient

coefficient

h

(bp/sd)

10

60

horizon h (days)

0
-2

5
0
-5
-10

-4

-15

-6

-20

-8

-25
0

20

40

60

horizon h (days)

80

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

horizon h (days)

Figure 2. Estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on 2- and 10-year zero-coupon Treasury
yields, for diﬀerent horizons h ranging from 1 to 120 business days. Estimated coeﬃcients γ̂h (solid blue
line) and bootstrapped ±1.96-standard-error bands (dashed red lines) are from regressions yt−1+h −yt−1 =
t + εt(h) . Restricted coeﬃcient estimates γh = ae−b(h−1) (dash-dotted black lines) are from the same
γh F
set of regressions estimated jointly via nonlinear least squares. See text for details.

35 days, the eﬀect is actually somewhat larger, around 5–8bp, and is sometimes statistically
signiﬁcant. After about 40 days, the eﬀects of forward guidance on the 10-year yield are close to
zero.
The eﬀect of a one-standard-deviation increase in LSAPs on the 2-year Treasury yield
(bottom-left panel of Figure 2) is about −2.5bp on the ﬁrst day, and this eﬀect is statistically
signiﬁcant.26 However, the eﬀect diminishes with the horizon h, ﬂuctuating around zero after
26

The estimated eﬀect in Table 4 is essentially zero, but that estimate is for an on-the-run (i.e., most recently

29
about 55 days. The standard error bands are somewhat narrower than for forward guidance.
For the 10-year Treasury yield in the bottom-right panel, the estimated eﬀect is about −8bp on
impact, and again the eﬀect diminishes almost monotonically over time, ﬂuctuating around zero
after about 50 days.

5.2 Persistence Estimates
To estimate the degree of attenuation in these ﬁgures, and the statistical signiﬁcance of that
attenuation, I re-estimate regressions (3) imposing that the coeﬃcients γh have an exponentially
decaying functional form,
γh = ae−b(h−1) ,

(4)

where a and b are parameters, with a denoting the impact eﬀect and b the exponential decay rate.
The idea is essentially the same as Barnichon and Brownlees’ (2018) “smooth local projections”:
unrestricted local projections can lead to excess variability of the estimates, but this variability
can be reduced by imposing prior information on the impulse responses, in this case smoothness
and an exponentially decaying functional form.
I stack the regressions (3) into a single system, impose the restriction (4) on the coeﬃcients γh , and estimate the parameters a and b in a single step via weighted nonlinear least
squares.27 The dash-dotted black lines in Figure 2 depict the results of this restricted estimation.
Table 7 reports the estimated values of a and b for the eﬀects of forward guidance and
LSAPs on the 2- and 10-year Treasury yields, along with bootstrapped t-statistics. The impact
eﬀects a in the top panel are all statistically signiﬁcant, consistent with the earlier results above.
A standard martingale view of asset price responses would imply that b = 0, but in Table 7,
the decay rates b are typically larger than zero, with half-lives of about 20 business days for
LSAPs, and 30 and 110 business days for forward guidance on the 10- and 2-year Treasury yields,
respectively. However, none of these decay rates is statistically signiﬁcant.
issued, most liquid, and most heavily traded) coupon-bearing 2-year Treasury, while the estimates in Figure 3 are
for a zero-coupon 2-year Treasury, which has a longer Macauley duration. Since the eﬀects of LSAPs generally
increase with duration, the eﬀect on the zero-coupon 2-year Treasury is larger. Zero-coupon yields are from the
Gürkaynak et al. (2007) database and keep the maturity constant even as the horizon h and time t change.
27

−1
The observations for each horizon h are weighted by σh
, where σh denotes the estimated variance of the
residuals for the unrestricted horizon h regression (3). I also impose two restrictions on the estimation: First, the
coeﬃcient a cannot be more than 25% greater or less than the average unconstrained eﬀect γh over the ﬁrst 5 days.
Second, the coeﬃcient b ≥ 0. These restrictions prevent the estimation from picking values of a and b that are
implausible a priori. Finally, the regressions in (3)–(4) are stacked and run out to a 180-business-day horizon h,
to help estimate the decay parameter b.

30
Table 7: Estimated Persistence Coefficients
Forward Guidance
a
b
Jan. 2009–Oct. 2015:
2-year Treasury yield
[ t-stat.]
10-year Treasury yield
[ t-stat.]

b

4.0∗∗∗
[4.12]

.006
[0.25]

−2.2∗∗∗
[−3.00]

.034
[0.27]

4.0∗∗
[2.22]

.023
[1.17]

−8.6∗∗∗
[−6.05]

.036
[1.31]

−0.3
[−0.50]

18.07
[1.43]

−4.9∗∗∗
[−2.80]

0.001
[0.01]

Jan. 2009–Oct. 2015, excluding March 18, 2009:
.007
2-year Treasury yield
4.1∗∗∗
[ t-stat.]
[4.28]
[0.51]
10-year Treasury yield
[ t-stat.]

LSAPs
a

3.6∗
[1.85]

0.022
[1.52]

Coeﬃcients a and b for restriction γh = ae−b(h−1) in regressions (3), estimated via nonlinear least squares.
Bootstrapped t-statistics in square brackets; ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively. See text for details.

Although the largest estimated decay rates in Table 7 are for LSAPs, it’s important to note
that those estimates are very sensitive to whether or not the extremely inﬂuential March 18,
2009, FOMC announcement is included in the analysis. (Recall that announcement was about
5.5 standard deviations, corresponded to over $1.1 trillion of new long-term bond purchases and
implicitly raised the possibility that there could be additional such operations in the future.) The
bottom panel of Table 7 reports results for the same regressions, excluding that one observation
from the sample. In this case, the results for forward guidance are essentially unchanged, while
the results for LSAPs no longer show any evidence of fading out over time.28
Figure 3 repeats the analysis in Figure 2, but excluding the March 18, 2009, observation.
The results for forward guidance are essentially identical to Figure 2 and are not reported, but the
results for LSAPs are very diﬀerent: for the 2-year Tresury yield, the eﬀects are no longer significant at any horizon, and for the 10-year yield, there is no longer any appearance of attenuation.
The eﬀects of LSAPs look completely persistent.
For reference, Figure 4 reports the behavior of Treasury yields around the March 18, 2009,
announcement. Yields of all maturities fell dramatically on the day of the announcement, but
5- and 10-year yields began to drift back up over the ensuing weeks, erasing the entire decline
28

The impact eﬀect of LSAPs on the 2-year Treasury yield is no longer signiﬁcant when the March 18, 2009,
observation is dropped, which implies that the decay parameter b is no longer well identiﬁed and results in the
large numerical value in the table. The impact eﬀect on the 10-year Treasury yield remains highly statistically
signiﬁcant, however, albeit with a smaller magnitude.

31
Effect of LSAPs on 2-Year Treasury Yield (excl. 3/18/09)

10

10

8

5

(bp/sd)

4

0
-5

h

2

coefficient

h

(bp/sd)

6

coefficient

Effect of LSAPs on 10-Year Treasury Yield (excl. 3/18/09)

15

0
-2
-4

-10
-15
-20
-25

-6

-30

-8

-35
0

20

40

60

80

horizon h (days)

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

horizon h (days)

Figure 3. Estimated eﬀects of LSAPs on 2- and 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yields for diﬀerent
horizons h, excluding the large and inﬂuential March 18, 2009, FOMC announcement. (Results for
forward guidance are essentially identical to Figure 2 and are not reported.) See notes to Figure 2 and
text for details.

in long-term yields by about the 30th business day following the announcement. The very large
size of the LSAP factor for this FOMC announcement gives these responses a very large weight
in the regression analysis above.
Thus, in contrast to Wright (2012), I ﬁnd relatively little evidence that the eﬀects of the
Fed’s unconventional monetary policy announcements died out over time. Although the point
estimates for forward guidance and LSAPs in Table 7 do suggest some attenuation, those estimates
are not statistically signiﬁcant. Moreover, for LSAPs, there is no evidence of attenuation once
the very inﬂuential March 2009 FOMC announcement is dropped from the analysis.29

6. Eﬀects of Forward Guidance and LSAPs on Interest Rate Uncertainty
Unconventional monetary policy could also have substantial eﬀects on interest rate uncertainty.
Bernanke (2013) emphasizes that a major goal of forward guidance was to reduce ﬁnancial market
uncertainty about the path of the federal funds rate, not just ﬁnancial market expectations about
that path. In this section, I investigate whether the FOMC’s forward guidance announcements
achieved this additional goal.
I also investigate whether LSAP as well as forward guidance announcements had eﬀects on
interest rate uncertainty. The eﬀect of LSAPs on uncertainty is ambiguous and is ultimately an
29

In Swanson (2017), I also estimate the persistence of the eﬀects of federal funds rate changes in the pre-ZLB
period, and show that those eﬀects also seem to be completely persistent.

32
4.5

FOMCannouncement
on3/18/2009

4
3.5

yield(percent)

3

10ͲyearTreasury

2.5
5ͲyearTreasury
2
1.5
1
0.5

2ͲyearTreasury

1ͲyearTreasury

0

Figure 4. 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yields from March 1 to May 31, 2009. See text
for details.

empirical question: on one hand, if LSAPs are a new source of shocks to long-term bond yields,
that could increase uncertainty about those yields; alternatively, LSAPs could reduce uncertainty
if they tended to be implemented in response to increases in long-term yields, because then LSAPs
would be a stabilizing force.
To measure uncertainty about the federal funds rate over the next several months or quarters, I use Eurodollar options with ﬁve quarters to expiration, as in Swanson and Williams (2014).
These data are available at daily frequency with a range of strike prices, which can be used to estimate the entire distribution of the federal funds rate in ﬁve quarters’ time.30 Following Swanson
and Williams (2014), I use the distance between the 80th and 20th percentiles of that distribution on any given day as a measure of uncertainty on that day about the federal funds rate ﬁve
quarters ahead.
30
I don’t need to assume normality for these distributions because we observe option prices for multiple strikes.
On each day from January 2008 through December 2015, I use the range of available Eurodollar option put and call
prices with ﬁve quarters to expiration to estimate the implied distribution of the spot 3-month Eurodollar rate in
ﬁve quarters’ time, using a ﬂexible functional form. Eurodollar options are the most liquid options on a short-term
interest rate and thus provide the best measure of the distribution of possible short-term interest rate outcomes.
I use the spread between overlapping federal funds futures and Eurodollar futures rates at a one-year horizon to
convert these implied distributions for the 3-month Eurodollar rate into an implied distribution for the federal
funds rate. These probability estimates ignore risk premia and thus represent implied risk-neutral probabilities.

33
Table 8: Estimated Effects of Forward Guidance and LSAPs on
Monetary Policy Uncertainty, 2009–2015
(1)

(2)

(3)

change in forward guidance
[ t-stat.]

4.21
[2.64]

3.78
[2.35]

3.55∗∗
[2.11]

change in LSAPs
[ t-stat.]


change in forward guidance
[ t-stat.]


change in LSAPs

1.14
[0.95]

1.58
[1.02]

1.07
[0.60]

—
—

−2.09
[−1.07]

—
—

—
—

−0.38
[−0.23]

—
—

(change in forward guidance)2
[ t-stat.]

—
—

—
—

−1.03
[−0.99]

(change in LSAPs)2
[ t-stat.]

—
—

—
—

0.06
[0.15]

Regression R2
# Observations

.15
55

.17
55

.17
55

[ t-stat.]

∗∗∗

∗∗

Coeﬃcients β from regressions of one-day changes in monetary policy uncertainty on forward guidance and
LSAP factors, nonlinear transformations of those factors, and a constant (not reported). Monetary policy
uncertainty is the interquintile range (in bp) for the federal funds rate distribution 5 quarters ahead, from
Eurodollar options. Bootstrapped t-statistics in square brackets; ∗∗∗ and ∗∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance
at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. See text for details.

The ﬁrst column of Table 8 reports results from regression (3) with monetary policy uncertainty as the dependent variable y. In response to a one-standard-deviation increase in forward
guidance, monetary policy uncertainty increases by about 4bp (as measured by the interquintile
range in the options-implied PDF), and this change is highly statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the
data support Bernanke’s (2013) stated goal that reductions in forward guidance by the FOMC
should reduce ﬁnancial market uncertainty about the path of the federal funds rate. In contrast
to forward guidance, LSAPs have no signiﬁcant eﬀect on monetary policy uncertainty on impact.
Of course, one might expect monetary policy uncertainty to decrease in response to any
forward guidance announcement by the Fed, regardless of whether that announcement is positive
or negative (i.e., a tightening or an easing). To investigate this possibility, the second column of
Table 8 includes the absolute values of the forward guidance and LSAP factors in regression (3).
Surprisingly, the coeﬃcients on these absolute values are not statistically signiﬁcant while the
coeﬃcient on the forward guidance announcement itself is essentially unchanged. As an alternative, the third column of Table 8 includes squared forward guidance and LSAP factors instead,

34
Effect of Forward Guidance on Monetary Policy Uncertainty

Effect of LSAPs on Monetary Policy Uncertainty

20

15

10

10

(bp/sd)

15

h

5

coefficient

coefficient

h

(bp/sd)

20

0

5

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

horizon h (days)

20

40

60

80

100

120

horizon h (days)

Figure 5. Estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on monetary policy uncertainty, measured
as the distance (in bp) between the 80th and 20th percentiles of the PDF for the federal funds rate 5
quarters ahead, implied by Eurodollar options. See notes to Figure 2 and text for details.

with similar results—the nonlinear terms are not statistically signiﬁcant, while the results for the
linear forward guidance factor are essentially unchanged.
The results in Table 8 show that, between 2009 and 2015, forward guidance easings reduced
monetary policy uncertainty, while forward guidance tightenings increased that uncertainty. That
last result might seem surprising at ﬁrst, but is intuitive if we think about the interaction of
monetary policy uncertainty with the zero lower bound. Throughout 2009–15, the federal funds
rate was essentially zero, a level that the FOMC regarded as its eﬀective lower bound. Thus,
ﬁnancial markets viewed a negative federal funds rate as virtually a measure-zero event. Forward
guidance easings during this period reduced the mean level of the expected federal funds rate over
the next several quarters, and thus compressed the distribution of the future federal funds rate
against the zero lower bound. This compression mechanically reduces measured monetary policy
uncertainty. In contrast, forward guidance tightenings increased the mean level of the expected
federal funds rate and thus reduced the extent to which the future federal funds rate distribution
was compressed against the zero lower bound. This expansion of the federal funds rate distribution
away from the ZLB mechanically increases measured monetary policy uncertainty. The results in
Table 8 are consistent with these mechanical eﬀects of forward guidance on uncertainty being an
important driver of those uncertainty results.
Figure 5 examines the persistence of these uncertainty eﬀects. Since the nonlinear terms
in Table 8 were not statistically signiﬁcant, the regressions in Figure 5 consider only the linear

35

10

10

(bp/sd)

15

0

coefficient

coefficient

Effect of LSAPs on Long-Term Bond Yield Uncertainty

5

h

5

h

(bp/sd)

Effect of Forward Guidance on Long-Term Bond Yield Uncertainty

15

-5

-10

0

-5

-10

-15

-15
0

20

40

60

horizon h (days)

80

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

horizon h (days)

Figure 6. Estimated eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on long-term bond yield uncertainty, as
measured by the Bank of America/Merrill Lynch MOVE index of implied volatility (in bp/year) from
options on Treasury securities. See notes to Figure 2 and text for details.

terms, as in previous ﬁgures. After the ﬁrst day, there is little evidence that the eﬀect of forward
guidance dies out over time, although the standard errors grow so that the eﬀect is not statistically
signiﬁcant after about 2 days. For LSAPs, interestingly, there is no eﬀect on impact but the
eﬀect grows substantially over the next few days and becomes statistically signiﬁcant. A onestandard-deviation increase in LSAPs was typically followed by a 2–5bp decline in monetary
policy uncertainty for most of the next 50 days. This ﬁnding seems in line with the discussion in
Woodford (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2013) and Bauer and Rudebusch
(2014), that one channel through which LSAPs aﬀected ﬁnancial markets was by signaling the
FOMC’s commitment to keep the federal funds rate low for an extended period. Thus, even
though my results in Tables 2 and 3 reject the hypothesis that LSAPs work entirely through the
signaling channel, my results here do suggest that LSAPs have signiﬁcant signaling eﬀects.
Figure 6 plots analogous results for the Bank of America/Merrill Lynch MOVE index of
long-term bond yield uncertainty. The MOVE index is a composite of implied volatility on
U.S. Treasury bonds with 2, 5, 10, and 30 years to maturity, measured using options on these
securities, with most of the weight on the 5- and 10-year maturities. Overall, the results in Figure 6
look very similar to those in Figure 5 for shorter-term interest rate uncertainty: An increase in
forward guidance raises longer-term bond yield uncertainty by a small amount, but the eﬀect is
not statistically signiﬁcant and declines to zero after a few days. An increase in LSAPs, on the
other hand, has essentially no eﬀect on longer-term bond yield uncertainty on impact, but then

36
leads to a statistically signiﬁcant decline in that uncertainty by about 3.5bp over the next few
days, and this eﬀect persists for about 45 days (although it loses its signiﬁcance).
Far from increasing longer-term bond yield uncertainty, an increase in LSAPs by the Fed
seems to have had a stabilizing eﬀect on longer-term bond yields. This would be the case, for
example, if the FOMC’s LSAP operations were conducted in such a way as to “push back” against
movements in long-term interest rates.
Finally, I investigate the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on stock market uncertainty,
as measured by the VIX, but ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects at any horizon (results not
reported).

7. Conclusions
I extend the methods of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) to separately identify the forward
guidance and large-scale asset purchase component of every FOMC announcement of the U.S.
zero lower bound period, January 2009 to October 2015. I show that this identiﬁcation is quite
robust and that my estimated forward guidance and LSAP announcements agree with observable
characteristics of notable FOMC statements.
I separately estimate the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on a variety of assets,
including Treasuries, stocks, exchange rates, corporate bonds, and interest rate options (to measure uncertainty). Both forward guidance and LSAPs had substantial and highly statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀects on medium-term Treasury yields, with magnitudes comparable to the eﬀects of
changes in the federal funds rate before the zero lower bound (as measured by their asset price
eﬀects per standard deviation change in each policy). Thus, I ﬁnd that both of these unconventional monetary policies were eﬀective policy instruments, about as eﬀective as conventional
monetary policy.
Forward guidance was more eﬀective than LSAPs at moving shorter-term Treasury yields
and stock prices, while LSAPs were more eﬀective than forward guidance and the federal funds
rate at moving longer-term Treasury yields, corporate bonds, and interest rate uncertainty. To the
extent that monetary policy aﬀects the real economy through changes in private-sector interest
rates like corporate bond yields, this suggests that LSAPs were more eﬀective than forward
guidance at stimulating the real economy. LSAPs were also more eﬀective at reducing interest
rate uncertainty, which may also stimulate the real economy (e.g., Bloom, 2009).

37
I ﬁnd no signiﬁcant evidence that either forward guidance or LSAPs had eﬀects that died out
over time. I estimate that the eﬀects of LSAP anouncements were completely persistent, with no
tendency to die out over the next several months, with the exception of the very inﬂuential “QE1”
announcement in March 2009. After that particular announcement, long-term bond yields fell
sharply but then rebounded over the next two months as ﬁnancial markets turned around. Given
that ﬁnancial markets were functioning very poorly in March 2009, and the QE1 announcement
was so large, the ﬁnancial market responses to that announcement may not be representative of
LSAP eﬀects more generally.
I estimate that the eﬀects of forward guidance were somewhat less persistent, with a half-life
of about 1–4 months, but those estimates are not statistically signiﬁcant. To some extent, we
should expect the eﬀects of forward guidance to die out gradually over time, since the FOMC’s
forward guidance announcements over this period had a typical horizon of several quarters or
less. My point estimates are generally consistent with this fact.
Overall, I ﬁnd there is relatively little reason for the Federal Reserve to raise its inﬂation
target to avoid hitting the zero lower bound in the future, because the Fed has other monetary
policy tools available.
Going forward, there are many important issues that call for further exploration. First and
foremost, estimating the eﬀects of forward guidance and LSAPs on macroeconomic variables such
as the unemployment rate should be a top priority for future research—after all, the FOMC’s
stated goal in pursuing these unconventional policies was to boost the economy. Measuring the
response of macroeconomic rather than ﬁnancial variables to monetary policy announcements
is diﬃcult, however, because of the lower frequency and longer response lags of macroeconomic
variables to those announcements. A second important avenue for future research is to study
the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policies in other economies, especially since the zero lower
bound period in the U.S. has ended. The methods of the present paper should be very helpful
for studying the eﬀects of unconventional monetary policies in these other economies as well as
in the U.S.

38

Appendix A: Details of Identifying Restrictions
As discussed in Section 2, the factor model (1) is not uniquely identiﬁed by the data. Here I provide the
details of the identifying restrictions in Section 2.
Given the T × n matrix X of n asset price responses to the T FOMC announcements in my sample,
I ﬁrst demean and scale each column of X to have zero mean and unit variance. I then extract the ﬁrst
three principal components of the standardized matrix to estimate the three latent factors that explain
a maximal fraction of the variance of the (standardized) data. Let F denote the T × 3 matrix of these
ﬁrst three principal components, and Λ the 3 × n matrix of loadings of the data X on F (cf. eq. (1)).
It’s straightforward to show that a 3 × 3 orthogonal matrix U is uniquely determined by three
parameters. Thus, we require three identifying restrictions to uniquely identify the rotation U that maps
the principal components F into three factors F ∗ ≡ F U that have a structural interpretation as 1) the
surprise change in the federal funds rate target, 2) the surprise change in forward guidance, and 3) the
surprise change in LSAPs.
As discussed in Section 2, my ﬁrst two identifying assumptions are that LSAPs and forward guidance
have no eﬀect on the current federal funds rate. These two zero restrictions can be written as
⎡ ⎤
·
U  Λ1 = ⎣ 0 ⎦ ,
0

(A1)

where Λ1 denotes the ﬁrst column of Λ, the loadings of the current-month federal funds rate on the
three factors F . Letting Ui denote the ith column of U , these restrictions correspond to Λ1 U2 = 0 and
Λ1 U3 = 0. Eﬀectively, these two restrictions imply that only the ﬁrst factor has any systematic eﬀect on
the federal funds rate.
My third identifying restriction is that the variance of the LSAP factor is as small as possible over the
sample from 1991 to 2008. The LSAP factor is given by F U3 , so this restriction amounts to minimizing

U3 (F pre) F pre U3 , where F pre denotes the 158×3 matrix of values of F from 1990–2008. This is a constraint
on U3 that does not directly aﬀect U1 or U2 , except via the orthogonality conditions between the columns
of U .
Computationally, I implement these three restrictions as follows. First, I implement restrictions
one and three above in one step as a quadratic minimization problem subject to a linear constraint: I
temporarily ignore the unit length requirement on U3 and normalize the third element of U3 to unity;31
I then minimize
⎡
⎤
u13

[ u13 u23 1 ] (F pre ) F pre ⎣ u23 ⎦ ,
(A2)
1
subject to Λ1 [ u13 u23 1 ] = 0, where this last constraint ensures the minimization respects the ﬁrst
identifying assumption. After computing the minimizing vector [ u13 u23 1 ] , I rescale it to have unit
length and call the resulting vector U3 .
To implement the second identifying restriction, I again temporarily ignore the unit length requirement on U2 and normalize its third element to unity. I then solve the equation


Λ1
U3



⎡

⎤
 
u12
⎣ u22 ⎦ = 0
0
1

(A3)

for u12 and u22 , which ensures that [ u12 u22 1 ] satisﬁes the identifying restriction and is orthogonal
to U3 . I then rescale the vector [ u12 u22 1 ] to have unit length and call the result U2 .
31

Note that there is nothing special about the third element here or in any of the normalizations below—if the
third element happens to be close to zero, then the ﬁrst or second element can be normalized to unity instead.

39
Finally, I compute U1 by an analogous procedure, normalizing the third element of U1 to unity,
solving the equation
⎤
⎡
   u11
 
U2 ⎣
0
⎦
u12 =
,
(A4)
U3
0
1
and renormalizing [ u11 u12 1 ] to have unit length. This ensures U1 is orthogonal to U2 and U3 .
This uniquely identiﬁes U and F ∗ up to a sign normalization for each column. I normalize the sign
of the ﬁrst column of F ∗ to have a positive eﬀect on the current federal funds rate, the second column to
have a positive eﬀect on the four-quarter-ahead Eurodollar future contract ED4, and the third column to
have a negative eﬀect on the 10-year Treasury yield.

Appendix B: Bootstrap Procedure
 as regressors. Because those
The regressions in Section 4 use the estimated monetary policy factors F
regressors are generated from a ﬁrst-stage estimation procedure, there is some additional uncertainty
regarding those variables that would not be present if they were directly observed. Traditional OLS or
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors do not take this extra sampling uncertainty into account
and thus are not correct in general (e.g., Pagan, 1984).
To address this problem, I compute the standard errors in Section 4 by boostrapping, as follows. I
ﬁrst write the 213×8 matrix of FOMC announcement responses X in terms of the estimated factor model
(i)
X = F Λ+ε, as in Section 2. For each bootstrap sample i, I draw 213 random numbers rj , j = 1, . . . , 213,
between 1 and 213, with replacement. Bootstrap sample X (i) is then deﬁned to be F Λ + ε(i) , where the
(i)
jth row of ε(i) is given by the rj th row of the original ε. I repeat this procedure 10,000 times to generate
bootstrap samples X (i) , i = 1, . . . , 10, 000. For each boostrap sample i, I impose the three identifying
 (i) .
assumptions in Section 2 to compute the synthetic structural factors F
Similarly, for each left-hand side variable y in Section 4, I take the residuals from the original
 + η (i) , where the jth element
 + η and deﬁne the bootstrap vector y (i) to be α + β F
regression y = α + β F
(i)
(i)
of η is given by the rj th element of the original η. For each bootstrap sample i, I run the regression
 (i) + ν (i) and store the estimated parameters α(i) and β (i) . The boostrapped standard
y (i) = α(i) + β (i) F
errors for β in Section 4 are computed from the empirical distribution of the β (i) .
Note that this samples the residuals ε and η with replacement rather than the raw underlying data
X and y. If we were to sample the observations X and y directly, we would end up with many bootstrap
samples that have multiple occcurrences of the large “QE1” announcement by the Fed, and many other
bootstrap samples that have no such occurrences. In actuality, the Fed made one “QE1” announcement,
and we are interested in the standard errors of our coeﬃcients β conditional on that fact. By sampling the
residuals ε and η, we preserve that feature of the data and compute the standard errors we are interested
in.
Bootstrapped standard errors in Section 5 are computed in esssentially the same way. The bootstrap
samples X (i) are the same, and for each horizon h, the left-hand side variables Δh yt−1 ≡ yt+1−h − yt−1
are sampled in the same way as above. That is, I take the residuals from the original regression Δh y =
 + η(h) and deﬁne the bootstrap vector (Δh y)(i) to be αh + βh F
 + η (i) , where the jth element of
αh + βh F
(h)
(i)

(i)

η(h) is given by the rj th element of the original η(h) . For each bootstrap sample i, I run the regression
(i)
(i)  (i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(Δh y)(i) = αh + βh F
+ ν(h) and store the estimated parameters αh and βh . The boostrapped
standard errors for each βh in the ﬁgures in Section 5 are computed from the empirical distribution of
(i)
the βh .
Finally, bootstrapped standard errors in Section 6 are computed in the same way as in Sections 4
and 5.

40

References
Ball, Laurence (2014). “The Case for a Long-Run Inﬂation Target of Four Percent,” IMF Working
Paper 14/92.
Barnichon, Regis, and Christian Brownlees (2018). “Impulse Response Estimation by Smooth
Local Projections,” Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).
Bauer, Michael, and Glenn Rudebusch (2014). “The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond
Purchases,” International Journal of Central Banking 10, 233–289.
Bernanke, Ben (2013). “Communication and Monetary Policy,” speech at the National Economists
Club Annual Dinner, Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, November 19, 2013, Washington DC, available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20131119a.htm
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010). “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF Staﬀ Position Note 10/03.
Bloom, Nicholas (2009). “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77, 623–685.
Campbell, Jeffrey, Charles Evans, Jonas Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). “Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Spring, 1–53.
Cragg, John, and Stephen Donald (1997). “Inferring the Rank of a Matrix,” Journal of Econometrics
76, 223–250.
D’Amico, Stefania, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). “The
Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Eﬀects,” Economic Journal 122, F415–F446.
Duffie, Darrell (2010). “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,”
Journal of Finance 55 (4), 1237–1267.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig (2014). “The TIPS-Treasury
Bond Puzzle,” Journal of Finance 69 (5), 2151–2197.
Forbes (2010). “Bernanke Runs Up the Sails for QE2,” by Fontevecchia, Agustino, October 15, 2010,
http://www.forbes.com/2010/10/15/bernanke-speech-deﬂation-equities-markets-housing.html.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). “The Financial Market Eﬀects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases,” International Journal of Central
Banking 7, 3–43.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic
Activity,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 44–76.
Gilchrist, Simon, Vivien Yue, and Egon Zakrajsek (2018). “US Monetary Policy and International
Bond Markets,” Federal Reserve Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018–014.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005). “Do Actions Speak Louder than Words?
The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,” International Journal
of Central Banking 1, 55–93.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2007). “Market-Based Measures of Monetary
Policy Expectations,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25, 201–212.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright (2007). “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve:
1961 to the Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.
Hanson, Samuel, and Jeremy Stein (2015). “Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,” Journal
of Financial Economics 115, 429–448.

41
`
Jordà, Oscar
(2005). “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American
Economic Review 95, 161–182.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). “The Eﬀects of Quantitative
Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity Fall, 215–265.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2013). “The Ins and Outs of LSAPs,”
in Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Symposium Proceedings from Jackson Hole, Wyoming (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City) 57–111, available at http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp.
Kuttner, Kenneth (2001). “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the Fed
Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523–544.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2018). “High-Frequency Identiﬁcation of Monetary Non-Neutrality: The Information Eﬀect,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Pagan, Adrian (1984). “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors,”
International Economic Review 25, 221–247.
Rogers, John, Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan Wright (2018). “Unconventional Monetary Policy
and International Risk Premia,” unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.
Summers, Lawrence (1991). “How Should Long-term Monetary Policy Be Determined?” Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 23 (3) part 2, 625–631.
Swanson, Eric (2011). “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist
and Its Implications for QE2,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2011, 151–188.
Swanson, Eric (2017). “Measuring the Eﬀects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets,” NBER Working Paper 23311.
Swanson, Eric, and John Williams (2014). “Measuring the Eﬀect of the Zero Lower Bound on
Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,” American Economic Review 104, 3154–3185.
Taylor, John (2012). “Fiscal Follies, Monetary Mischief” interview given to Barron’s, April 12, 2012,
by Gene Epstein.
The Wall Street Journal (2010). “Q&A: IMF’s Blanchard Thinks the Unthinkable,” by Davis, Bob,
February 11, 2010, Real Time Economics.
The Wall Street Journal (2013a). “Bond Markets Sell Oﬀ,” by Burne, Katy, and Mike Chernev, June
19, 2013, Credit Markets.
The Wall Street Journal (2013b). “No Taper Shocks Wall Street: Fed ‘Running Scared’,” by Rusolillo,
Steven, September 18, 2013, Money Beat.
The Wall Street Journal (2013c). “Fed Stays the Course on Easy Money,” by Hilsenrath, Jon, and
Victoria McGrane, September 19, 2013, Economy.
The Wall Street Journal (2014). “U.S. Stocks Surge after Fed Gets Dovish on Policy,” by Vigna, Paul,
December 17, 2014, Money Beat.
The Wall Street Journal (2015a). “U.S. Government Bonds Rally after Fed Statement,” by Zeng, Min,
March 18, 2015, Credit Markets.
The Wall Street Journal (2015b). “U.S. Stocks Surge as Fed Seen Taking Time on Rates,” by WSJ
Staﬀ, March 18, 2015, Money Beat.
The Wall Street Journal (2015c). “Dollar Drops after Fed Keeps Interest Rates on Hold; U.S. Central
Bank Leaves Interest Rates Unchanged,” by Ira Iosebashvili, September 17, 2015.
The Wall Street Journal (2015d). “Rates: Lower, for Even Longer,” by Justin Lahart, September 18,
2015, C1.

42
The Wall Street Journal (2015e). “Fed Delays Interest Rate Liftoﬀ; Oﬃcials Still Expect to Move This
Year, but Express Concerns About Global Tumult,” by Jon Hilsenrath, September 17, 2015.
The Wall Street Journal (2015f). “U.S. Bond Yields Jump after Fed Fuels Rate-Increase Angst; Fed
Signals It May Raise Rates before End of Year,” by Min Zeng, October 28, 2015.
The Wall Street Journal (2015g). “Fed Keeps December Hike in Play,” by Jon Hilsenrath, October 29,
2015.
Williams, John (2013). “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary Policy,” panel
discussion at the NBER Conference on Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy,
October 18, 2013, available at http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williamsspeeches/2013/october/research-unconventional-monetary-policy-ﬁnancial-crisis.
Woodford, Michael (2012). “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,”
in The Changing Policy Landscape: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium Proceedings
from Jackson Hole, Wyoming (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City) 185–288, available
at http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp.
Wright, Jonathan (2012). “What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero
Lower Bound?” Economic Journal 122, F447–F466.

