NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF ENERGY TAXES
William A. Pizer
Steven Sexton
Working Paper 23318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23318

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by William A. Pizer and Steven Sexton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Distributional Impacts of Energy Taxes
William A. Pizer and Steven Sexton
NBER Working Paper No. 23318
April 2017
JEL No. H22,Q41,Q48
ABSTRACT
Despite popularity among economists for their efficiency, energy pollution taxes enjoy less
political support than standards-based regulation because of common perceptions that they
burden the poor relative to the rich. However, the literature on pollution tax incidence and
consumption surveys in Mexico, the United Kingdom, and the United States, suggest energy
taxes need not be as regressive as often assumed. This paper demonstrates that the incidence of
such taxes varies according to the energy commodities that are taxed, the physical, social and
climatic characteristics of jurisdictions in which they are implemented, and how the revenue is
used. It is also shown that the variation in household energy expenditure within income groups is
greater than variation across income groups in many cases. These horizontal equity impacts are
reviewed, as are their implications for policy making.

William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu
Steven Sexton
Sanford School of Public Policy
201 Science Drive, 184 Rubinstein Hall
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
steven.sexton@duke.edu

INTRODUCTION
Economists have long-favored pollution taxes and pollution permit trading as mechanisms to
control harmful emissions from energy production and consumption. These market-based
mechanisms are preferred to more prescriptive instruments like technology, emissions, and fuel
economy standards because they yield emissions reductions at least cost.1 Evaluation of the
efficiency characteristics of these policies and alternatives has occupied much of the theoretical
and empirical economics literature on pollution control.
By imposing opportunity costs on pollution emissions, these pollution pricing policies tend to
raise the price of energy according to the pollution attributed to the marginal fuel unit. It is this
transmission of the pollution cost into commodity prices that guarantees least-cost pollution
control. But, as with other public interventions, energy price increases can undermine equity
objectives, posing an equity-efficiency tradeoff familiar to public economics. In particular,
common belief holds that the poor will be relatively more burdened by energy price increases
than the wealthy. Absolute incidence analysis that considers tax burdens without regard to the
use of proceeds engenders such perceptions.
When equity concerns arise, it is often assumed they can be ameliorated by redistribution of the
substantial resource rents associated with inframarginal emissions, e.g., government revenues
from pollution taxes or permit auctions. Differential incidence analysis accounts for the
distribution of rents associated with environmental policy, which often dwarf net costs to society,
indicating a substantial capacity for policy to create winners and losers. Murray et al (2015), for
instance, estimate that the rents from proposed regulations of the U.S. power sector approach
$200 billion per year, whereas costs of the regulation are $0.5 billion. A tax on carbon dioxide
emissions in the U.S. of $15 per ton raises $102 billion in government revenues (Mathur &
Morris, 2014). And the global value of carbon pricing instruments in 2015 was $50 billion,
though this value has been greater by factors of 2 or more in years when permits traded at higher
prices (Kossoy et al., 2015). How these rents are allocated has significant distributional
implications (Metcalf 2009b). Energy taxes may impose substantially heterogeneous impacts
across income groups, and tax incidence is central to the political economy of energy taxation.
Consider, for instance, that a broad-based energy tax in the United Kingdom would raise taxes
on 16% of the direct expenditures of the poorest ten percent of households, but would tax only
4% of the direct expenditures of households in the wealthiest income decile (ONS, 2013).
Less frequently addressed than the distribution of energy tax burdens across income groups, i.e.,
vertical equity impacts, is the distribution of energy tax burdens within income groups, i.e.
horizontal equity impacts. Horizontal inequities may arise from heterogeneity in transportation
and housing patterns among households with comparable incomes. For instance, a low-income
household may reside in a coastal, city-center apartment, relying exclusively on public
transportation and never engaging an air conditioner to cool the home. A similarly poor
household might live in a single family home in a less temperate climate and rely upon a long car

1

We adopt the shorthand of referring to policies that tax or impose tradable quotas on pollution or polluting
production as “energy taxes”. This captures our primary interest in the distributional effect of higher energy prices
alongside the considerable rent or government revenue associated with market-based policies.

2

commute to the city center for work. The former, consuming less energy in the home and in
transportation, would be considerably less impacted by an energy tax than would be the latter.
Only a few papers address the horizontal equity of energy taxes. A theoretical justification for
horizontal equity concerns requires amendments to conventional social welfare functions. But to
the extent such inequities are large and of concern, they are more difficult to ameliorate than
vertical inequities because the most obvious proxy for unequal effects is the level of energy
consumption itself. Subsidies for energy-intensive, energy-taxed commodities or energyconsumption-based transfers would mitigate variation in tax treatment within income groups at
the cost of reducing the price signal necessary to efficiently reduce pollution levels.
Amid growing interest in market-based pollution control policy, this paper proceeds to (1)
present basic data on household energy expenditures in select countries in order to demonstrate
heterogeneity across countries in average fuel expenditures by income deciles, and,
consequently, heterogeneity in regressivity of energy taxation; (2) to synthesize the broader
literature that addresses under which circumstances and to what degrees are energy taxes
regressive; and (3) to demonstrate within-income-decile heterogeneity in energy expenditures
that bear on horizontal equity. A discussion of policy implications concludes. Though we refer to
energy taxes throughout, we intend that this discussion is directly relevant to proposals to tax
carbon. As Metcalf (2009a) and others have observed, “A carbon tax is in large measure an
energy tax.” Energy combustion is the predominant source of human-caused emissions, and nonenergy sources are often not subject to regulation under existing and proposed climate policies
(European Environment Agency 2011).

VERTICAL EQUITY OF ENERGY TAXES

Energy taxes are commonly assumed to be regressive (e.g., Metcalf, 2009a; Rausch, Metcalf,
and Reilly, 2011; Williams, Gordon, Burtraw, Carbone, and Morgenstern, 2015), burdening the
poor more than the rich. That is, raising the cost of fuels and energy-intensive goods implies a
larger percent loss of overall consumption for poorer households because those goods often
comprise relatively large shares of low-income household budgets. As Fullerton (2011)
observed, these direct effects of policy may also be compounded by indirect and general
equilibrium “source-side” effects that further harm the poor via costlier consumption and lower
earnings. In particular, earnings among the poor will decline amid pollution pricing to the extent
firms substitute clean capital for labor. Such fears figure centrally in the political economy of
pollution control, and in particular, climate change mitigation. Recasting a challenge posed by
Baumol and Oates (1988) two decades earlier, Fullerton (2011) urged research “to determine
whether these fears are valid, and whether anything can be done about them—other than to
forego environmental improvements.”
Heeding the challenge of Baumol, Oates, and Fullerton, and the growing policy imperative to
understand the distributional impacts of alternative pollution control policies, a relatively recent
literature has begun to demonstrate that emissions taxes and tradable permits are not universally
3

regressive. Indeed, the incidence of energy taxes depends upon the fuels and pollutants that are
targeted, the characteristics of taxed populations and their communities, how household income
is measured, and, importantly, how policy-generated resource rents are distributed.
The conventional view about the regressivity of pollution taxes and tradable permit programs is
chiefly attributable to consumption survey data that exhibit energy expenditure shares declining
in income. Much as poor households are recognized to spend relatively large shares of income on
foods, so, too, are they thought to devote relatively large shares of budgets to energy
consumption, a necessity in the developed world second-only to food. The poor are also likely to
own older vintages of energy-consuming durable goods like household appliances and
automobiles that are less energy efficient than newer models adopted by rich households.
Consumption survey data in the U.S. and other countries demonstrate that energy tax incidence
varies in predictable, if not commonly considered, ways.
Regressivity of energy tax direct effects
The vertical equity of direct energy tax impacts is assessed by comparing average energy
expenditures of households grouped according to proxies of annualized lifetime earnings,
typically annual income or annual expenditures. Where the average shares of total expenditures
(or income) devoted to energy consumption are decreasing in income across groups, energy taxes
are considered regressive because price increases raise the costs of a greater share of
consumption for the poor than for the rich. Data from the 2014 U.S. Consumer Expenditure
Survey confirm the conventional wisdom that general energy taxes in the U.S. are regressive.
The average household in the lowest decile of annual expenditures devotes nearly 15% of its
budget to purchases of electricity, natural gas, gasoline, and other fuels, whereas these energy
purchases constitute only slightly more than 5% of average total expenditures among households
in the highest expenditure decile. This regressivity is depicted in Figure 1, which shows the
average energy expenditure as a percent of annual spending by total expenditure decile for U.S.
households. It exhibits a monotonic decline of energy budget shares in expenditure deciles,
indicating that the direct effects of a broad-based energy tax would impose a greater relative
burden on poorer households in the U.S.
Electricity consumption drives much of this regressivity. U.S. households in the poorest
expenditure decile devote nearly 7% of total spending to electricity, more than triple the
electricity budget share of the wealthiest decile. As shown in Panel A of Figure 2, average
household electricity budget shares decline monotonically in total expenditures. This
phenomenon is not unique to the U.S. Virtually every country-level consumption survey exhibits
a similar pattern. Relying on data from the U.K. Living Costs and Food Survey, a similar pattern
emerges for the U.K. (see Panel B of Figure 2), where the variation in average budget shares
across the poorest and richest households is even greater than in the U.S. Electricity budget
shares decline monotonically—by a factor of eight—from the approximately 8.8% share among
the poorest households to barely 1% among the wealthiest.
Analysis of consumption data from Mexico’s 2012 National Survey of Income and Expenditure
(Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares, 2012) shows a near-monotonic decline
in electricity expenditure shares, though the decline is considerably less stark than it is in the
4

U.K. and the U.S. (see Panel C of Figure 2). Shares are smaller in Mexico compared to the U.S.
and U.K., particularly for poor households. This likely reflects differences in both electricity
prices and incomes, particularly among the poor, a point to which we return. More generally,
Flues and Thomas (2015) estimate virtually universal regressivity of electricity taxes across 21
OECD countries based on expenditure shares. This regressivity has become more pronounced in
recent years as electricity prices have increased around the world. In the U.K., for instance,
household spending on electricity increased 43% from 2002-2012, with the average household’s
electricity budget share growing more than 50%. The poorest fifth of households spent 11% of
their income on household energy in 2012, up from 8% in 2002. The richest fifth spent just 3%
in 2012 up from 2% in 2002 (ONS 2014). Similar patterns are evident in Germany and elsewhere
around Europe (BDEW 2016, Eurostat 2013, 2016). In the U.S., in contrast, electricity prices
have fallen in real terms due to the expansion of domestic natural gas production.
In contrast to electricity consumption patterns across incomes, transportation fuel consumption
patterns suggest that taxes on gasoline and diesel fuels are less regressive than are electricity
taxes. In some countries, the direct impacts of fuels taxes appear progressive. Though poorer
households in the U.S. devote greater shares of their budgets to gasoline consumption than do the
rich, this pattern is reversed elsewhere. In the U.S., gasoline purchases constitute the greatest
energy expenditure of the average U.S. household; 4.8% of expenditures are dedicated to
gasoline. The poorest households in the U.S. spend 6.5% of budgets on gasoline, compared to
only 3% among the richest U.S. households. Excepting the wealthiest decile, however, average
budget shares do not differ by more than 1.5 percentage points, as shown in Panel D of Figure 2.
In Mexico, gasoline expenditure shares increase in income, suggesting the direct effects of
gasoline taxes in Mexico are progressive, rather than regressive. Expenditure shares in Mexico
increase monotonically up to the last income decile. The poorest households spend less than one
percent of annual budgets on gasoline consumption; the decile with the highest share of gasoline
consumption spends four times more of their budgets on gasoline purchases, as shown in Panel F
of Figure 2. Fuels consumption in the UK exhibits yet a different pattern. The greatest
expenditure shares are incurred by households in the middle of the income distribution, as shown
in Panel E of Figure 2. Households in the 6th expenditure decile direct almost twice the share of
total spending to gasoline (4.0%) than the richest households (2.2%). The poorest households
spend just 1.5% of their budgets on gasoline. Thus, gasoline taxes are progressive in the U.K. up
to the 6th expenditure decile, and regressive there beyond.
Elsewhere around the world, heterogeneous consumption patterns indicate that the distributional
impacts of the direct effects of transportation fuels taxes are determined by individual country
characteristics, including vehicle ownership rates and worker commute patterns. The direct
impacts of such taxes are regressive in Austria, Switzerland, Spain, and France, among others.
They are progressive in Turkey, where Flues and Thomas (2015) estimate that only one in four
of the poorest households operates a motor vehicle compared to three in four of the wealthiest
households. Likewise, the direct effects of transportation fuel taxes are progressive in Chile and
Hungary, where the ratio of drivers to non-drivers differs across the income distribution by an
order of magnitude. Fuel taxes are also estimated to be progressive in China, Costa Rica and
Brazil. In Ethiopia, modern transportation in any form is beyond the reach of the poorest

5

households, and so a transportation fuels tax is strongly progressive, as it is also in Ethiopia,
Ghana, Kenya, Brazil, Costa Rica, and Kenya (Sterner 2012, Flues and Thomas 2015).
More generally, very low incomes among the poorest households in low and middle-income
countries imply that the direct effects of fuels taxes are uniformly progressive in those countries.
These assessments, however, ignore indirect effects of fuels taxes, focusing exclusively on
household expenditures for transportation fuels. As we later note, such taxes are likely to raise
the cost of some public transportation, upon which poor households are relatively more
dependent than rich households. Accounting for such indirect effects can change distributional
analysis. We must also be careful to avoid using expenditure shares to draw conclusions about
existing taxes. To the extent that poor households avoid private vehicle ownership and accept
inferior modes of transportation in order to avoid existing transportation fuels taxes, then this
averting behavior burdens the households in ways not reflected in cross-sectional consumption
data.
Even if direct effects of fuels taxes suggest their progressivity in poor countries, regressivity in
richer countries, however, is not implied. Indeed, a transportation fuels tax is regressive in the
U.S., but fairly neutral in the U.K., Germany, and France. It is progressive in Sweden. This
heterogeneity in direct impact distributions among high-income countries is indicative of
differences in commute patterns. In the U.S., low-income individuals are likely to own
automobiles that they drive relatively long distances for work commutes. In much of Europe,
long commutes are rarer (Stutzer & Frey, 2008). Further, robust public and mass transit systems
serve to lower the share of private vehicle use (Haghshenas & Vaziri, 2012). Hence, poor
households in the U.S. may be particularly disadvantaged by gasoline taxes.
Flues and Thomas (2015) estimate slight regressivity of heating fuels taxes across 21 select
OECD countries, though in some instances, e.g., Germany, the taxes are estimated to be
progressive. The regressivity of heating fuels taxes is moderated to the extent that poor
households live in smaller and multifamily homes with less area to heat and less heat loss
(Hernández, 2014). On the other hand, the regressivity of heating fuel taxes may be exacerbated
if poor households live in older, less efficient housing stock and own older, less efficient
household appliances. In India and Tanzania, taxes on biomass and kerosene are highly
regressive (Datta 2012; Mkenda, Mduma, Ngasamiaku 2012).
Much as vehicle ownership rates and other characteristics of transportation infrastructure induce
variation in consumption shares across income groups within countries and within income
groups across countries, so to do the magnitudes of consumption shares devoted to other energy
commodities differ in predictable ways. For instance, natural gas budget shares decrease
monotonically in total expenditure deciles in the U.K., but they increase monotonically in
Mexico. The difference is reflective of high dependence upon natural gas for home heating in the
U.K. Not only does Mexico have lower demand for home heating because of its relatively
warmer climate, but lower per capita incomes also depress the rate of home heating capital
adoptions in Mexico relative to the U.K. While incomes are similar across the U.S. and the U.K.,
the U.K. climate requires little home cooling, whereas air conditioners consume considerable
electricity across large portions of the U.S. due to high seasonal temperatures. Consequently, the
level of spending on electricity in the U.S. is much higher than it is in the U.K. In spite of
6

Mexico’s warm climate, electricity budget shares in Mexico are relatively low, likely due to low
air conditioner penetration rates in Mexico (Davis, Fuchs, & Gertler, 2014). In developing
countries, where rates of residential electrification are low, the generally regressive electricity tax
may exhibit progressivity.
The progressivity of the direct effects of energy taxes can be summarized by the Suits
coefficient, a tax incidence measure analogous to the Gini coefficient.2 It is calculated as the
share of area below a 45-degree line that falls between the 45-degree line and a Lorenz curve that
depicts the relationship between cumulative tax share and cumulative income share. Positive
Suits values reflect progressive taxes, whereas negative values reflect regressive taxes. By
construction, the index is bounded by -1 and 1. The Suits index is useful for defining whether the
direct effects of particular taxes are progressive or regressive when expenditure shares do not
increase or decrease monotonically across income groups and have distributional impacts that are
ambiguous upon visual inspection. Perhaps more importantly, the Suits index provides a singlevalued index with which to more easily compare the progressivity of alternative taxes or
common taxes imposed in different jurisdictions. For example, Figure 3 maps the Suits index of
a uniform tax on home energy consumption for 30 countries based upon analysis of Eurostat
data. The energy expenditures reflect home heating, cooling, and electricity costs. The Suits
coefficients for all but one of these countries is negative. In only the Former Yugoslav Republic
are home energy taxes progressive. This corresponds with the intuition that energy taxes will be
more progressive in countries with low incomes that put energy-consuming durable goods
beyond the reach of poor households. There is, however, no strong relationship between per
capita incomes and home energy tax regressivity, reflecting the importance of country-specific
housing and climate characteristics. Such taxes would be only slightly regressive in Finland and
Sweden, suggesting regressivity may partly depend upon inequality in the overall income
distribution.
Accounting for indirect effects of energy taxes

2

Define the Suits coefficient, S, as:
1

𝑆 = 2 ∫(𝑦 − 𝑇(𝑦))𝑑𝑦,
0

where y indexes the cumulative share of total national income (or total expenditures) earned by households ordered
from poorest to richest. The function T is cumulative share of a particular tax paid by those households earning y.
For example, suppose the poorest 40 percent of households earn y = 20 percent of national income. And suppose,
for a particular tax, those households paid 10 percent of the total tax burden. Then, T(0.2) = 0.1. By construction,
T(0)=0 and T(1)=1. The Suits coefficient is equal to zero for a proportional tax, less than zero for a regressive tax,
and greater than zero for a progressive tax. It is bounded by -1 and 1. An approximation for use with decile-level
aggregation computes the Suits coefficient as:
10

𝑆 = 1 − ∑[𝑇(𝑦𝑖 ) + 𝑇(𝑦𝑖−1 )](𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦𝑖−1 ).
𝑖=1

7

The foregoing analysis has the benefit of simplicity and transparency; it relies only upon
assessment of primary consumption data, typically obtained by household surveys. But it
considers only the direct incidence of energy taxes, ignoring indirect effects of higher energy
costs and of behavior changes undertaken by firms and agents to avert energy taxes. An
accounting of indirect effects can dramatically change incidence analysis. For instance, as
Sterner and others have noted, public transportation and taxi services are among the industries
most exposed to fuel taxes. Their costs are likely to increase in proportion to their respective fuel
cost shares. The distributional impacts of fuel taxes will therefore depend upon the relative
dependencies of rich and poor households on transportation services. In Mexico, for instance, the
direct effect of fuel taxes is progressive, but because the poor spend about 12% of annual
budgets on public transportation and the rich spend essentially nil, the regressivity of indirect
transport effects yields a net effect of fuel taxes on transportation-related expenditures that is
slightly regressive (Sterner & Lozada, 2012). In Costa Rica, a gasoline tax is estimated to be
progressive whereas a diesel tax is estimated to disproportionately burden the poor because
diesel is predominantly used in public transportation. In Europe, the distributional impacts of
fuel taxes are not changed when indirect transportation effects are considered, whereas fuel tax
progressivity increases in poor countries like Ethiopia and China (Mekonnen, Deribe, &
Gebremedhin, 2013; Sterner & Cao, 2012; Sterner & Carlsson, 2012).
Alternative methods of tax incidence analysis account explicitly for indirect effects of energy
taxes in economy-wide energy tax incidence analysis. Employing methods pioneered in this
context by Fullerton (1995) and Metcalf (1999), several studies of carbon tax incidence have
accounted for indirect tax impacts by tracing the effects of higher primary fuel costs through the
economy using input-output (I-O) matrices that relate industry outputs to inputs of other
industries. Whereas low-income households are disproportionately impacted by the direct
impacts of some energy taxes because of the relatively large budget shares they devote to some
direct energy expenditures, they are likely to be less affected by indirect impacts than highincome households.
In general, to the extent that high income households consume more overall, then an accounting
of indirect effects of energy taxes is expected to increase the progressivity of the taxes (Hannon,
Stein, Segal, & Serber, 1978; Herendeen, Ford, & Hannon, 1981). Bull, Hassett, and Metcalf
(1994) evaluate the direct and indirect effects on U.S. households of a $0.27 per Btu tax on select
energy commodities, including coal, gasoline, natural gas, and electricity. Using input cost
shares of 82 commodities, they estimate that the Btu tax directly increases the cost of the various
energy commodities by 3-16% and induces indirect cost increases on other goods ranging from
1-2.5%. More than half of the average household burden of the Btu tax is estimated to be
attributable to indirect tax impacts. The direct effect of the tax is regressive, but the indirect
component of the tax is progressive, yielding a tax that is on net approximately proportional,
though slightly regressive.
Mathur and Morris (2014) use similar methods to estimate the incidence of a tax of $15 per ton
of carbon dioxide emissions. They estimate that indirect effects constitute less than one-third of
the tax burden for low consumption deciles and more than half of total burden for highconsumption deciles. Accounting for indirect effects, yields a carbon tax that nevertheless
appears to be modestly regressive on net; poor household expenditures increase more than two
8

percent whereas rich household expenditures rise by 1.3%. Indirect tax impacts are greatest
among the air transport, other transport, automotive parts, food at work, and recreation
expenditure categories of the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey (Mathur and Morris 2014).
Such I-O approaches account for indirect effects of energy taxes as higher energy costs raise the
costs of inputs across industries. But they, too, assume no behavior change. As Hassett, Mathur
and Metcalf (2011) note, higher prices for industrial inputs and consumer products will induce
substitution away from carbon-intensive items, eroding the carbon tax base, but lowering the
burden for agents by less than tax collections fall because of the costs of averting behavior.
Analyses that hold consumption quantities constant thus constitute first approximations of
impacts. They are more reflective of impacts in the short-run when options for averting higher
prices are minimal.
In the longer run, averting behavior and substitutions certainly make demand more elastic. The
averting behavior is presumably less costly than the avoided tax, so agent welfare rises relative to
the short-run effect. Elastic demand also implies that tax-induced price increases may not be
fully passed onto consumers but may, instead, be passed backward onto owners of capital and
energy resources. Studies employing a third analytical approach, that accounts for behavior
change, suggests regressivity is overstated in short run analyses to the extent owners of capital
and natural resources are higher income (Bovenberg and Goulder 2001; Metcalf et al. 2008).
Such computable general equilibrium (CGE) models can also account for innovation, which may
have distributional consequences, too. CGE models, however, must impose numerous
assumptions about the functional forms of supply and demand that afford them less transparency.
CGE models and simpler partial equilibrium models (which allow behavioral change in some but
not all markets) also employ energy price statistics that may vary in their fidelity around the
world.
Measurement issues
The incidence of energy taxes depends upon the taxed energy commodity and the setting in
which the tax is imposed. The estimation of such incidence also depends upon whether indirect
effects and behavior change are considered. It also depends critically upon how income is
measured. Stratification of households by annual expenditures, as is done here, is commonly
preferred to annual income measures of tax incidence because expenditures track more closely
lifetime income than does contemporaneous income (Poterba, 1991). Annual income is subject to
shocks due to spells of unemployment, health problems, and changes in family conditions that
exaggerate the regressivity of energy taxes (Poterba, 1989; Bull, Hassett, & Metcalf, 1994).
Annual income also exhibits well-known lifecycle patterns in earnings and asset accumulation,
which cause them to reflect poorly the current or future economic circumstances of some subsets
of the population, e.g., young workers and the elderly. Under the Permanent Income Hypothesis
(Friedman, 1957), annual consumption is less sensitive to shocks and exhibits less severe life
cycle patterns than does annual income because of consumption smoothing behavior.3

3

Bull, Hassett and Metcalf (1994) observe in U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey data that consumption tends to
closely follow income, exhibiting a “marked hump-shaped pattern” over lifetimes, rather than the relatively flat
consumption pattern posited by the Permanent Income Hypothesis. Therefore, they account for energy tax incidence

9

Incidence calculations that rely upon annual income as opposed to annual consumption tend to
exhibit greater regressivity of electricity, gasoline, and broad-based energy taxes. Even the
distinction between progressive and regressive can change. For example, Sterner (2012) finds
regressivity is exaggerated by income-based measures in France, Germany, Spain, Sweden, and
the UK. And, whereas annual income strata reveal fuel taxes in Germany and Sweden to be
regressive, expenditure strata indicate they are, instead, progressive. Use of expenditure strata
also render progressive taxes in China more neutral than income strata suggest.
Addressing vertical equity concerns
Given fuel-specific heterogeneity in tax incidence, distributional objectives may be better
accommodated by fuel-specific or sector-specific policy. Yet a basic tenet of microeconomics
dictates that efficient pollution control policy not preferentially target particular sources of
emissions. Rather, all polluters should face a common price per unit of pollution in order to
achieve least-cost abatement. Fowlie, Knittel, & Wolfram (2012), for instance, estimate that the
heavy regulation of pollution from smokestacks relative to emissions from automobile tailpipes
raises the cost of pollution abatement in the U.S. by $1.6 billion annually. Nevertheless, sourcespecific policies may be more expedient for historical, technological, or political economy
reasons, including distributional reasons.
At the same time, low budget shares for energy in some countries, including Finland, France,
Ireland, Mexico, and Spain, suggest that distributional concerns in these countries may be over
wrought, irrespective of the country and fuel-specific incidences of prospective taxes. In these
countries, energy expenditure shares are 5% or lower for the poorest 20% of households,
implying a burden of only several hundred dollars even from energy taxes that increased energy
costs by one-half. The distributional impacts of the generally regressive electricity tax are also
relatively small. The average U.S. household spends 4% of its annual budget on electricity. In
Mexico, the electricity expenditure share is only 2%. These small expenditure shares limit the
magnitude of income redistribution accomplished via the direct effect of energy taxes regardless
of differences in consumption shares across poor and rich households.
Rather than reducing the pollution tax or ignoring its distributional effects, one could marry a
regressive energy tax with a progressive redistribution of revenues. Distinct from other forms of
environmental regulation, pollution taxes generate government revenues that can be used to
accomplish government objectives, including neutralizing the distributional impacts of the
pollution taxes themselves, e.g. via new transfer programs or adjustments to existing taxes and
transfers. A number of economic studies have considered the differential incidence of energy
taxes under various assumptions about how energy tax revenues would be expended. As Metcalf
(2009b) observes, the use of proceeds bears critically on distributional impacts. Mathur and
Morris (2014), for instance, estimate that if 11% of revenues from a $15 tax per ton of carbon
dioxide were returned to the poorest twenty percent of households in some way, then these
households would, on average, be no worse off because of the carbon tax. Tradable permit
programs can similarly generate revenues if the permits are auctioned by the government, though

on lifetime consumption by relating household consumption to typical lifetime consumption profiles for similar
households.

10

alternative allocation mechanisms generate rents elsewhere in the economy and introduce
distinct equity impacts.
The recycling of pollution tax revenues can have important efficiency and distributional
implications. In fact, the earliest literature considering pollution tax swaps, dating at least to
Tullock (1967), focused on the efficiency improvements associated with substitution of pollution
taxes for distortionary taxes, independent of environmental improvements. Because
environmental taxes also introduce efficiency costs, the sign and magnitude of the net efficiency
improvements from pollution tax swaps vary according to which taxes are adjusted (Bovenberg
& de Mooij, 1994; Carbone, Morgenstern, Williams III, & Burtraw, 2013; Cramton & Kerr,
2002; Fullerton & Metcalf, 2001; Goulder, 1995, 2002; Goulder & Bovenberg, 2002; Goulder,
Parry, Williams III, & Burtraw, 1999; Parry, 1995; Parry & Bento, 2000).
Efficiency goals in revenue recycling may also be at odds with objectives of neutralizing the
regressivity of the pollution taxes, themselves. For instance, lump sum, homogeneous per capita
rebates achieve progressivity of the pollution tax and rebate package, but they do not improve
marginal work incentives, which are diminished by the pollution tax (Goulder, 1995; Rausch et
al., 2011). A reduction in marginal income tax rates would reduce distortions in the labor market,
and dramatically lower the cost of pollution taxes, but at the cost of burdening the poorest
households three times more than the richest households in relative terms (Dinan, 2012; Goulder,
1995; Parry & Bento, 2000; Rausch et al., 2011; Rausch & Reilly, 2012). Only 30 percent of
households in the lowest income quintile and 64 percent of households in the second-lowest
income quintile would benefit from a reduction in income taxes (Dinan, 2012).
Dinan (2012) enumerates potential revenue and expenditure mechanisms to address
distributional concerns and highlights the challenges in ensuring low income households are
made whole and economy-wide costs are minimized. For instance, a revenue-neutral payroll tax
rebate on the first $3,660 of earnings would return $560 per worker, sufficient to compensate the
average low-income household for the cost of a tax equal to $28 per ton of carbon dioxide. It
would be progressive across households with earnings, providing benefits that constitute a
greater share of income to poor households. But households without earnings—just less than half
of all households in the lowest fifth of the income distribution—would be uncompensated.
Recycling of pollution taxes via increased generosity of existing transfer programs could also
reduce pollution tax regressivity, though recipiency varies considerably even within low income
deciles. Automatic indexing of transfer programs and the tax system also contributes marginally
to reducing regressivity of pollution taxes (Dinan, 2012).
Metcalf (1999) develops one potential revenue-neutral, non-regressive pollution tax swap. The
proposal raises $126 billion in revenues from taxes on carbon, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and
particulate matter emissions and from gasoline and diesel purchases. These fund a four-percent
across-the-board income tax cut, a $150 income tax credit per person, and an exemption from
payroll taxes for the first $5,000 in earnings. The environmental taxes are equal to seven percent
of income for households in the lowest annual income decile and 1.6% for wealthy households.
The revenue recycling blunts the tax regressivity, with approximately the bottom third of the
income distribution receiving tax reductions equal to four percent of income. The top third of the
distribution receives cuts equal to 1.5-2.7% of income. Still, the net effect of the tax reform is to
11

reduce the progressivity of the tax system, as the upper half of the income distribution receives
tax cuts and the lower half incurs tax increases. Comparing effects on the basis of a lifetime
income proxy (see Metcalf 1999), the tax swap looks more progressive, with small tax cuts
received by households in the middle eight deciles of the income distribution. No group’s tax
burden changes by as much as one half-percent of annual lifetime income. The progressivity
could be enhanced by scaling payroll tax exemptions to family size and by increasing the
refundable tax credit to $300 per exemption.

ENERGY TAX IMPACTS ON HORIZONTAL EQUITY
Most discussions of equity focus on whether a policy creates a more or less equitable distribution
of income. This is determined by the average policy impact for individuals at various income
levels as captured visually by figures in the preceding section as well as quantitative measures
like the Suits index. A progressive policy puts a proportionally higher burden on richer families
and, by construction, leads to a more equitable income distribution.
The emphasis in the literature on the extent of vertical equity ignores welfare changes occurring
to households within income groups. For example, a payroll tax reduction financed by a
pollution tax may raise the income of some households in the lowest income decile and lower the
incomes of others. This within-income group heterogeneity in impacts does not affect
evaluations of regressivity that have occupied much of the previous literature. Nevertheless, such
unequal policy treatment of households in equal income positions may bear on social welfare or
the policymaker’s objective. One place we have seen such a focus is regarding regional impacts
(e.g., Blonz et al 2010; Bull et al 1994; Mathur and Morris 2014)
With coarse income categories, e.g., quintiles or deciles, incomes will vary non-trivially within
income groups. But even for households with identical incomes, policy impacts may vary due to
household characteristics. One household may be located in a temperate coastal region and
comprised of earners who walk to work. Another household may be located in a community with
a less-forgiving climate, long work commutes, and limited public transit. Thus, the impacts of
pollution taxes and any revenue recycling will vary across households of similar incomes
according to climate, characteristics of the electricity generating fleet, housing stock, and energy
efficiency of household durables, as well as commute distance, job density, transportation
infrastructure, income sources and transfer benefits recipiency, among perhaps other
characteristics. While capital investments, e.g., energy efficient durables, can mitigate the tax
burden over time, such investments themselves constitute burdens to households as do other
averting behaviors. In the case of capital investments, poor households may be capital
constrained so that such investments become more difficult for very households facing the
largest increase in energy expenditures. This could exacerbate inequality over time. Narrower
income slices of the data will not eliminate this heterogeneity, and, therefore, will not eliminate
observed inequities in policy treatment.
Such horizontal inequity may be important for at least several reasons. First, a progressive tax
reform would surely be viewed less favorably by those concerned with equity if the apparent
progressivity is a consequence of massive, positive gains to a few winners within low-income
12

groups. This would be even more likely if the gain of few winners concealed broad, if small,
harm to a majority within the same low-income group. Second, the shares of winners and losers
and the magnitudes of their gains and losses may have political economy implications. For
instance, political support for a policy may require a broad set of winners within income classes.
Alternatively, the minority with much to gain or lose from policy reform may be more likely to
exert effort to influence political outcomes. This likely motivates interest in regional impacts,
given the connection to political representation in government. Third, society may conclude that
it is simply unfair to effectively tax individuals with the same income differently. A number of
authors have articulated this perspective, though not without considerable debate, a discussion of
which we return to briefly below.
Measuring and Understanding Horizontal Equity
Whether horizontal equity matters to society surely depends on the degree of heterogeneity
within income groups. And yet, there is relatively little work in the literature concerning any
heterogeneity of energy tax effects within income groups. Poterba (1991), an early exception,
shows considerable within-decile variation in gasoline expenditure shares even though gasoline
expenditure shares do not vary considerably across income groups. Variability in expenditure
shares is also revealed to be greatest among low income groups. For instance, one-third of
lowest-income-decile households incur no gasoline expenditures, but about one-sixth spend more
than 10% of total expenditures on gasoline. In the highest income decile, in contrast, all
households incur some gasoline expenses and none spends more than 10% of annual budgets on
gasoline. Unsurprisingly, then, when Rausch et al. (2011) simulate the effects of a carbon tax in
the United States using the Consumer Expenditure Survey, they find significant variation in
incidence within income groups, particularly among low income groups. Indeed, the
interquartile range (25th to 75th percentiles) among the lowest decile includes the mean
expenditure shares across all the other deciles. Thus, intra-class variation among the poorest
households exceeds variation in mean impacts across income groups.
This kind of variation in energy expenditures can be seen graphically for the U.S., Mexico, and
the U.K., in Figure 4. For each expenditure decile, and for each country, the figure shows the
interquartile range of expenditure shares (from the 25th to the 75th percentile, “the box”) along
with the range of values that are within 1.5 times the interquartile range (“the whiskers”). Panels
A to C show intraclass expenditure shares variation for electricity, and panels D to F do similarly
for gasoline.
For electricity (panels A-C), we see the same consistent pattern reported by Rausch et al of
considerable within-decile variation. There is more variation in expenditure shares for the
poorest households than for the richest households, with a monotonic decrease in between. For
the U.S. and U.K. (panels A-B), the variation in electricity shares across deciles appears
comparable to within-decile variation. But the within variation is still large: Expenditure on
electricity reaches 20 percent for some households while others have no (direct) expenditures.
Some in the UK even have negative expenditures, reflecting various rebate programs. For
Mexico (panel C), we noted earlier that the variation across deciles was smaller than in the U.S.
and U.K., and here we see it is smaller than the within-decile variation as well.

13

Expenditure shares for gasoline (panels D-F) only amplify the idea that within-decile variation is
larger than across-decile variation. For gasoline, the interquartile ranges for the decile with the
most variation (#1 for the U.S., #6 for the U.K., and #8 for Mexico) encapsulate the medians – if
not the interquartile ranges – of all the other deciles. For the U.K. and Mexico, this reflects a
very large number of people with no direct expenditures on gasoline. In the U.S., fewer
households are without expenditures, but the interquartile range of 3 to 8 percent for the poorest
decile still almost spans the interquartile ranges for the other nine deciles. Only the 75th
percentile for the 4th decile is slightly higher.
Thus, there appears to be more than enough variation within income groups to consider
horizontal equity concerns. Moreover, the level and variation is greater than the variation in
tobacco or alcohol expenditures, which can also have unpriced social costs. They have an
interquartile range of only 0-1 percent (or less) for all deciles in the U.S. These micro data from
national consumption surveys demonstrate that energy expenditures vary non-trivially within
income groups. In many cases, such variation exceeds variation in expenditure shares across
income groups. The data also reveal that many low income households would be unaffected by
taxes on specific fuels because they consume none of them. For example, in the U.K. and
Mexico, more than 75 percent of poor households has no gasoline expenditures. This includes
the lowest decile in the U.K., and the lowest three deciles in Mexico.
Social Welfare Theory
Even with the relatively large horizontal equity effects suggested in these figures, their
implications for policy are not obvious. There has been considerable debate in the academic
literature about the theoretical basis for horizontal equity considerations. Whereas vertical
equity concerns can be motivated by reliance upon a utilitarian social welfare function and
declining marginal utility of income, horizontal inequities stem from changes in net incomes for
households of the same income levels. This requires going beyond a conventional social welfare
function. In particular, concern about horizontal equity must give the initial position (prior to the
energy tax) some special status so that deviations from that position are an appropriate welfare
metric.
Kaplow (1992, 2000) has presented forceful arguments against horizontal equity as a distinct
construct. Why should variation in policy outcomes for otherwise similar individuals be viewed
as any different from a lottery? And, if viewed as a lottery, what is the basis for an initial
position receiving special status?4 Others have taken a decidedly different view. Even if a
public policy acts like a lottery, it is not (Musgrave 1990). Winners and losers arise based on
rules determined by government, not luck. Another possible argument for horizontal equity
comes from recent work on preferences, framing, and context. There is little doubt that
individuals themselves are influenced by relative incomes, in addition to absolute levels of
income (e.g., Easterlin 2003), though it is not obvious what this implies for welfare (Shafir
2016).

4

Kaplow has argued out that, viewed as a lottery, horizontal equity concerns can lead to a violation of the Pareto
principal, as society might fail to enact a policy that was preferred by the individuals facing it.

14

It is certainly possible to define welfare functions in terms of changes in income (e.g., Auerbach
& Hassett, 2002; Bourguignon, 2011; Slesnick, 1989). A focus on changes conveys special
welfare significance to the pre-policy status quo – that either it does not matter at all or that the
income level associated with the status quo is valued differently than changes in income
associated with the policy. As suggested by the above references, this notion has been the focus
of a spirited debate—one we have no hope of settling here.
Concerns in Practice
Even for those inclined to value horizontal equity, concern about the horizontal equity impacts
may at least partly depend upon the inevitability or invidiousness of inequities. That is, the
extent to which averting behavior can reduce inequities at low cost. For example, we know that
within-income-group variation in energy expenditures is attributable, at least in part, to regional
variation in climate and geography (Aldy et al., 2010; Rausch et al., 2011). To our knowledge,
however, the fraction of horizontal variation that can be explained by such physical
characteristics of regions is poorly understood (Pizer, Sanchirico, & Batz, 2009). It is generally
suggested that other demographic characteristics (beyond income and geography) play a smaller
role in energy costs within income groups. But this research typically lacks information about
housing or commute characteristics, which likely cause a substantial degree of variation. Very
little is known about how individual behaviors—like thermostat or water heater settings—induce
variation in energy consumption.
If the latter is a large driver of intra-class heterogeneity, and if it can be diminished by low cost
behavioral changes among policy “losers”, then observed variation in energy consumption
should weigh less heavily among equity concerns. Changes in household appliance settings, for
instance, can occur quickly and at low pecuniary and time cost, and perhaps at very low total
cost. Changes in household location, housing stock, place of employment, commute mode, and
energy efficiency of household durables are much costlier in the short run, and, therefore, are
likely to occur more slowly. To the extent these differences drive intra-class variation, then
horizontal inequities may be more persistent, less readily resolved, and of greater ethical
concern.
Regardless of one’s perspective on this ethical debate, there is clearly a practical issue associated
with characterizing the effects within income groups. Figures relating energy expenditure shares
to income deciles simply do not communicate to policymakers what are the full set of
distributional impacts. And the intra-class changes clearly matter in a political economy sense.
Swapping incomes among an income class, for example, may not affect the vertical equity at all.
But it clearly creates opposition among the one-half of affected individuals who must be worse
off.
It is also more difficult to ameliorate horizontal equity effects compared to vertical equity
effects. That is, much of the literature on vertical equity effects emphasizes the ability of
planners to adjust those effects with suitable changes to income taxes or other taxes and transfer
programs. It is less obvious how one might mitigate horizontal effects from energy taxes without
attenuating the efficiency gains of the energy tax, itself (e.g., by simply using lower energy tax
rates). One-time transfers based on historical use could compensate policy losers for durable
15

investments made in the absence of policy. But it is not obvious where to find the data to
implement such transfers. Moreover, even with perfect information on such exposure, such onetime transfers may over-compensate. One may consider, for instance, that forward-looking
households have anticipated energy taxes, and such prices were already capitalized in asset
prices at the time they were acquired.
Alternatively, one could focus on the variation due to geographic location. The federal
government could rebate some portion of the energy tax revenue to households via states,
counties, or perhaps utility service areas, in well-defined geographic areas. Based on aggregate
energy demand information for the region, such an approach could reduce inequality across
regions. It would also diminish energy tax efficiency by muting the choice to migrate across
regions, but it is unclear whether such a margin is significant or not. In addition, other sources of
within-region variation would remain unaddressed.

POLICY IMPLICATIONS
What are we to make of the observed variation in energy expenditures and literature on
distributional effects of energy taxes? We see five takeaway messages.
1. Energy taxes are not always regressive, particularly gasoline taxes in poorer countries.
Though pollution taxes are often assumed to burden poor households relatively more than
rich households, it is evident this common belief is not always correct. The incidence of
pollution taxes varies along at least several dimensions. First, the regressivity of any
particular pollution tax depends upon the taxed commodity. As we have shown,
electricity taxes tend to be highly regressive, whereas gasoline taxes are less regressive,
and may be progressive in some settings and over some ranges of income. Secondly, a
country’s overall level of economic development is important. Energy taxes in general,
and gasoline taxes in particular, tend to exhibit progressivity in less developed countries
wherein the poor may not have electrified homes or access to automobiles or affordable
public transportation. Third, the incidence of energy taxes varies according to the climate
and cultural characteristics of jurisdictions, along with features of the housing stock and
transportation and electricity generation infrastructure. Thus, the regressivity of gasoline
taxes differs across comparably rich countries like the U.S., with its longer commutes and
less extensive public transport, and the U.K. Such taxes are highly regressive in the U.S.
and, yet, exhibit progressivity over low to middle incomes in the U.K. In addition to
contextual differences across countries, conclusions about regressivity can be influenced
by measurement. Regressivity is diminished when evaluated using proxies for lifetime
earnings, e.g., annual expenditures, as opposed to annual earnings. The former is widely
considered by economists to better measure the well-being of households but is more
difficult to observe and measure. Regressivity is also generally reduced when indirect tax
effects are considered in addition to the direct effects upon which some of the literature
focuses exclusively.
The regressivity of energy taxes is likely to change over time. In particular, as incomes
grow in developing countries, we would expect regressivity to increase based on
16

observed consumption patterns. Moreover, holding energy consumption fixed,
regressivity may be expected to grow even more if incomes grow disproportionately
among the rich or if energy prices grow faster than incomes.
2. Variation in energy expenditure shares is typically larger within rather than across
income groups. The horizontal equity impacts of energy taxes are less remarked upon
than the vertical equity implications. Yet, there is evidence that within-income-group
variation in tax burden exceeds that variation across income groups. This intra-class
variation tends to be greatest for the poorest households, some of whom consume no
gasoline or electricity while others devote 20% or more of their budgets to purchases of
either electricity or gasoline. Such variation among households of similar incomes stems
from differences in climates, geography, built environment, and households’
characteristics and behaviors. Some behaviors like thermostat settings can be easily
changed to avoid higher tax burdens, but other characteristics like commute length and
housing characteristics are immutable except by changing jobs or moving. On the one
hand, this points to a significant potential for disadvantaged groups—identified by region
or other demographic commonality—to mobilize political opposition in the face of such
taxes. On the other, there is a longstanding ethical debate on the extent to horizontal
equity should matter for social welfare or other objectives of a planner.
3. Even if energy taxes change resource distributions, the cause for policy concern is not
pre-ordained. To the contrary, in some settings, the direct expenditures on particular
energy commodities comprise only a limited portion of household budgets. In Mexico,
average electricity expenditure shares do not exceed 2% across all income deciles. Such
small expenditure shares, thus, limit the magnitude of redistribution that is induced by
energy taxes, and, in particular, limit the losses to those poor households that are hurt by
regressive energy taxes. Indeed, as Dinan (2012) noted, even a substantial tax on carbon
equal to $103 per ton would impose added costs on the average lowest-income-quintile
household of $425 per year.
4. Unlike other forms of regulation, energy taxes generate revenues that governments can
use to accomplish distributional goals, at least regarding regressivity. Thus, even in
settings where energy taxes would impose relatively greater burden on the poor, a series
of transfers or changes to other taxes can theoretically be devised to (1) make income
populations whole, at least on average, or (2) design a proportional, or distributional
neutral tax reform, or (3) perhaps, even to increase the progressivity of government tax
and transfer programs. In recycling the revenues of energy taxes, however, planners face
a tradeoff between accomplishing progressivity and achieving efficiency. The costs of
energy taxes, particularly the tax interaction effects, can be minimized by reducing other
distortionary taxes, but the most distorting taxes also tend to be the most progressive,
such that tax rate reductions yielding the greatest cost reductions also exacerbate
regressivity.
While vertical equity concerns can be ameliorated by devising tax swaps, they likely will
leave in place horizontal inequity because of variations within income classes. For
example, capped reductions in payroll taxes financed by energy taxes can improve
17

progressivity but do not aid households without any earnings, including the unemployed
and retired. Admittedly, to the extent such households are recipients of indexed transfers
and benefits, then the price increases induced by higher energy costs will translate into
somewhat more generous benefits from such programs, e.g. Social Security (Rausch et al
2010; Fullerton, Heutel, and Metcalf 2012.) Achieving horizontal equity would require
not only targeting non-earners, but also compensating relatively more those households
that consume more electricity. But rebates dependent upon current (or post-policy)
energy consumption serve to reduce the price signal that the energy tax induces in order
to avoid the externality-induced deadweight loss to begin with. Thus, eliminating
horizontal equity comes at a potentially high efficiency cost. One-time rebates could be
offered to households in hot climates or to households with long-commutes to
compensate them for the policy-induced devaluation of long-lived investments. Such
one-time rebates, if not predicted by households, have the benefit of avoiding distortions
to behavior. It may, however, lead to overcompensation if the energy taxes themselves
were predicted and capitalized.
5. In summary, energy taxes are a cost-effective policy to address energy externalities but
raise legitimate distributional concerns in some cases that may or may not be easily
rectified. Policymakers frequently face efficiency-equity trade-offs in designing public
policies. With energy taxes, revenues can help reduce distributional problems to an
extent. But if horizontal equity is a concern, then more costly (less efficient) regulation
may be desired. For example, choosing energy efficiency standards for homes, cars, and
appliances over energy taxes may lead to uneconomic and suboptimal investment. And,
by not raising the price of electricity, such standards will fail to incentivize other energy
saving behavior. But these higher societal costs may come with more modest
distributional impacts making such standards a better choice. Alternatively, it may be
desirable to introduce energy taxes more gradually as less-malleable household behaviors
become changeable.

18

REFERENCES
Auerbach, A. J., & Hassett, K. A. (2002). A New Measure of Horizontal Equity. American
Economic Review, 92(4), 1116–1125. https://doi.org/10.1257/00028280260344650
Baumol, W. J., & Oates, W. E. (1988). The Theory of Environmental Policy. Cambridge
University Press.
BDEW (2016). " BDEW electricity price analysis: households and industry." BDEW: Berlin.
Accessed online:
https://www.bdew.de/internet.nsf/res/17C4483BB515C7F4C125807A0035E077/$file/16
1124_BDEW_Strompreisanalyse_November2016.pdf

Blonz, Joshua, Dallas Burtraw, and Margaret Walls (2010). Climate policy's uncertain outcomes
for households: The role of complex allocation schemes in cap-and-trade. The BE
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy. 10(2).
Bourguignon, F. (2011). Status Quo in the Welfare Analysis of Tax Reforms. Review of Income
and Wealth, 57(4). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4991.2011.00480.x
Bovenberg, A.L. and L. Goulder. (2001). "Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts of CO2
Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?" In C. Carraro and G.E. Metcalf, eds,,
Distributional and Behavioral Effects of Environmental Policy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 45-85.

Bovenberg, A. L., & de Mooij, R. A. (1994). Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation.
The American Economic Review, 84(4), 1085.

19

Bull, N., Hassett, K. A., & Metcalf, G. E. (1994). Who Pays Broad-Based Energy Taxes?
Computing Lifetime and Regional Incidence. Energy Journal, 15(3), 145–164.
Carbone, J., Morgenstern, R. D., Williams III, R. C., & Burtraw, D. (2013). Deficit reduction and
carbon taxes: Budgetary, economic, and distributional impacts. Resources for the Future.
Retrieved from http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/RFF-RptCarbone.etal.CarbonTaxes.pdf
Cramton, P., & Kerr, S. (2002). Tradeable carbon permit auctions: How and why to auction not
grandfather. Energy Policy, 30(4), 333–345. https://doi.org/10.1016/S03014215(01)00100-8
Davis, L. W., Fuchs, A., & Gertler, P. (2014). Cash for coolers: evaluating a large-scale
appliance replacement program in Mexico. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 6(4), 207–238.
Dinan, T. (2012). Offsetting a Carbon Tax’s Costs on Low-Income Households: Working Paper
2012-16 (Working Paper No. 43713). Congressional Budget Office.
Easterlin, R. A. (2003). Explaining happiness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(19), 11176–11183.
European Environment Agency (2011). "Energy and non-energy related greenhouse gas
emissions." European Environment Agency: Brussels. Accessed online:
http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/specification.2010-0809.2026605593/assessment-1

Eurostat (2013). "Analysis of EU-27 household final consumption expenditure." Eurostat:
Brussels. Accessed online: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php/Archive:Household_consumption_expenditure_-_national_accounts
20

Eurostat (2013). "A Quarter of household expenditure allocated to housing." Eurostat: Brussels.
Accessed online: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7747215/2-29112016AP-EN.pdf/39954d6e-eb8a-4b1b-98db-ad1d801128aa

Flues, F., & Thomas, A. (2015). The distributional effects of energy taxes (p. 0_1,2-3,6-74).
Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Fowlie, M., Knittel, C. R., & Wolfram, C. (2012). Sacred Cars? Cost-Effective Regulation of
Stationary and Nonstationary Pollution Sources. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 4(1), 98–126. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.4.1.98
Friedman, M. (1957). The permanent income hypothesis. In A theory of the consumption
function (pp. 20–37). Princeton University Press.
Fullerton, D. (1996). "Why Have Separate Environmental Taxes?" In Poterba, J.M, ed., Tax
Policy and the Economy. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Fullerton, D. (2011). Six Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy: Six Distributional
Effects of Environmental Policy. Risk Analysis, 31(6), 923–929.
Fullerton, D., & Metcalf, G. E. (2001). Environmental controls, scarcity rents, and pre-existing
distortions. Journal of Public Economics, 80(2), 249–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00472727(00)00087-6
Fullerton, D., G. Heutel, and G.E. Metcalf (2012). "Does the indexing of government transfers
make carbon pricing progressive?" American Journal of Agricultural Economics 94 (2):
347-353.
Goulder, L. H. (1995). Effects of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with Prior Tax Distortions: An
Intertemporal General Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 29(3), 271–297.
21

Goulder, L. H. (2002). Environmental policy making in economies with prior tax distortions.
Edward Elgar Publishing. Retrieved from
http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:elg:eebook:2462
Goulder, L. H., & Bovenberg, A. L. (2002). Environmental taxation and regulation in a secondbest setting. Handbook of Public Economics, Ed. Martin Feldstein and Alan J. Auerbach,
3, 1471–1545.
Goulder, L. H., Parry, I. W. H., Williams III, R. C., & Burtraw, D. (1999). The cost-effectiveness
of alternative instruments for environmental protection in a second-best setting. Journal
of Public Economics, 72(3), 329–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(98)00109-1
Haghshenas, H., & Vaziri, M. (2012). Urban sustainable transportation indicators for global
comparison. Ecological Indicators, 15(1), 115–121.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.09.010
Hannon, B., Stein, R. G., Segal, B. Z., & Serber, D. (1978). Energy and Labor in the
Construction Sector. Science, 202(4370), 837–847.
Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. "The consumer burden of a carbon
tax on gasoline." Fuel Taxes and the Poor: The Distributional Effects of Gasoline
Taxation and Their Implications for Climate Policy, Thomas Sterner, ed., Resources for
the Future Press (2011).

Herendeen, R. A., Ford, C., & Hannon, B. (1981). Energy cost of living, 1972–1973. Energy,
6(12), 1433–1450.
Hernández, D. (2014). Affording Housing at the Expense of Health Exploring the Housing and
Neighborhood Strategies of Poor Families. Journal of Family Issues,
0192513X14530970. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192513X14530970
22

Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI). (2012). Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y
Gastos de los Hogares.
Kaplow, L. (1992). Note on Horizontal Equity, A. Fla. Tax Rev., 1, 191.
Kaplow, L. (2000). Horizontal equity: new measures, unclear principles. National bureau of
economic research. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w7649
Kossoy, A., Peszko, G., Oppermann, K., Prytz, N., Klein, N., Blok, K., … Borkent, B. (2015).
State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2015 (World Bank Other Operational Studies No.
22630). The World Bank. Retrieved from
https://ideas.repec.org/p/wbk/wboper/22630.html
Mathur, A., & Morris, A. C. (2014). Distributional effects of a carbon tax in broader U.S. fiscal
reform. Energy Policy, 66, 326–334.
Mekonnen, A., Deribe, R., & Gebremedhin, L. (2013). Fossil Fuel and Food Tax Incidence in
Ethiopia. Eastern Africa Social Science Research Review, 29(2), 1–23.
Metcalf, G. E. (1999). A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms. National Tax Journal,
52(4), 655–681.
Metcalf, G.E., S. Paltsev, J.M. Reilly, H.D. Jacoby and J. Holak. (2008). "Analysis of U.S.
Greenhouse Gas Tax Proposals," MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
Change, Report # 160.
Metcalf, G. E. (2009a). Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 3(1), 63–83.
Metcalf, G.E. (2009b). "Market-based policy options to control US greenhouse gas
emissions." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(2): 5-27.

23

Musgrave, Richard (1990). Horizontal equity, once more. National Tax Journal 43(2) pp 113122
(ONS) U.K. Office of National Statistics (2014). "Household Energy Spending in the UK, 20022012." U.K. Office of National Statistics: London.
Parry, I. W. H. (1995). Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 29(3), S64–S77.
Parry, I. W. H., & Bento, A. M. (2000). Tax Deductions, Environmental Policy, and the “Double
Dividend” Hypothesis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 39(1),
67–96.
Pizer, W., Sanchirico, J. N., & Batz, M. (2009). Regional patterns of U.S. household carbon
emissions. Climatic Change, 99(1–2), 47–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-009-9637-8
Poterba, J. M. (1989). Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes. The
American Economic Review, 79(2), 325.
Poterba, J. M. (1991). Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive? Tax Policy and the Economy, 5, 145–164.
Rausch, S.,G. Metcalf, J. Reilly, and S. Paltsev. 2010. “Distributional Implications of Alternative
U.S. Greenhouse Gas Control Measures.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy 10(2), Symposium.
Rausch, S., Metcalf, G. E., & Reilly, J. M. (2011). Distributional impacts of carbon pricing: A
general equilibrium approach with micro-data for households. Energy Economics, 33,
Supplement 1, S20–S33.
Rausch, S., & Reilly, J. (2012). Carbon Tax Revenue and the Budget Deficit: A Win-Win-Win
Solution? (Technical Report). MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
Change.

24

Shafir (2016). Preference Inconsistency: A Psychological Perspective. In Matthew Adler and
Marc Fleurbaey eds The Oxford Handbook of Well-Being and Public Policy. Oxford
University Press..
Slesnick, D. T. (1989). The Measurement of Horizontal Inequality. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 71(3), 481–490. https://doi.org/10.2307/1926905
Sterner, T., & Cao, J. (2012). Is Fuel Taxation Progressive or Regressive in China? In T. Sterner
(Ed.), Fuel Taxes and the Poor: The Distributional Effects of Gasoline Taxation and
Their Implications for Climate Policy. Routledge.
Sterner, T., & Carlsson, E. (2012). Distributional Effects in Europe. In T. Sterner (Ed.), Fuel
Taxes and the Poor: The Distributional Effects of Gasoline Taxation and Their
Implications for Climate Policy. Routledge.
Sterner, T., & Lozada, A. (2012). The Income Distribution Effects of Fuel Taxes in Mexico. In
T. Sterner (Ed.), Fuel Taxes and the Poor: The Distributional Effects of Gasoline
Taxation and Their Implications for Climate Policy. Routledge.
Stutzer, A., & Frey, B. S. (2008). Stress that Doesn’t Pay: The Commuting Paradox*.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 110(2), 339–366. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14679442.2008.00542.x
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) of the UK. (2013). Living Costs and Food Survey,
2013.
Tullock, G. (1967). The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft. Economic Inquiry,
5(3), 224–232.

25

Williams, R. C., III, Gordon, H., Burtraw, D., Carbone, J. C., & Morgenstern, R. D. (2015,
March). The initial incidence of a carbon tax across income groups. National Tax
Journal, 68(1), 195+.

26

FIGURES AND TABLES

10
5
0

% of Expenditures

15

Figure 1: Average U.S. Household Energy Expenditure as Percent of Total Expenditure by
Expenditure Decile

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

decile
Electricity
Natural Gas

Gasoline
Fuel Oil and Other Fuels

27

10

Figure 2: Average Electricity and Motor Fuels Expenditures as Percent of Total Spending for
U.S., U.K. and Mexico Households by Expenditure Decile

0

2

4

% of Expenditures

6

8

Panel A: Electricity: USA

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

9

10

9

10

decile

0

2

4

6

% of Expenditures

8

Panel B: Electricity: U.K.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

decile

1
.5
0

% of Expenditures

1.5

2

Panel C: Electricity: Mexico

1

2

3

4

5

6

decile

28

7

8

4
0

2

% of Expenditures

6

8

Panel D: Motor fuels: U.S.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

9

10

9

10

decile

2
0

1

% of Expenditures

3

4

Panel E: Motor fuels: U.K.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

decile

2
1
0

% of Expenditures

3

4

Panel F: Motor Fuels: Mexico

1

2

3

4

5

6

decile

29

7

8

Figure 3: Suits Index for 30 European Countries (possible range is -1 for the most regressive to
+1 for the most progressive).

30

Figure 4: Intra-class variation in electricity and gasoline expenditures by total expenditure decile.
For each decile (1 = poorest, 10 = richest), the blue shaded box shows the interquartile range
(IQR) with the median indicated by a line; the whiskers show the range of values within 1.5 times
the IQR on either side of the box..
Panel A: Electricity: USA
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-5

0

5
10
% of expenditures

15

20

excludes outside values

Panel B: Electricity: U.K.
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-5

0

5
10
% of expenditures

15

20

excludes outside values

Panel C: Electricity: Mexico
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-5

0

5
10
% of expenditures

excludes outside values

31

15

20

Panel D: Gasoline: USA
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0

5

10
% of expenditures

15

20

excludes outside values

Panel E: Gasoline: U.K.
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0

5

10
% of expenditures

15

20

excludes outside values

Panel F: Gasoline: Mexico
1
2
3

decile

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0

5

10
% of expenditures

excludes outside values

32

15

20

