                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        OPERATIVE GIFT AND BEQUEST MOTIVES




                                  Andrew B. Abel




                              Working Paper No. 2331




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




Previous versions of this paper were written while I was an Associate Professor
at Harvard University. I thank Olivier Blanchard, Stanley Fischer, Lawrence Summers,
John Taylor and Philippe Weil for helpful discussions. Financial support from
the Amoco Foundation Term Professorship in Finance, the National Science Foundation
and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #2331
                                                                 August 1987




                            Operative Gift and Bequest Motives




                                             ABSTRACT




   The Ricerdlon Equivalence Theorem, which is the proposition that changes in the timing of
lump-sum taxes have no effect on consumption or capital accumulation, dependson the existence
of operative altruistic motives for Intergenerational transfers. These transferscan ha bequests
from parents to children or gifts from children to parents. In order for the Ricardlan
Equivalence Theorem to hold, one of these transfer motives must he operative In the sense that
the level of the transfer Is notdetermined by a corner solution resulting from a binding
non-negativity constraint This paper derives conditions that determine whether the bequest
motive will be operative, the gift motive will be operative, or neither motive will
                                                                                      he operative
In a   model in which consumers are altruistic toward their parents end their children.




                                                                Professor Andrew Abel
                                                                Department of Finance
                                                                The Wharton School
                                                                Steinberg Hall, Room 2319
                                                                University of Pennsylvania
                                                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                  Operative Gift and Bequest Motives

                                          Andrew B. Abel*



      In a pioneering paper, Barro (1 974) demonstrated that if consumers have operative

 altruistic bequest motives, then a reduction in lump-sum taxesaccompanied by the issue of an

 equal amount of government bonds has no effect on the eflocation ofresources. Berro stressed

 that this result, which has come to be known as the Picardian
                                                                 Equivalence Theorem, requires
 that the bequest motive be operative. In this context, the term "operative" means that

 equilibrium bequests are determined by tangencij conditions rather thanby corner solutions

 such as meg arise from binding non-negativity constraints. If the bequest motive is not

operative, then the Ricardian equivalence result presented by Barro does not hold and there are

 important effects associated with the governments choice between debt finance and taxes.

   More recently, Buiter (1 979) and Carmichael (1 982) haveanalyzed the altruistic gift

motive in which consumers obtain utility from the utility of their parents and thus may be

motivated to give resources to their parents. Their analyses confirm Barro'sclaim (p. 11 04)

that if the gift motive is operative, then the PicardianEquivalence Theorem holds. If the gift

motive is not operative, then the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem fails to hold.

     Because the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem depends on an operative motive for private

intergenerational transfers, it is important to determine the conditions under which either

transfer motive will be operative. Several papers have studied whether the bequest motive is

operative in a variety of different models1 but the literature does not contain an analysis of the

conditions that determine whether the gift motive is operative. In this paper, I will study the

conditions for an operative gift motive. However, rather than confine theanalysis to a model in

which consumers have only a gift motive, I will assume that individual consumers have

two—sided transfer motives. That is, I will assume that individual consumers have both a gift

motive and a bequest motive as in Burbidye (1 983), Buiter and Carmichael(1 984) and
                                                2



Burbidge (1 984).2 In the steady state equilibrium, the gift motive may be operative, the

bequest motive may be operative, or neither motive may be operative. If either of the

intergenerational transfer motives is operative, then the Picardian Equivalence Theorem holds;

however, if neither motive is operative, then changes in the timing of lump—sum taxes have

important effects on the intertemporal and intergenerational allocation ofresources.3

  The major goal of this paper is to determine conditions under which each of the

intergenerational transfer motives is operative if individual consumers have two- sided transfer

motives. As a prerequisite to this analysis, I will discuss, in section I, appropriate restrictions

on the gift motive and the bequest motive. In section II, I will discuss the restrictions on

two-sided transfer motives implied by intergenerational consistency. The specification of the

motives for intergenerational transfers has important implications for a wide range of issues

extending betjond the effects of fiscal policy, including the intergenerational transmission of

inequality' and for the behavior of financial markets, especially markets for life insurance and

annuities.5 In section III I discuss the endogenous determination of equilibrium factor prices

end then describe the steady state equilibrium. The conditions under which one or the other of

the transfer motives is operative are derived in section IV. Concluding remarks are presented

in section V.



I. A Two-Sided Transfer Motive

   In this section I present a two-sided transfer motive and discuss appropriate restrictions on

the parameters of the transfer motive. Consider a representative consumer economy in which

each consumer lives for two periods. A generation t consumer is born at the beginning of period

t,consumesc1inperiodtatage1 andconsumesc211 inperiodt+1 atage2. Let ut=

u(c1 t,c2t÷ 1 ) be the utility that a generation t consumer obtains directly from his own

consumption. Defining ult as u(c1 t,c2t+ 1 )/c1t and              as Ou(c1 t,c2t÷ 1 )/ac2t÷ 1'

assume that ult > 0,        1 > 0 end that Uit(O, ) = oo =       i (,0). Also, assumethat u(;)
                                                  3



  is strictly concave and that Cit and c2t+ are normal goods.

    In addition to obtaining utility directly from his own consumption, a generation t consumer

 obtains utilitity from the consumption of his parents and from theconsumption of all of his

 descendents. In particular, I will use the Buiter-Carmichael( 1 984) generalization of the

 Burbidge( I 983) two-sided utility function


                        Ut + aut_l + PJut+j                                                    (1)
                                               j= 1

 The parameter measures the strength of the bequest motive andsatisfies the restriction 0

 < 1. The assumption that must be less than one is the standard assumption in the literature6

 and is necessary and sufficient for the transvers&ity condition tohold in the steady state with

 constant per capita consumption. The nonnegative parameter a measures the strength of the gift

 motive. There is no compelling reason to restrict a to be less than one.7'8 I will show in

section II that intergenerational consistency (defined below) places en upper bound on the

admissable values of a, but depending on the value of , this upper bound may be greater than,

equal to, or less than one.

   The two—sided utility function in (1) nests both the one-sided altruistic bequest motive and

the one—sided altruistic gift motive. The one-sided altruistic bequest motive is often specified

recursively as

                              Vt = Ut + Pvt+i                                                  (2)
When a=0, the utility function in (1) is consistent with therecursively specified altruistic

bequest motive in (2).

   The one—sided gift motive is often specified recursively asVt   = Ut + t- 1 which can be
rewritten as

                      Vt = ut + aut_l + a2vt_2
From the point of view of the generation t consumer with the one-sided gift motive in (3), the

utility of his granarent, t2 is fixed; mcimization of the utility function in (3) is
                                                  4


equivalent to maximization of the utility function in (1) when = 0. Thus, the utility function

in (1) nests the one-sided altruistic bequest motive end the one-sided altruistic gift motive.10

     Before presenting the consumers budget constraint, it is necessary to describe the

demographic composition of dynastic families. Each consumer lives for two periods and has

n      1 children at the beginning of the second period of his life. This assumption follows the

standard convention of ignoring the fact that it takes two people fromdifferent families to

produce children.        In the model, each consumer has n children and has one parent.12

      Let g be the gift given by a generation t consumer to his parent who is a generation t- 1

consumer. This gift is made during period t wI         is the only period during which both

generations are alive. Because the generation t consumer has one parent and n children, this

                              in period t and receives gifts totalling n g11.   in period t+ 1.
consumer gives a gift of

      Let b1 be the bequest given by a generation t consumer to each of his n children (generation

t+ 1 consumers) in period t+ 1. The generation t consumer receives a bequest b1_ 1 from his

 parent in period 1. In addition to receiving the bequest b1. 1 in period t, the generation t

 consumer inelastically supplies one unit of labor in period t and receives the real wage rate wt

 in period t. The generation t consumer is retired in period 1+ 1. Letting Rt+ 1 be the gross rate

 of return on saving held from period t to period t+ 1 , the budgetconstraint of a representative

 period I consumer is

                                        +   rtbt = Iwt + bt_iIRt+i + ng+                           (4)
         (cit+gOPt+i + C.f
                                                                          on his own
 The left hand side of (4) contains the generation t consumerS expenditure

    consumption in the two periods of his life plus the expenditure onbequests to children and a gift

    to his parent. The right hand side of (4) contains the three sources of the generation t

    consumers resources labor income, bequest received from his parent and the gifts received

    from his children.

         I use the standard Nash assumption that in choosing optimal values of consumption,

    bequests, and gifts, the consumer takes as given theactionsof all other members of his dgnastic
                                                   5



 family. In particular, in choosing       the generation t consumer takes as given the gifts given by

 his siblings to their common parent. The maximization problem of a representative generation

 t consumer is to maximize (1) subject to (4), the non- negativity constraints 13 g1 0 and bt

  0 and subject to the given values of the decisions of all other members of the dynastic family.

 Recalling that u1 and u2t+ 1 are the derivatives of u1(c1 t,c2t+ 1 ) with respect to its first and

 second arguments, respectively, the first-order conditions are

                                      =
                                              P1.11 u2141                                         (5)
                            u1                 a u2              (holds with equality if g1 > 0) (6)

                                             (a/n) u1       1    (holds with equality if bt > 0) (7)
Equation (5) characterizes the optimal intertemporal allocation of the consumer's own

consumption over his lifetime, If the consumer reduces cit by one unit he suffers a utility loss

of u1 However, if this unit of the consumption good is saved, thenc2 1+ i can be increased by

    1 units which increases utility by t+ 1 u2 t i At the optimum, the utility loss in period t

is equated to the utility gain in period t+ 1 ,as indicated by (5).

   Equation (6) characterizes the optimal gift g1. In period 1, the generation 1 consumer can

reduce his own consumption by one unit, suffering a utility loss of ult, end can increase the gift

g1 by one unit, increasing his parent's utility by u21. The increase in parent's utility raises the

generation t consumer's utility by a u2t. If the optimal gift is at an interior optimum(g > 0),

then the utility loss (u1 t from the reduction in c11 will equal the utility gain (a u2t) from the

increased gift. If, at = 0, the utility loss from reduced consumption exceeds theutility gain

from an increased gift, then the consumer will not make a positive gift, and the non-negativity

constraint on the gift binds strictly. It is worth noting that if, for some unspecifiedreason,

siblings jointly decide on the level of the gift to give to their common parent, or equivalently, if

each consumer is assumed to have 1 /n parents, then the first-order condition (6) must be

amended to


                ult               a n u2               (holds with equality if   > 0)            (6')
                                               6


Equation (6) corresponds to the first-order condhon derived by Carmichael (1982) and is

consistent with the conditions in Buiter and Carmichael (1 984).

   Equation (7) characterizes the optimal bequest bt. The generation t consumer can reduce

c2 t+ by one unit end increase the bequest to each child by 1 In, which increases the utility of

each child by (1 /n)u1       If the    uest motive is operative (bt > 0), then the utility loss

from decreased consumption is equal to the utility gain from increasing the bequest. If the

non—negativity constraint binds strictly, then the inequality in (7) holds strictly.



II. I nteraenerational Consistencu under a Two— Sided Motive

   In this section I discuss the conditions under which the decisions of different generations

within a family are "intergenerationally consistent." There are two aspects of intergenerational

consistency. First, there is the notion of dynamic consistency introduced by Strotz (1 956).

Strotz showed that for a particular formulation of the intertemporal utility function in which

the discount factor between two periods depends only on the length of time between the two

periods, and not on calender time, the consumption plan will be dynamically inconsistent unless

the discount factors are geometrically declining. In the context of the utility function in (1), it

is important that the weights on ut+ are geometrically declining for j = 0,1 ,2        If these

weights were not geometrically declining, then the consumption plan would suffer from dynamic

inconsistency in Strotzs sense, if the bequest motive were operative.

   The second notion of intergenerational consistency isthat the first-order conditions of

parents and their children should not contradict each other. More precisely, consider the

first—order condition characterizing the optimal gift from a child to a parent at time t

(equation(6)) and the first—order condition characterizing the optimal bequest from a parent to

a child at time t (equation (7) with the time subscript decremented by 1). If both of these first

order conditions are to hold, then

                                      au2           (1/n)ult                                      (8)
                                                   7



 Beceu i t i .umed to be positive, equation (8) implies that

                                          a            n                                            (9)
 Equation (9) along with the restrictions 0 < 1 end a 0 describe the adrnissable values of

 the parameters a and under the restriction that the two-sided transfer motive is

 intergenerational ly consistent.



 Ill. Cornoetitive Factor Prices and Steedu State EQuilibrium

    n the previous sections analyzed the behavior of an individual dynastic familytaking as

given the factor prices wt and R. These factor prices, which are determined endogenously in

competitive factor markets, depend on the productive technology. Let Vt be gross output in

period 1. This output is hornogenous and can either be consumed or used as capital in the

following period. The level of output is determined by a neoclassical linearly homogeneous

production function t=           N1) where Kt is the aggregate stock of capital and Nt is the

number of young consumers who each supply one unit of labor. The production function F( , ) is

a gross production function in the sense that the aggregate capital stock, K. 1 is equal to

output, Y1, minus total consumption, N1 c11 + N1_ 1c2t, in period t. The production function can

be written in intensive form as y = f(k) where y is the output- labor ratio, k is the

capital—labor ratio, f > Oandf" <0.

   In competitive factor markets, each factor is paid its marginal product

                = R(k)           f'(k1)                                                         (10)
           wt = w(k1)            f(k) — ktf (k1)                                                (11)
   The steady state is characterized by constant values of consumption for bothyoung consumers

and old consumers. Therefore, ult and u21 are each constant in the steady state. Equations (5)

- (7) imply that in the steady state the interest rate R must satisfy the following condition

                                    a        R     c n/                                         (12)
If one of the transfer motives is operative, then the steady state interest rate is at one of the
                                                 8



boundaries in (12). In particular,

                                   R   = n/                  ifb>O                            (13a)

                                   P=        a               ifg>O                            (13b)

Srnce is restricted to be less than one, equation (1 3e) yields the well—known result that a

steady state with operative bequests is undercapitalized relative to the Golden Rule (i.e., R>n).

However, since a can be less than, greeter then, or equal to n, equation (1 3b) implies that a

steady state with an operative gift motive can be either overcapitalized, undercapitalized, or at

the Golden Rule. This result is contrary to the result in Carmichael (1 982) that a steady state

with an operative gift motive is overcapitalized. Carmichael's overcapitelization result follows

from his assumption that the gift parameter a must be less than one and from his implicit

assumption that siblings jointly determine the gifts to their common parent according to (6').

Under this pair of assumptions P = na < n in the steady state with operative gifts.

   Finally, observe from (1 3a,b) that if a n, then either bequests or gifts must be equal to

zero in the steady state. In the case with a = n, which is on the boundary of the acknissable

region of the parameter space, end which corresponds to Burbidge's specification1 ', it is

possible for both gifts end bequests to be positive in the steady state. However, as shown below

in section IV, the direction of net intergenerational transfers will be determinate in this case.

Also note that with cif5 = n, the range of possible values for the steady state interest rate in (1 2)

is degenerate the steady state interest rate is equal to n/ = a regardless of the level of

government debt which is serviced by lump-sum taxes. Finally, since at least one of the

transfer motives is operative, the Picardien Equivalence Theorem holds in this case, as argued

by Burbidge.



IV. When Are the Transfer Motives Ooerative?

    The neutrality of government debt requires that one of the transfer motives is operative

both before and after the change in government debt, and, furthermore, that the same motive is
                                                  9



operative after the change as before the change. Since the Picardian Equivalence theorem rests

on the existence of an operative transfer motive, the question of when one of the transfer

motives will be operative takes on great importance. In this section, I extend Weils (1 987)

analysis of the one—sided bequest motive in (2) to the case of the two-sided utility function in

(1).
   Recall that K1 1 is the total stock of capital at the beginning of period t+ 1. All of this

capital is held by generation t consumers and, furthermore, this is the only asset held by these

consumers. Therefore, letting St denote the saving of a representative generation t consumer, it

follows that Kt+ 1 = N1 st which can be written as

                           =                                                                     (14)
                    flkt       St

Rather than determine the saving of a generation t consumer as the solution to an

infinite—horizon maximization problem, I will follow WeiFs approach and ask the following

question How much would a generation 1 consumer save if he earns a wege income wt, receives

a bequest bt_i from his parent, receives gifts totalling ng 1 from his n children, earns a rate

of return R1÷ i , and, in addition, if he is arbitrarily required to leave a bequest of bt to each of

his children and to give a gift of g1 to his parent? Although I cannot answer this question

explicitly at this level of generality, the saving function will have the following form

             s1 = s(bt_i                 wt , n(g1÷1 —bt)         Rt+i)                          (15)
The saving function in (1 5) depends on first-period income, second-period income, and the

rate of return to saving. Under the assumption that cit and c21 1 are both normal goods,

s(.,.,.) is increasing in its first argument and is decreasing in its second argument. Substituting

the competitive factor prices (1 0, 11) into (1 5), then substituting the resulting expression

into (1 4) and restricting attention to the steady state yields

         h(k,b-g)          s(b—g+w(k), n(g-b), R(k)) - nk = 0                                    (16)
We follow Diamond (1 965) and confine attention to locally stable steady states (i.e., steady

states for which hk c 0). To avoid any complications which matj arise from multiple locally
                                                 10



stable steady states, I follow Well and assume that there is a unique locallystable steady state.

Let k = k*(z) be the steady state capital labor ratio when b — g = z.

   As a point of reference, consider the steady state of the Dmrnond (1 965) economy in which

consumers have neither a bequest motive nor a gift motwe. Let k0 denote the steady state

capital- labor ratio in the Diamond economy. Because b = g = 0 in the Diamond economy, it

follows that

                             kD = k*(0)                                                       (17)
    Recall that the saving function s( , , ) is increasing in its first argument and is decreasing in

its second argument. Therefore, it follows from the definition of h(k, z) in (1 6) that h(k, z)

0 and hence k*(z) isan increasing function of ) 5 Because k(z) >0 and R(k) <0, equation

(17) implies that

                  >                    >
            b-g-0            OS      kkD CS                R_RD
                                                              >
                                                                                              (18)


      I now present simple conditions which are sufficient for each type of transfer motive to be

operative. Essentially, in order for a transfer motive to be operative, it must be sufficiently

strong. Proposition 1 , which provides a sufficient condition for operative bequests, is due to

Weil( 1 987); Proposition 2, which provides a sufficient condition for operative gifts, is new.



Proposition 1. If       > n/RD, thenb>0.


Proof: If > n/RD, then (12) implies that P0 > n/ P. Therefore, (18) implies that b-g>

0, which along with the non- negativity constraint on g, implies that b> 0. q.e.d.



Proposition 2. Ifa>RD,theng>0.
                                                  11




Proof: ft a > RE', then (1 2) rnphes that pD       cx P. Therefore, (I 8) implies that b-g < 0,

which along with the non- negativity constraint on b, implies that g) 0. q.e.d.



If both transfer motives are sufficiently weak, then there will be no transfers in either

direction. Precise conditions are given by



Preposition 3. If n/ RE', Ci RD, j < ,,, then b = g = 0.


Proof (by contradiction): Suppose that b> 0 so that (1 3a) implies that P = n/ RD.

Therefore, (18) implies that b-g 0 which implies that g> 0. However, if g> 0, then (1 3b)

implies that P = a which contradicts the statements above that P = n/ end o < n. Therefore, b

= 0. A similar line of argument proves that g=0. q.e.d.

   Finally, we consider the case in which o = n, which corresponds to the case considered by

Burbidge)6 In general, it is possible for there to be both positive gifts and positive bequests in

the steulj state. Nevertheless, one can determine whether the net flow of intergenerational

transfers is from parents to chuck-en (b-g> 0), from chuck-en to parents (b-g < 0), or zero.


Proposition 4. If a( = n, then b-g - 0 as               RD - n/p = a.

Proof: Supposethot RD> n/a. It followsfrom (12) that RE'> Rwhich ,eccordingto(18),

implies that b-g> 0. Similarly, RD <cx implies that RD < R which, according to (18) implies

that b-g c 0. Finally, RD = n/ = a implies that RD = R which implies that b-g = 0. q.e.d.

    The results concerning when the transfer motives will be operative are summarized in

Figures 1 end 2. The distinction between Figures 1 and 2 is that the utility function u(.,.) and

the prockiction function f( ) are such that the steady state of the Diamond economy is efficient in

Figure 1 but is inefficient in Figure 2. If the Diamond economy is efficient , then Figure 1

indicates that either the gift motive or the bequest motive could be operative; if neither motive
p

                cc= ni




          Bequests




U                                                               a
                           fl   RD
               Figure 1 - Diamond steady state is efficient




                       =




         Transfers'
                         :Gifts


    Ii                       ri
                                                                    a
                Figure 2 - Diamond tead'j state i inefficient
                                                    12



 is sufficiently strong, then neither motive will be operative. If the Diamondeconomy is

 inefficient, then Figure 2 indicates that, for admissable values of , the bequest motive cannot be

 operative, which is consistent with Wails (1 987) results. However, the gift motive can be

 operative if it is sufficiently strong. Again, if neither motive is sufficiently strong, then
 neither will be operative.

    The conditions for operative transfer motives are stated in terms of R0, thesteady state

 interest rate in the Diamond model, It was Weils insight to recognize that the RD provides a

 useful summary of the utility function u( , ) and the production function f( ) for determining

whether a transfer motive will be operative. Nevertheless, it would be useful to state the

conditions for operative bequests in terms of underlying preferences and technology. As a step

toward this goal, I will relate pD to consumer behavior expressed in terms of the average

propensity to consume and to the production function expressed in terms of the capital share of

income. Then, for a specific example I will express RD directly in terms of theparameters of

preferences and technology.

   Let Cit denote st/wt, the average propensity to save out of wage income and let + denote the

capital share in income, Ptkt/yt. Because the production function is assumed to belinearly

homogeneous, the labor share in income, wt /        is equal to I - +t so that

                         wt =        E(1-$t)/$tJ Rtkt                                            (19)
It follows from (1 9) and the definition of theaverage propensity to save, Cii, that

                          St =       E(l-$t)/+tiRtkt                                             (20)
Equating the left hand side of (1 4) to the right hand side of (20) in the steady state of the

Diamond economy yields

                        nkD = Ci((1-$)/$] RDICD                                                  (21)
It follows immediately from (21 ) that

                          RD =       n$/[Ci(1-4)J                                                (22)
   It follows from (22) that in the Diamondeconomy, the steady state interest rate tends to be
                                                13



large when either the capital share in income, 4, is large or the average propensity to save, 6, iS

small. Of course, the capital share, 4, and the average propensity to save, 6, are, in general,

endogenously determined. However, there is a special case in which both 4 and 6 are exogenous

parameters. tf the utility function is logarithmic, u(c1 u c21.. 1 (1 -6)ln Cit + i fri C2t+ 1'
0 <o < 1 , then the average propensity to save out of wage income is constant and equal to 6. If the

production function is Cobb-Douglas, f(k)     Ak, 0 ' 4 < 1 and A > 0, then the capital share in
income is constant and equal to4. In this special case, the expression for RD on the right hand

side of (22) is simply a function of the parameters of preferences and technology. Substutiting

this expression for RD in Propositions 1 - '1 delivers, for this example, a complete

characterization, in terms of the parameters of preferences and technology, of situations in

which the transfer motives will be operative or inoperative.



V. Concludina Remarks

    The effects of changes in the timing of lump-sum taxes depend crucially on whether the

motives for intergenerational transfers are operative. In this paper I have derived conditions

which determine whether the bequest motive is operative, the gift motive is operative or neither

motive is operative. When neither motive is operative, then changes in the timing of

lump—sum taxes affect the intertemporal and intergenerational allocation of resources.

    The formal results presented in Propositions 1 -4 and summarized in figures 1 and 2 apply

only to the steady state of a representative consumer economy. Future research should be

devoted to extending the analysis to the transition path outside the steady state and should analyze

economies with interesting heterogeneity. The reason for extending the analysis to the

transition path is that the Ricardien Equivalence Theorem requires that all consumers in all

generations be linked by operative intergenerational transfer motives. If some generation has

 no operative intergenerational transfer motive, then at least some changes in the timing of

 lump—sum taxes will affect the intertempor& allocation of resources. The magnitude of the
                                                   14


 effect would depend on, among other things, the extent and sort of heterogeneity among

 consumers. For example, heterogeneity with respect to initial wealth or labor income may lead

 to a situation in which some consumers have operative bequest motives while otherconsumers

 in their cohort face binding constraints. In this situation, the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem

 would not hold; the extent of the departure from the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem, i.e., the

 magnitude of the effect of fiscal policy, would depend on the proportion of consumers who face

 binding constraints. In a subsequent paper, Abel (1 986) I have begun to explore some of these

 issues. However, the model in that paper is restricted to Cobb—Douglas technology, logarithmic

utility with a bequest motive but no gift motive, and the heterogeneity is restricted to initial

wealth. tn addition to analyzing more general utility and production functions, future research

should analyze the effects of fiscal policy in the presence of heterogeneous labor productivity,

secular productivity growth and two-sided transfer motives.

   An additional avenue for future research is to analyze bequest and gift behavior under more

general forms of intergenerational transfer motives. Bernheim (1 987) has argued that there is

no reason to insist on Jnemic consistency in modelling the consumption and transfer behavior

of families. Recently, Rag (1 987) has examined specifications of intergenerational altruism in

which a consumer obtains utility from the utility of many subsequent generations in hisfamily,

in addition to obtaining utility directly from his own consumption. If, for example, aconsumer

cares about his gran&hildren's utility in addition to his childrens utility and his own

consumption, then, in general, the consumption decisions of different generations within the

family will display dynamic inconsistency. In addition, Ray has shown that under this sort of

altruistic utility function, it is possible for the steady state to be characterized by positive

bequests end a dynamically inefficient overaccumulaton of capital. The determination of

conditions for the bequest motive to be operative or inoperative remains anopen question in this

more general framework.
                                                15



                                          Footnotes



*Depertment of Finance, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

1 9104-6367. Previous versions of this paper were written while t wasan Associate Professor

at Harvard University. I thank B. Douglas Bernheirn, Olivier Blanchard, Stanley Fischer, Miles

Kimball, Lawrence Summers, John Taylor and Philippe WeB for helpful discussions. Financial

support from the Amoco Foundation Term Professorhip in Finance, the National Science
Foundation and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

1. See Drazen(1 978), WeiKi 987), Cukierman(1 986), Cukierman and Meltzer(1 986),

Feldstein(1 986) and Abel(1 986).

2. Recently, Kimball (1 986) has extended the analysis in this paper to analyze the conditions

under which there will be an operative bequest motive under two-sided altruism.

3. As pointed out by Carmichael, in order for the Ricardian Equivalence to hold, the same

transfer motive must be operative both before and after the change in fiscal policy.

4. See Abel (1985), Kotlikoff, Shoven andSpivak(1 984), andlomes(1 981).

5. See, for example, Fischer(1 973), Friedman and Warshawsky(1 984).

6. See, for example, Buiter(1 979), Buiter and Carmichael (1 984), Carmichae)(1 982),

Burbidge(1 983,1 984), Weil(1 987).
7. Buiter and Carmichael (1 984) note that the specification of the gift motive as Vt = Ut +

t— 1 implies that Vt = j=O°°               They argue that if ci> 1 , then the utility Vt 5

unbounded as t approaches   infinity. However, even if ti    1 , the maxirnation of (3) subject to

the constraints on the generation t consumer is a well-defined maximization problem.

   Alternatively, Buiter and Carmichael point out that if v1 is constant over time, then the

"steady state utility function" is v(c1 ,c2)         u(c1 ,c2)/1 1 —cii , where c1 is the steady state

consumption of consumers of age i. They observe that if a> I , then "the model has the peculiar

characteristic that the steady-state utility function v() has the opposite properties to the
                                                  16



 consumption utthty u(); for example, if u() is positiveend increasing in c1 andc2,v() is

 negative and r9s?,1g in c1 and c2."(p.763) However, the "steady state utility function" v()

 is not a useful construct. Saniuelson (1 968) showed that the steady state capital stock is lower

 than the Golden Rule capital stock if consumption is allocated to maximize the weighted sum of

 utility of all generations, with declining weights on future generations (which is formally

 identical to the problem faced by consumers with a bequest motive in (2)). Maximization of the

 "steady state utility function" led Buiter (1 979) to conclude erroneously that if either the

 bequest motive or the gift motive is operative, then a competitive economy would attain the

Golden Rule in the steady state and that 'lump-sum taxation end debt policy will not affect the

 s/ee4' state capital—labor ratio if there are both bequest and gift motives." (p.425)

8. In an interesting analysis of consumption and gift behavior under a specific assumption about

expectations of future gifts, Hon and Tsukamoto (1 985) analyze the case in which a> 1 as well

asthecase in whicha< 1.

9. Gale (1 983) has pointed out that there is an infinity of infinite—horizon utility functions

which are consistent with the recursive formulation in (2). By starting with equation (1) as

the specification of preferences, I am explicitly choosing one solution, a practice which is

followed, at least implicitly, in an overwhelming majority of the literature.

10. The relation between the utility function in (1) and "two—sided altruism" is discussed in

Kimball (1 986).

11. Bernheim and Bagwell (1 984) have recently provided a stimulating analysis of the

implications of marriage and altruism for the efficacy of fiscal policy.

1 2. This point has not been appreciated in the gift motive literature. In fairness to Carmichael,

it must be noted that he seemed to be aware of this point and avoided its implications by treating

the "descendents and forebearers as though there were only one of each; the descendent will be n

times 'bigger,' and the forebear-er n times 'smaller' than the individual." (1 979, fn 2).

Subsequently, Buiter end Carmichael (1 984, p. 763, In. 2) recognized that each consumer has
                                               17




one, rather than 1 /n,(set of) parent(s). Thej use this observation to make an insightful

comment on Burbidg&s specification of the utilitg function, but thej ignore this observation in

deriving optimal individual behavior under the Nash assumption.

1 3. The assumption that the marginal utilitj of consumption at each age becomes infinite as the

level of consumption approaches zero implies that anj non— negativity constraints on

consumption will not be binding.

1 4. Actuelly Burbidge departed from the Nash assumption in determining an individual

consumers optimal gift and thus arrived at the analogue of (6) rather than (6). Under this

assumption, the boundarj of the a&nissable region of parmater values is a3 = 1 rather than c43 =

n. Adjusting Burbidge's analjsis to incorporate the Nash assumption would amend his

assumption to o = n.

1 5. Formalig, h(k*(z), z) 0 which implies that k*'(z) = — hz/hk > 0.

16. Seefootnotel4.
                                          References




 Abel, Andrew B., "Precautionary Saving and Accidental Bequests," American Economic Review,

    75,1 (September 1985), 777-791.
                "An Analysis of Fiscal Policy under Operative and Inoperative Bequest Motives,

   mimeo, The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, September 1 986.

 Barrn, Robert J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,"Journ& of Political Economu,

   November/December 1 971, 82,1095-1117.

Bernheirn, B. Douglas, 'Ricardian Equivalence: Evaluation of Theory and Evidence," in National

   Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, Stanley Fischer (ed.),forthcoming,

   1987.

 ____________ and Kyle Bagwell, "Is Everything Neutral? The Implications of

    Intergenerational Altruism in an Overlapping Generations Model with Marriage, mimeo,

   Stanford University, November 1984.

Buiter, Willem, "Government Finance in an (}'erlapping- Generations Model with Gifts and

   Bequests," in George M. von Furstenberg, ed., Social Security Versus Private Saving,

   Cambrid: Batlinger, 1979.

____________ and Carmichael, Jeffrey, "Government Debt: Comment," American Economic

   Review. September 1981, 71, 762-765.

Burbidge, John B. "Government Debt in an Overlapping-Generations Model with Bequests and

   Gifts," American Economic Review, March 1983, 73, 222-227.

                ,"Government Debt: Reply," American Economic Review, 74, 1, 766- 767.

Carmichael, Jeffrey, "Economic Equilibrium and Steady—State Growth with Intergenerationally—

   Dependent Preferences," Econometric Research Program, Research memo. n. 215, Princeton
   University, 1 979.

___________On Barros Theorem of Debt Neutrality: The Irrelevance of Net Wealth3 American

    Economic Review,Ilarch 1982, 72, 1,202-213.

Cukiermen, Alex, "Uncertain Lifetimes and the Ricardian Equivalence Proposition, mimeo,

    Tel-Aviv University, Decernberl 986.

____________ and Allan Melizer, "A Political Theoryof Government Debt and Deficits in a

    Neo- Ricerdien Framework, mimeo, Tel- Aviv University, 1 96.

Diamond, Peter A. ,"National Debt in a Neoclesscal Growth Model," American Economic Review,

    December 1 965, 55. 11 26-11 50.

Drazen, Allan, "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a Lifecycle Model, Journal of

    Political Econornu.Junel 978,86, 505-516.

Feldetein, Martin S. "Perceived Wealth in Bonds end Social Security: A Comment," Journal of

     Political Econornu. April 1976,84, 331-336.

_______________ 'The Effects of Fiscal Policies when Incomes areUncertain: A Contradiction

     of Ricardian Equivalence," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2062,

     November 1986.

Fischer, Stanley, "A Life Cycle Model of Life Insurance Purchases," International Economic

     Review, February 1973, 14, 132-152.

Friedman, Benjamin M. end Mark Warshewsky," The Cost of Annuities: Implications for Saving

     Behavior and Bequests," mimeo, Harvard University, September 1984.

Gale, Douglas, Moneu: in diseouilibriumL. James Nisbet and Cornpany/Cambride University

     Press, 1983.

Hori, 1-lajime and Jun Tsukamoto, "Voluntary Intergenerational Transfers and the Steady-State

     Interest Rate," Tohoku University, Discussion Paper No. 59, April 1 985.




           :        '
 Kimball, Miles, "Making Sense of Two-Sided Altruism," mimeo, Harvard Universitg, December

    1   986.

 Kotlikoff, Laurence, John Shoven and Avia Spivak, "The Impact of Annuitg Insurance on Savings

        and Inequality," presented at the Conference on the Family and the Distribution of Economic

        Rewards, September 20-22, 1 981.

Ray, Debraj, "Nonpatern&istic Intergenerational Altruism," Journal of Economic Theoru,

        February 1987,41,1, 112-132.

Sarnuelson, Paul A. 'A Turnpike Refutation of the Golden Rule in a Welfare- Maximizing

        Many-Year Plan," in Karl Shell, ed., Essaus on the Theoru of Ootimal Economic Growth,

        MIT Press, 1967, 269-280.

                    "The Two-Part Golden Rule Deduced as the Asymptotic Turnpike of Catenary

        Motions," Western Economic Journal. March 1968, 6,2,85-89.

Strotz, Robert, 'Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization, Review of Economic

     Studies, 1956,23, 165-180.

Tomes, Nigel, "The Family, Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmission of Inequalitp,"

    Journal of Political Econornu, October 1 981, 81, 5, 928- 958.

Well, Philippe, "'Love Thy Children': Reflections on the Barro Debt Neutrality Theorem,"

        Journal of Monetaru Economics, May 1 987, 19, 3,377-391.
