                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GOVERNMENT DEBT AND CORPORATE LEVERAGE:
                          INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE

                                          Irem Demirci
                                         Jennifer Huang
                                         Clemens Sialm

                                       Working Paper 23310
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23310


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




We thank Aydogan Alti, Miguel Ferreira, Adrien Matray, Kai Li, Vassil Mihov, Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, Sheridan Titman, Garry Twite, Josef Zechner, and seminar participants at the
2015 FMA European Conference, the 2016 CEPR European Summer Symposium in Financial
Markets, the 2016 China International Conference in Finance, the Frankfurt School of Finance
and Management, the Nova School of Business and Economics, the University of Iowa, the
University of Mannheim, the University of Texas at Austin, and the Vienna University of
Economics and Business for comments and suggestions. Clemens Sialm is an independent
contractor with AQR Capital Management. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23310.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Irem Demirci, Jennifer Huang, and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Debt and Corporate Leverage: International Evidence
Irem Demirci, Jennifer Huang, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 23310
April 2017
JEL No. F21,F34,F36,F65,G28,G32,G38,H63

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of government debt on corporate financing decisions. We document a negative
relation between government debt and corporate leverage using data on 40 countries between 1990
and 2014. This negative relation holds only for government debt that is financed domestically and
is stronger for larger and more profitable firms and in countries with more developed equity markets.
In order to address potential endogeneity concerns, we use an instrumental variable approach based
on military spending and a quasi-natural experiment based on the introduction of the Euro currency.
Our findings suggest that government debt crowds out corporate debt.


Irem Demirci                                       Clemens Sialm
University of Mannheim                             University of Texas at Austin
L9, 1-2, Rm 303                                    McCombs School of Business
68161 Mannheim                                     2110 Speedway; B6600
Germany                                            Austin, TX 78712-1276
idemirci@mail.uni-mannheim.de                      and NBER
                                                   clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Jennifer Huang
Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business
1 East Chang An Avenue
Oriental Plaza, E2, 20F
Beijing, 100738
China
cyhuang@ckgsb.edu.cn
                                     1   Introduction


   Increasing government budget deficits and debt levels have obtained significant at-
tention during the recent financial crisis. However, the impact of government debt on
the corporate sector has not been explored much in the financial economics literature.
Our paper investigates whether changes in government debt affect the financing choices
of corporations in an international setting.
   Government debt can crowd out corporate debt if investors in financial markets prefer
to maintain a relatively stable proportion of debt and equity securities in their portfolios.
An increase in government debt will increase the overall supply of debt in the economy.
Households will only be willing to absorb the additional supply if debt securities offer
higher expected returns. To the extent that it is not too costly for firms to deviate from
their target capital structure, they will substitute some of the debt financing with equity
to reduce overall financing costs.
   We present a simple model where households can save using equity and debt securities.
Households require a higher return for equity securities, as they have a preference for safer
fixed-income securities. Firms finance their projects by issuing both debt and equity
securities, whereas the government is constrained to only issue debt securities. The
model shows that an increase in government debt increases the required returns on debt
securities relative to equity securities, and thereby crowds out corporate debt financing.
We also discuss the conditions that lead to differential crowding out effects across firms
with different flexibilities to adjust their capital structures.
   We empirically test the predictions of our theoretical model using a data set that
covers 40 countries between 1990 and 2014. We find that higher levels of government
debt are associated with lower corporate leverage levels. The results are robust to in-
cluding country- and year-fixed effects, using alternative specifications based on changes
in leverage levels, and controlling for various time-varying macroeconomic variables. We
also obtain consistent results using a panel of disaggregated firm-level data.
   We further investigate whether the relation between corporate debt and government



                                               1
debt depends on whether the government debt is financed domestically or internationally.
Since corporate debt is largely held by domestic investors, we hypothesize that the crowd-
ing out effect is more pronounced for government debt purchased by domestic investors.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we find an insignificant relation between external govern-
ment debt and corporate debt. On the other hand, the coefficient estimates for domestic
government debt are both statistically and economically significant.
   The impact of government debt on capital structure might differ across firms within
a country for several reasons. First, the debt of some firms (such as large firms and
profitable firms) tends to be less risky and more liquid, so that those securities might be
perceived as closer substitutes for government debt. Second, firms with more financial
flexibility might incur lower costs of switching between debt and equity financing. These
firms might be in a better position to adjust their capital structures in response to shocks
in the supply of government securities. Consistent with our priors, we find that the
crowding out effect is stronger for larger and more profitable firms.
   Our international setting also allows us to study the impact of country characteristics
on crowding out effects. We hypothesize that the cost of switching between debt and
equity securities is smaller for firms operating in countries with more developed equity
and bond markets. Our results indicate that a change in government debt has a stronger
impact on corporate debt in countries with relatively large equity markets and in countries
where companies are less dependent on bank financing.
   An important concern about the crowding out effect of government debt is that gov-
ernment debt is endogenous. Firms might adjust their capital structures in response
to economic conditions, which are correlated with the supply of government debt.1 We
address this endogeneity concern using an instrumental variable approach and using a
quasi-natural experiment. The first approach uses military expenditures as an instrument
for the government budget deficit. Changes in military expenditures are, arguably, less
affected by the economic environment than the overall budget deficit which is affected by
changes in tax revenues and transfer payments. Our results remain robust using this in-

   1
    The leverage dynamics of the business cycle is discussed by Hackbarth, Miao, and Morellec (2006),
Bharma, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010), and Halling, Yu, and Zechner (2016).



                                                 2
strumental variable approach. Our second approach addresses the potential endogeneity
issues by utilizing the introduction of the Euro currency as a quasi-natural experiment.
The European Monetary Union (EMU) facilitated the integration of financial markets
in member countries. Companies and governments in EMU countries gained access to
financing from a substantially broader market and became less dependent on domestic
financing sources after the monetary unification. We find that the sensitivity of corpo-
rate leverage to local government debt decreased significantly for companies incorporated
in EMU countries after the integration, whereas the corresponding sensitivity did not
change for non-EMU countries.
   Taggart (1986) investigates several macro factors that might explain the short- and
long-run time-series variation in corporate debt. Analyzing U.S. data, he concludes that
business risk, tax policy, and inflation risk fail to explain the short-run variation in corpo-
rate debt, whereas corporate debt is significantly related to government debt. Friedman
(1986) argues that an increase in the supply of long-term government bonds will increase
the expected return on government debt securities and on other securities that are close
substitutes. Investors will attempt to trade out of these securities and trade into oth-
ers like equity. He compares the response of spreads between debt and equity securities
to changes in government debt, and finds that government debt financing decreases the
spread between equity and debt securities.
   In a more recent study, Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010) develop a model that
investigates the impact of government debt maturity on corporate debt maturity. When
the supply of long-term Treasuries increases relative to the supply of short-term Trea-
suries, the expected return on long-term Treasuries increases. Firms absorb this supply
shock by issuing short-term debt until the expected return differential between long-term
and short-term debt is eliminated. They test the implications of their model using U.S.
data and find a negative relation between corporate debt and government debt maturity.
In a related study, Badoer and James (2016) argue that this gap filling is a more impor-
tant determinant of very long-term corporate borrowing than shorter-term borrowing.
Foley-Fisher, Ramcharan, and Yu (2014) examine the impact of the Federal Reserve’s



                                              3
Maturity Extension Program (MEP) on the firm financial constraints. They find that
firms that rely on long-term debt issued more long-term debt during the MEP’s im-
plementation. Furthermore, such firms enjoyed increases in investment and employment
during the MEP relative to other periods, suggesting that the MEP affected real economic
activity.
   Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012, 2015) argue that investors value the
liquidity and safety of U.S. Treasury bonds. An increase in the supply of government
securities decreases the relative value of those attributes in the market. They find that
an increase in the Treasury supply reduces the yield spread between Treasury and other
fixed income securities. In addition, government debt crowds out the the supply of safe
and liquid assets issued by other financial institutions, like bank-issued money (M2 minus
M1) and other short-term debt. Our paper contributes to this literature by combining two
substitution effects and deriving the equilibrium outcome: On the demand side investors
substitute between government debt and corporate debt to meet their demand for safer
assets and on the supply side firms substitute between debt and equity securities to
minimize total financing costs.
   Our paper is most related to Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2014), who investigate
the government crowding out of corporate debt using unique long-term U.S. data from
1920-2012. They also find a robust negative relation between government leverage and
corporate leverage. In a related paper, Ma (2016) finds that firms act as cross-market ar-
bitrageurs in their own equity and debt securities and simultaneously issue in one market
and repurchase in another in response to relative valuations. Our main contribution is to
investigate the crowding out effect between government and corporate debt using a cross-
country sample. Using international data allows us to benefit from a larger variation in
government debt and to take advantage of cross-country differences in institutional en-
vironments. Furthermore, our instrumental variable approach and the empirical analysis
of the Euro integration also help to address potential endogeneity concerns.
   In the corporate finance literature, a significant amount of research is devoted to un-
derstanding how firms make their financing decisions. Many of the empirical studies focus



                                            4
on the firm-specific determinants of capital structure. For instance, Titman and Wessels
(1988) investigate the empirical validity of theoretical determinants of capital structure
such as asset structure, growth, uniqueness, industry classification, size, earnings volatil-
ity, and profitability. Besides these firm-specific determinants, empirical studies show
that there are also factors outside the firm, such as industry average leverage, peer firms’
capital structures, and the economic environment that shape firms’ leverage policies.2 A
related literature has employed dynamic models to study the impact of taxes and financ-
ing frictions on capital structure, and the relation between investment, financing, and
payout decisions.3 Finally, a growing literature uses the variation in the institutional en-
vironment across countries to explore the importance of country-specific factors. These
papers provide an analysis of the impact of various institutional factors such as legal
environment, tax policies, and the types of capital providers in the economy on capital
structure.4 Our study contributes to these literatures by focusing on the impact of dy-
namic changes in government debt on firms’ financing decisions in a large cross-country
sample.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a simple model
that formalizes the main ideas discussed in the Introduction. Section 3 describes the data
and reports the summary statistics. Sections 4 and 5 present the results for country- and
firm-level analysis, respectively. Section 6 investigates the cross-sectional differences in
crowding out. Section 7 reports the crowding out results using instrumental variable
specifications and using the EMU integration as a quasi-natural experiment.




   2
      See for example, Korajczyk and Levy (2003), Welch (2004), Frank and Goyal (2007), Leary and
Roberts (2014), and Graham, Leary, and Roberts (2015).
    3
      See for example, Hennessy and Whited (2005), Strebulaev (2007), DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Whited
(2011), and DeAngelo and Roll (2015).
    4
      See for example, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1996, 1998, 1999), Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-
Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001), Claessens, Djankov, and Nenova (2000), Giannetti (2003), De Jong,
Kabir, and Nguyen (2008), and Fan, Titman, and Twite (2012).



                                                 5
                                         2    The Model


      We describe in this section a simple model that illustrates the crowding out effect. Our
model includes three economic agents: households who save, firms who require financing
to fund their projects, and the government.



2.1      Households’ Optimization Problem

      Households are endowed with an initial wealth of W , and decide how much to al-
locate to debt and equity securities in order to maximize the utility from next period’s
consumption:


max U [wD W (1 + rD ) + wG W (1 + rG ) + (1 − wD − wG )W (1 + rE ) + v(ρwD + wG )W ] ,
wD ,wG



where rD , rG and rE are returns on corporate debt, government debt and equity, and
         D            G
wD ≡     W
           ,   wG ≡   W
                          and 1 − wD − wG are their portfolio weights. For simplicity, we do not
explicitly model the risks of corporate debt and equity. The returns can be interpreted
as risk-adjusted returns. We assume that households obtain additional utility v from
holding safer debt-like assets, where v 0 (·) ≥ 0, v 00 (·) ≤ 0, and U 0 (.) > 0. The lower bound
for the first derivative is given by v 0 (1) = 0 such that when wD = 0 and wG = 1, the
additional utility obtained from holding more debt is zero.5 The parameter ρ ∈ (0, 1]
captures the substitutability between corporate and government debt. As ρ approaches
one, households treat corporate debt as a perfect substitute for government debt.6




   5
     When adjustment costs are low the equilibrium leverage ratio is above unity. We impose the
following condition to keep the equilibrium leverage ratio below unity

                                                   ρv 0 (0)
                                              θ>            .
                                                   1−λ

   6
     The utility v is similar to the preference for “extremely safe” assets, like bank deposits and Trea-
sury bonds in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015). We extend the preference to all debt-like
instruments.



                                                   6
      The first-order conditions imply:


                                rE − rD = ρv 0 (ρwD + wG ),                                 (1)

                                  rE − rG = v 0 (ρwD + wG ).                                (2)


The spread between the return on equity and debt securities captures in a reduced-
form the investors’ preference for safer assets. The investors demand a higher return on
corporate debt securities than government debt securities if the two security types are
not perfect substitutes (i.e., ρ < 1).



2.2     Firms’ Optimization Problem

      Firms have projects that require an investment of K in the first period and produce an
output of f (K) in the second period. The total investment K is financed by equity and
                                  D
debt, with leverage ratio d ≡     K
                                    .   Each firm takes as a given the external financing costs
rD and rE , and chooses the leverage ratio d to maximize total output net of financing
and deviation costs:

                                                                    θ
                max f (K) − dK(1 + rD ) − (1 − d)K(1 + rE ) −         (d − λ)2 K.
                  d                                                 2


The last term represents the quadratic costs for firms that deviate from the target capital
structure λ < 1. These costs capture the impact of various market frictions, such as taxes,
agency costs, and other financing costs.
      The firms’ first-order condition is as follows:


                                        rE − rD = θ (d − λ) .                               (3)


The optimal leverage ratio is determined by equating the marginal cost of debt to marginal
cost of equity. Firms choose the leverage ratio d to take advantage of the rate differen-
tial rE − rD . This rate differential captures external capital market conditions that are




                                                  7
unrelated to firm-specific risk.



2.3     Market Equilibrium

      In equilibrium, both the equity and debt markets clear, and the outstanding amounts
of equity and debt securities sum up to households’ initial wealth:


                                    W = E + D + G = K + G.


Substituting in the definitions of wD , wG and d, we obtain the following relation between
the households’ portfolio share of debt and firms’ leverage ratio:

                                      D   D             K
                                                         
                              wD ≡      =                       ≡ d(1 − wG ).                         (4)
                                      W   K             W

Note that this equality holds for any levels of G and K, and is independent of the
relation between K and G. We take as given the response of corporate investment (K) to
government debt (G), and focus only on the financing decisions, namely the composition
of investment between debt and equity.
      By combining the two first-order conditions given in equations (1) and (3), and the
definition of wD in (4), we derive the equilibrium condition


                     µ∗ ≡ rE∗ − rD
                                 ∗
                                   = θ(d∗ − λ) = ρv 0 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG ).                          (5)


The equilibrium corporate debt level d∗ is determined by the households’ preference
for safer debt-like instruments, the supply of government debt, and the cost for firms to
deviate from their target debt levels. The target λ captures in a reduced form the optimal
debt level for the firm, without taking into account the investors’ preference for safe and
liquid assets. The higher the cost of deviation θ, the less a firm deviates from its target
capital structure λ.7
   7
     In the Appendix A.1, we show that the equilibrium leverage ratio is above its target and that it
decreases with θ. Hence, higher financing costs are associated with leverage ratios that are closer to the
target.



                                                    8
   Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium debt-to-capital ratio for the case without a govern-
ment sector (i.e. wG = 0). The horizontal axis shows different leverage levels d and the
vertical axis shows the equity premium rE − rD . The preferences of households for debt
securities are captured by the downward-sloping curve ρv 0 (ρd). As debt securities become
more abundant, households do not require a large equity premium to be indifferent be-
tween holding equity and debt securities. The upward-sloping line θ(d − λ) captures the
capital structure preferences of firms. At a leverage ratio of d = λ, the frictions of debt
financing are minimized. However, due to households’ preference for debt-like securities,
the return that households demand for holding equity is higher than for debt at d = λ
by an amount of ρv 0 (ρλ). Therefore, the firm increases its leverage from the target level
λ to d∗ where the marginal cost of debt financing equals the marginal benefit of holding
debt for the household. The figure shows that the equilibrium level of debt-to-capital
(d∗ ) corresponds to a positive equity premium.


                               <Figure 1 about here>


   The following result derives the impact of government debt on the corporate leverage
ratio.
   Proposition 1: Given households’ preference for debt-like instruments, an increase in
government debt leads to a lower corporate leverage ratio and a lower equity premium.
   Appendix A.2 presents the detailed proof. We can also prove by contradiction that
both d∗ and wD
             ∗
               should decrease after the introduction of government debt. Assume
counterfactually that d∗ increases with wG . Then, equation (5) implies that v 0 increases.
Since v 00 (.) ≤ 0, v 0 increases only if ρwD
                                            ∗                                              ∗
                                              + wG decreases. Given the increase in wG , ρwD
                                                       ∗
has to decrease more than the increase in wG . Since ρwD = ρd∗ (1 − wG ) and ρd∗ ≤ 1,
                                                  ∗
every percentage point increase in wG decreases ρwD by less than one percentage point,
holding d∗ constant. Hence, the only feasible equilibrium response is for both d∗ and wD
                                                                                       ∗


to decrease when government debt increases.
   Figure 2 shows how the introduction of government debt affects the equilibrium in
financial markets. We compare the equilibrium outcomes without a government sector


                                             9
(denoted with one asterisk) and with a government sector (denoted with two asterisks).
The introduction of government debt shifts the marginal utility curve (v 0 ) downwards
because the household sector now has a larger share of debt securities for a given portfolio
share of corporate debt. Households demand a higher return on corporate debt if the
firm keeps its leverage ratio at its initial level d∗ which in turn increases the total cost of
debt financing for the firm. Hence, the firm decreases its leverage ratio to the point where
the marginal cost of debt is equal to the marginal cost of equity. The introduction of
government debt reduces both the equity premium and the optimal amount of corporate
debt.



                                  <Figure 2 about here>




2.4     Firms with Different Financing Frictions

      Next, we investigate whether the crowding out effect differs between firms with dif-
ferent financing frictions. We use the cost of deviating from the optimal capital structure
(θ) as a measure of financing frictions. We assume that the substitutability between
corporate debt is identical across firms (i.e., ρ is identical). In an integrated market,
the equity premia (µ = rE − rD ) need to be identical across firms given that their debt
securities are perceived as identical by households.
      The firms’ first order condition (3) implies the following equity premia with (µ∗∗ ) and
without (µ∗ ) the government sector for i ∈ {L, H}:


                           µ∗ = θi (d∗i − λ) and µ∗∗ = θi (d∗∗
                                                            i − λ).




      By taking the difference between the equity premia we obtain the following equalities
for firms with high and low financing frictions:


                          µ∗ − µ∗∗ = θH (d∗H − d∗∗         ∗    ∗∗
                                                H ) = θL (dL − dL ) .




                                               10
      Firms with higher costs to deviate from their target leverage ratio will tend to change
their leverage levels to a smaller extent than firms with lower financial frictions:

                                     d∗H − d∗∗
                                            H    θL
                                       ∗    ∗∗
                                               =    < 1.
                                     dL − dL     θH

      Proposition 2: The introduction of government debt yields a smaller change in leverage
for firms with higher financing frictions.
      Figure 3 illustrates how an increase in the supply of government debt affects the
leverage for firms that are subject to different levels of financing frictions but with the
same level of substitutability. In equilibrium, the two firms have the same equity premia
since the households are indifferent between holding the securities of the two firms. The
decrease in the equity premium generated by the introduction of government debt de-
creases the leverage ratios of the two firms. Higher financing frictions captured by θ are
associated with a lower sensitivity of the leverage ratio to changes in the equity premium.
Therefore, in response to the same amount of decrease in equity premium, high-θ firms
optimally choose smaller adjustments in their leverage ratios compared to low-θ firms.


                                 <Figure 3 about here>




                        3    Data and Summary Statistics


      This section describes the data sources and summarizes the main variables used in
our empirical analysis.



3.1     Data

      We obtain firm-level accounting data from Compustat Global and Compustat North
America, and firm-level market data from Compustat Global Security Daily. The main
variable of interest is the total government debt-to-GDP ratio, which we obtain from



                                              11
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) database available through the IMF8 . For other
country-level variables, we use data from the World Bank, IMF and the ECB. To ensure
that the country-level variables are consistently defined over time, for each country and
variable, we use the data source that provides us with the longest series.
    Our sample covers the period between 1990 and 2014, and the first year of the sample
is determined by the availability of the firm-level and country-level data which varies
across countries. Observations with missing and/or negative book value of assets are
dropped from the sample. We exclude financial (6000-6999), public (9000-9999), and
utility (4900-4999) firms. Since we focus on the time-series variation in corporate and
public debt, each firm is required to have data on book leverage, lagged firm-level controls,
as well as lagged values of government debt, GDP per capita, inflation, S&P index level,
unemployment, and nominal exchange rate.9 The final sample consists of 38,776 firms
from 40 countries with a total of 343,403 firm-year observations and 813 country-year
observations.
    Table 1 shows the distribution of countries in our sample. The sample includes firms
from different parts of the world, mainly Europe, Asia, North America, and South Amer-
ica. The U.S., Japan, and the U.K. are the countries with the highest number of firm-year
observations.



                                     <Table 1 about here>




   8
      The WEO series are not available for the earlier periods of our sample for some countries. For those
countries with short series we use government debt data from the central banks whenever available or
other sources such as World Bank. Those countries are Ireland, Israel, Peru, South Africa, and the US.
    9
      We also exclude country-year observations with less than ten firms and 16 country-year observations
with a sovereign debt default or restructuring event. These events are associated with large decreases
and increases in government debt-to-GDP ratios that might result from significant devaluations of the
local currency, changes in external debt policy or debt forgiveness. We obtain the data on sovereign
debt defaults and restructuring episodes from Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff’s webpage at
http://www.reinhartandrogoff.com/.



                                                   12
3.2     Summary Statistics

      We use three leverage measures for our firm-level analyses. First, we define the tradi-
tional leverage measures, Book Leverage and Market Leverage, which are total book debt
over book value of assets and total book debt over market value of assets, respectively.
The third measure, Debt-to-Capital Ratio, proposed by Welch (2011), is defined as the
book value of debt divided by debt plus the book value of equity.10 The book value of
total assets includes the value of non-financial liabilities such as trade credit, in addition
to book debt and book equity. Therefore, an increase in accounts payable causes a de-
crease in the book leverage, even if total financial debt of the firm stays constant. The
debt-to-capital ratio is immune to such changes in non-financial liabilities. The country-
level variables follow firm-level definitions, and are calculated by aggregating the values
in the numerator and the denominator over all firms in a given year and country. We
require positive book values of equity for our debt-to-capital ratio and market-to-book
ratio calculations. All ratio variables, including leverage measures, are winsorized at the
top and bottom 1%.
      Table 2 reports country averages for corporate leverage and macroeconomic variables.
While, on average, firms in Hong Kong have the lowest book leverage, firms in Portugal
have the highest book leverage in our sample. Belgium, Greece, Italy, and Japan are
countries with an average government debt-to-GDP ratio exceeding 100%. Chile, Hong
Kong, and Russia have the lowest average government debt-to-GDP ratios that are all
below 20%.



                                    <Table 2 about here>



      Besides our main country-level debt variables, we also control for other country char-
acteristics. Our main specification includes GDP per capita, the level of consumer prices,
the level of equity prices, the exchange rate, and the unemployment rate. In order to

  10
     Besides these three leverage measures, we also estimated our regressions for Net Leverage which is
defined as total debt minus cash normalized by total assets. Our results also hold for net leverage.



                                                  13
account for the movements in the stock market, we convert each country’s return on its
S&P Global Equity Index into a variable that tracks the index level assuming that the
base year is the first year in the sample. The nominal exchange rate is the value of the
local currency relative to one U.S. dollar calculated as an annual rate based on monthly
averages. The unemployment rate is defined as the number of unemployed relative to the
labor force.
   We also compute additional firm-level variables that have been shown to relate to
corporate leverage (Rajan and Zingales (1995), Baker and Wurgler (2002), Frank and
Goyal (2003), and Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2008)). The tangibility is defined as
the ratio between the value of property, plant, and equipment (PPE) and total assets.
We use the book value of total assets to account for the impact of firm size on leverage.
The return on assets (ROA) is defined as operating income scaled by total assets. Finally,
the market-to-book ratio is defined as the ratio between the market value of total assets
and the book value of the firm. We use Compustat currency exchange rate data in order
to convert non-ratio variables into U.S. dollars. Detailed variable definitions are given in
Table A1 of the Appendix.
   Panels A and B of Table 3 report the summary statistics for country- and firm-level
variables, respectively. Panel A of Table 3 shows that the ratio between corporate debt
and corporate total assets has a mean (median) of 28.3% (27.7%) and a standard deviation
of 6.5%. Since it is normalized by the book value of total capital rather than total assets,
the debt-to-capital ratio is higher than the book leverage, with a mean (median) of 42.3%
(42.0%). On average, the market leverage is smaller than the other leverage measures
with a mean of 19.5% and a median of 18.5%. The government debt-to-GDP ratio has
a mean of 58.3% and an interquartile range of 37.2% and 72.5%. There is a significant
difference between the variances of domestic and external government debt such that the
standard deviation of external government debt is almost twice as high as the standard
deviation of domestic debt. The median GDP per capita amounts to $24,407 and the
average unemployment rate is 7.4%.


                                <Table 3 about here>


                                            14
      Panel B reports the summary statistics for firm-level variables. On average, the book
leverage, the debt-to-capital ratio, and the market leverage are 21.7%, 29.7% and 18.0%,
respectively. Consistent with the capital structure literature, we find a significant varia-
tion in the tangibility of firms. The mean tangibility equals 30.5% with an interquartile
range between 11.2% and 44.6%. Most firms in our sample are profitable, as captured by
a median ROA of 8.4%. Finally, the median firm’s market value exceeds the book value
by 24.2%.



                            4    Country-Level Analysis


      This section presents the results of our empirical analyses using the country panel
where we aggregate firm-level variables by year and country.



4.1     Fixed Effects Specification

      Our first proposition states that an increase in government debt leads to a reduction
in corporate leverage. We test this hypothesis both in levels and changes of government
debt. Our baseline specification relates the country-level corporate debt to government
debt-to-GDP ratio and additional macro variables. More specifically, we estimate the
following regression equation:



      Leveragej,t = β1 Government Debt-to-GDPj,t−1
                                                                                        (6)
                                          + β2 Xj,t−1 + β3 Yj,t−1 + uj + δt + εj,t .


      Equation (6) is estimated separately for three different definitions of Leveragej,t ,
namely book leverage, market leverage, and the debt-to-capital ratio. Government Debt-to
-GDPj,t−1 is total government debt as a percentage of GDP in country j; Xj,t−1 denotes
macro variables, including the natural logarithm of GDP per capita, the natural loga-
rithm of consumer prices, the natural logarithm of the equity index, the natural logarithm



                                             15
of the exchange rate, and the unemployment rate; Yj,t−1 denotes the traditional deter-
minants of leverage that are averaged across firms within a country, namely tangibility,
firm size, profitability, and the market-to-book ratio. Finally, uj and δt denote country-
and year-fixed effects, respectively. Year-fixed effects account for worldwide events such
as the recent financial crisis, and country-fixed effects control for time-invariant country
characteristics.
      Panel A of Table 4 reports the results for the fixed effects specification. The standard
errors are clustered at the country level and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The
results indicate a negative relation between government debt and aggregate corporate
leverage. A 10 percentage point increase in government debt relative to GDP reduces
book leverage (market leverage) by 0.74 (0.55) percentage points. Government debt is
also negatively correlated with the debt-to-capital ratio: a 10 percentage point increase
in government debt-to-GDP is associated with a 0.96 percentage point decrease in the
debt-to-capital ratio. Alternatively, a one standard deviation increase in government
debt relative to GDP reduces book leverage (market leverage) by 0.38 (0.23) standard
deviations. The exchange rate, the unemployment rate, and the ROA are significant
determinants of the book leverage.


                                  <Table 4 about here>




4.2     First Differences Specification

      A second method for analyzing the time-series relation between corporate debt and
government debt is to estimate equation (6) in first differences:


 ∆Leveragej,t,t−1 = β1 ∆Government Debt-to-GDPj,t−1,t−2
                                                                                            (7)
                                          + β2 ∆Xj,t−1,t−2 + β3 ∆Yj,t−1,t−2 + δt + εj,t .


      Panel B of Table 4 reports the results for country-level first differences regressions.
The coefficient estimates for the government debt-to-GDP ratio are all negative for our


                                               16
three different leverage measures such that corporate leverage decreases significantly fol-
lowing an increase in government debt. For example, a 10 percentage points increase
in the government debt-to-GDP ratio is associated with a 0.68 (0.59) percentage points
decrease in firm book leverage (market leverage) in the subsequent year. The economic
magnitude in the first differences specification is very similar to the magnitude in the
fixed effects specification. The coefficients on the log-transformed variables in the first
differences specification capture the impact of the prior-year growth rates in the corre-
sponding variables on the changes in the corporate leverage levels. Note that changes in
the GDP per capita, the ROA, and the market-to-book ratio are typically significantly
related to changes in corporate debt. Overall, our findings suggest that there is a negative
relation between corporate leverage and government debt supply.11



4.3     External versus Domestic Government Debt

      Our government debt variable includes both external and domestic government debt.
Consequently, there can be cases in which an increase in the supply of government debt
is absorbed by foreign investors or international financial institutions leaving more local
funds available for corporations. We should therefore expect a stronger relation between
corporate leverage and domestically-held debt. In Table 5 we repeat our baseline analysis
by replacing Government Debt-to-GDP with Domestic Government Debt and External
Government Debt measured in percent of GDP.12 Domestic government debt is calculated
by subtracting external government debt from total government debt outstanding. The
results are reported for both fixed effects and first differences specifications. For all
leverage definitions, the economic magnitude of the estimates for the coefficient of internal
government debt is larger than the estimates for total government debt reported in Table

  11
      In order to ensure that the results are not driven by a single country in our sample, we repeat
the fixed effects and first differences regressions in Table 4 by dropping one country at a time from our
sample. We also estimated our baseline specification for the period before the 2007 financial crisis. Our
results are robust to these subsamples.
   12
      The IMF defines gross external debt as, at any given time, the outstanding amount of those actual
current, and not contingent, liabilities that require payment(s) of principal and/or interest by the debtor
at some point(s) in the future and that are owed to nonresidents by residents of an economy (http:
//www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/eds/Eng/Guide/file2.pdf).



                                                    17
4.13 Furthermore, the coefficient estimates for external debt are insignificant suggesting
that the negative relation between corporate leverage and government leverage is driven
by domestic public debt rather than external debt.



                                    <Table 5 about here>




4.4     Constant Elasticity Specification

      One possible concern about using the government debt-to-GDP ratio as the indepen-
dent variable is that the relation between corporate leverage and government debt could
be driven by changes in GDP rather than changes in the amount of government debt out-
standing. To address this concern, we regress the natural logarithm of the dollar value of
corporate debt on the natural logarithm of the dollar value of lagged government debt.
The coefficients in this specification can be interpreted as the elasticities of corporate
debt in response to changes in government debt. Table 6 reports the estimation results
which confirm our findings in Table 4. The elasticity of corporate debt with respect to
government debt is between 0.145 and 0.198 depending on whether we use a fixed effects
or a first differences specification.



                                    <Table 6 about here>




4.5     OECD Countries

      We repeat our baseline estimation for the subsample of countries that are members
of the OECD.14 Panel A of Table A2 in the Appendix reports the fixed effects regression

  13
      This result is not an artifact of the different samples in Tables 4 and 5. We continue to find the
coefficient estimates for domestic government debt to be higher than those for total government debt in
the smaller sample.
   14
      Those countries are: Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Finland, France,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Poland, Portu-
gal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the U.S., and the U.K. Since they became members in 2010,
Chile and Israel are not included in the OECD sample.



                                                  18
results for the 25 OECD countries. The results are similar to those reported for the
whole sample. In Panel B, we repeat our baseline first differences analysis for the OECD
countries. Consistent with the fixed effects regression results, the coefficient estimates for
the OECD subsample are similar to those estimated for the whole sample.



                             5    Firm-Level Analysis


   We estimate in this section our model using firm-level data. Using firm-level data
allows us to control for firm-specific determinants of leverage and mitigates concerns about
the composition of firms changing in the country sample. Furthermore, the firm-level
analysis weighs more heavily towards countries with a larger number of firm observations.
   Panels A and B of Table 7 report the estimation results for firm-fixed effects and
the first difference specifications, respectively. All independent variables are lagged by
one year relative to leverage. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. We
obtain a negative relation between the level of government debt and firm leverage levels
for all three leverage measures. The coefficient estimates imply that a 10 percentage
point increase in government debt relative to GDP reduces firm leverage by between 0.46
and 0.74 percentage points. Similarly, the coefficient estimates from the first differences
specification are consistent with our previous findings. A 10 percentage point change
in government debt relative to GDP reduces firm leverage by between 0.78 and 1.04
percentage points. Consistent with the capital structure literature, we find that book
leverage variables increase with tangibility of assets and firm size, and decrease with the
ROA and the market-to-book ratio.



                                 <Table 7 about here>



   We conduct several robustness tests for our firm-level analysis which we report in the
Appendix. As we did for the country panel, in the firm panel, we restrict the sample
to the OECD member countries. Fixed effects and first differences estimation results



                                             19
for this subsample are reported in Table A3, which are similar to those for the baseline
specification in Table 7.
      We also differentiate between domestic and external government debt at the firm level.
The results are reported in Table A4 which confirm the findings from the country-level
analysis: domestic debt is more significantly related to leverage rather than total debt.
      Next, we investigate whether the negative impact of government debt on corporate
leverage is specific to long-term or short-term corporate debt. In Table A5, we estimate
our baseline specification for long-term debt defined as total debt that matures in more
than one year divided by total assets, and for short-term debt defined as the ratio of debt
in current liabilities to total assets. The results indicate that the negative relation holds
for both long-term and short-term corporate debt.



             6    Cross-Sectional Differences in Crowding Out


      This section studies whether the relation between corporate debt and government
debt differs across firms and across countries.



6.1     Firm Characteristics and Crowding Out

      We investigate the impact of firm characteristics on the crowding out effect, as dis-
cussed in Proposition 2. The impact of government debt on capital structure might differ
across firms for two reasons. First, firms with more financial flexibility incur lower costs
of switching between debt and other sources of financing. These firms are in a better
position to adjust their capital structure in response to shifts in demand. For example,
larger firms are more flexible in their choices between debt and equity financing, since
they are potentially less subject to asymmetric information problems. In contrast, high
equity issuance costs or borrowing costs might prevent small firms from changing their
method of financing. Similarly, more profitable firms face lower costs in adjusting their
capital structure because they have the flexibility of first drawing down their internal



                                              20
funds before tapping the external capital market. Moreover, they may face a lower cost
of switching between debt and equity financing. Second, some types of corporate debt are
closer substitutes to government debt than others. For example, bonds issued by larger
firms might be more liquidly traded. Similarly, more profitable firms tend to have lower
default risk, which makes their debt a better substitute for government debt. Thus, the
crowding out effect should be stronger for large and profitable firms. Therefore, larger
and more profitable firms should respond more to government debt changes.
      In the first three columns of Table 8 we interact the government debt-to-GDP ratio
with an indicator variable for firm size. More specifically, we split firms into two groups
depending on whether their lagged total book value of assets is in the top 20th percentile
of their country-year distribution. On average, these firms constitute 80% of the total
market value of equity in their countries. Consistent with our prior, we find that the
crowding out effect is significantly higher for large firms than for small firms.


                                  <Table 8 about here>


      Similarly, we expect profitable firms to respond more to changes in government debt.
Such firms are more likely to have high retained earnings that they can use towards
investment without any need for external financing. The last three columns of Table
8 report the results for profitability interactions, where the dummy variable Profitable
indicates that the firm’s lagged ROA is above its country’s median in a given year. The
results show that the crowding out effect is more significant for profitable firms. Overall,
we find consistent evidence with our model’s implications such that government crowding
out is more prominent for firms that are financially less constrained.



6.2     Country Characteristics and Crowding Out

      In this section, we investigate the cross-country variation in the crowding out effect.
We hypothesize that in countries where firms are eligible for alternative sources of external
financing, it is less costly for firms to adjust their capital structure. Consequently, we


                                              21
expect corporate debt to respond more to changes in government debt in such countries
relative to others.
   We define two proxies, namely, the bank dependence of the private sector and the size
of the equity market to test cross-country variation in crowding out. Bank Dependence is
measured by the outstanding amount of bank credit extended to the private sector as a
fraction of GDP. Carlin and Mayer (2003) use this variable to measure the bank depen-
dence of industries. Market Capitalization is defined as the total market value of public
firms as a percent of GDP. This variable is used to measure stock market development
by Levine and Zervos (1998), and to measure the ease of access to stock market by Beck,
Lundberg, and Majnoni (2006). In each year, we split the sample into two equally-sized
groups based on previous year’s Market Capitalization and Bank Dependence. The indica-
tor variables High Bank Dependence and Low Market Capitalization capture country-year
observations with above-median bank dependence and below-median market capitaliza-
tion, respectively.
   Table 9 reports the estimation results using the country-level regressions. All regres-
sions include year- and country-fixed effects as well as the interactions of High Bank
Dependence and Low Market Capitalization with the control variables which are not
reported to save space. The coefficient estimates for government debt-to-GDP are all
negative indicating that corporate leverage is negatively related to government debt-to-
GDP ratio in countries with relatively large equity markets and less bank dependent
private sectors. On the other hand, the positive coefficient estimates of the interaction
terms suggest that the crowding out effect is less prominent in countries with relatively
small equity markets and more bank dependent economies.15



                                   <Table 9 about here>




  15
    We obtain similar results when we define Bank Dependence as bank credit divided by book value of
corporate assets.



                                                22
                               7    Endogeneity Concerns


      An important concern about the crowding out effect of government debt is that gov-
ernment debt is endogenous. Firms might adjust their capital structure in response
to economic conditions, which are correlated with the supply of government debt. We
address this endogeneity concern in multiple ways. As mentioned previously, our spec-
ifications include year-fixed effects that capture the impact of the global business cycle
and additionally control for several country-level macroeconomic variables that capture
the local business environment. Furthermore, we only find a crowding out effect for
the portion of government debt that is financed domestically, confirming the postulated
segmentation of debt markets. In this section we present further evidence to address po-
tential endogeneity concerns. We first present the results from an instrumental variable
specification and then we discuss results that use the EMU integration as a quasi-natural
experiment.



7.1     Instrumental Variable Approach

      Although we control for time-invariant country characteristics, various macroeconomic
controls, and year-fixed effects in our baseline analysis, endogeneity concerns might re-
main. For example, government budget deficits tend to be large when the economy is
performing poorly. In these periods the government receives lower tax revenues and has
higher transfer expenditures from various social programs (e.g., unemployment benefits,
welfare). Such episodes might also coincide with time periods where corporations are
more financially constrained and adjust their financing strategies. We address this issue
by employing an instrumental variable approach where we use military expenditures as an
instrument for government debt.16 While military expenditures are not completely exoge-
nous, they are less affected by the macro-economic environment than other government


  16
     Ramey and Shapiro (1998) use large military buildups and increases in total purchases as exogenous
changes in government spending. Berndt, Lustig, and Yeltekin (2012) identify fiscal shocks as innovations
to current and future defense spending growth.



                                                   23
revenues and expenditures, such as taxes and transfer payments.
   Panel A of Table 10 reports the estimation results where the government debt-to-GDP
ratio is instrumented with the lagged military expenditures relative to GDP. In order to
ensure that our results are not driven by firms operating in defense related industries, we
drop firms in industries that are at least 40 percent defense dependent, as determined by
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.17
   We use the lag of military expenditures to mitigate the possibility of reverse causality.
The first stage estimation results indicate that there is a positive and statistically signif-
icant relation between military expenditures and government debt. Panel A also reports
the statistics for underidentification and weak identification tests. The Kleibergen-Paap
LM statistic is 4.60 with a p-value of 0.032, which rejects the null of underidentification
at the 5% level. The Kleibergen-Paap F statistic amounts to 4.48, which is below the
rule of thumb value of 10.
   The second stage regressions indicate a significant relation between corporate leverage
and instrumented government debt. The results for the government debt-to-GDP are
broadly consistent with those in Table 4.



                                   <Table 10 about here>



   Panel B reports the results for domestic government debt, which are based on a
smaller sample due to data availability. We continue to find a statistically significant
negative relation between our leverage measures and domestic government debt in the
second stage. Both the first stage and the second stage coefficient estimates increase in
statistical significance relative to Panel A. Furthermore, the Kleibergen-Paap LM and
the Kleibergen-Paap F statistics increase to 7.28 (p = 0.007) and to 10.84, respectively.




  17
     These industries are explosives, ordnance and accessories, radio and TV communications equipment,
communications equipment, aircraft and parts, shipbuilding and repairing, guided missiles and space
vehicles, tanks and tank components, search and navigation equipment, commercial physical research,
commercial nonphysical research, and testing laboratories.



                                                 24
7.2     Euro-Area Integration

      In this section we use the integration of the bond markets in the European Monetary
Union (EMU) as a quasi-natural experiment to address the endogeneity concerns. Since
the second half of the 1990s, the degree of integration in various European financial
markets has significantly increased (ECB, 2006). The effect has especially been prominent
in government and corporate bond markets (Pagano and Von Thadden, 2004 and ECB,
2006).
      We hypothesize that after the EMU integration, the sensitivity of corporate leverage to
local government debt decreases for companies incorporated in one of the EMU countries.
The monetary integration can weaken the crowding out effect through increased demand
by non-local investors for government debt and corporate debt securities. While the
former helps local investors in absorbing government debt supply and increases funds
available to the corporate sector, the latter decreases firms’ dependence on local investors,
especially on financial institutions.
      Figure 4 depicts the relation between changes in corporate leverage and changes in the
government debt-to-GDP ratio for EMU and non-EMU countries before (1990-1998) and
after the introduction of the Euro (1999-2006). Whereas the relation between corporate
leverage and government debt is negative for non-EMU countries both before and after
the integration, the negative relation for EMU countries completely disappears after the
Euro integration.


                                 <Figure 4 about here>


      Next, we verify the finding in Figure 4 using a regression specification. Table 11
analyzes the impact of the EMU integration on the sensitivity of corporate leverage to
government debt. After 1998 is an indicator variable for the years following 1998. The
sample period ranges from 1990 to 2006. EMU is an indicator variable that captures
whether the country is a member of the European Monetary Union. All regressions
include macroeconomic and firm-level controls as well as their interactions with the EMU,


                                              25
After 1998, and EMU X After 1998. In order to save space, we only report the coefficient
estimates for government debt and its interactions. All regressions include the direct
effects of EMU, After 1998, and EMU X After 1998.
   Panel A in Table 11 reports the fixed effects regression results for book leverage, debt-
to-capital, and market leverage. All regressions include country-fixed effects. Consistent
with our baseline specification, the coefficient estimates of government debt before 1999
for non-EMU countries are negative, and they are statistically significant at the 1%
level. The positive coefficient estimates for the triple interactions suggest that corporate
leverage becomes less sensitive to local government debt in EMU countries after the
integration. The results are statistically significant for the book and the market leverage
regressions. The results also indicate that there is no significant change in the government
debt sensitivity of corporate debt after 1998 for non-EMU countries.



                                <Table 11 about here>



   In Panel B, we repeat our analysis using the first differences specification. In all
specifications, the change in government debt-to-GDP is negative and significant at least
at a 5% level. Finally, the coefficient estimates of the triple interaction term are positive
in all specifications and statistically significant in two of the three specifications.



                                    8    Conclusions


   In this paper, we investigate the impact of government debt on firms’ capital structure
decisions using data on 40 countries between 1990-2014. We argue that an increase in
government debt supply might reduce investors’ demand for corporate debt relative to
equity since government debt is a better substitute for corporate debt than for equity. As
a result, corporations might adjust their capital structure and reduce their leverage. We
document a negative relation between government debt and corporate leverage both in
levels and changes of debt after controlling for country- and year-fixed effects as well as



                                              26
country-level controls. We find that the crowding out effect is stronger for firms and coun-
tries facing smaller financing frictions, for example for larger and more profitable firms
or for firms in countries with more developed equity markets and less bank-dependent
private sectors. These firms tend to have more flexibility in substituting between differ-
ent sources of financing. In order to address potential endogeneity problems, we use an
instrumental variable approach and a quasi-natural experiment based on the EMU inte-
gration. Overall, our results are consistent with government debt crowding out corporate
debt.




                                            27
                                    References


Badoer, D.C. and James, C.M., 2016. The determinants of long-term corporate debt
  issuances. The Journal of Finance, 71(1), 457-492.

Baker, M. and Wurgler, J., 2002. Market timing and capital structure. The Journal of
  Finance, 57(1), 1-32.

Beck, T., Lundberg, M. and Majnoni, G., 2006. Financial intermediary development and
  growth volatility: Do intermediaries dampen or magnify shocks? Journal of Interna-
  tional Money and Finance, 25(7), 1146-1167.

Berndt, A., Lustig, H. and Yeltekin, S., 2012. How does the US government finance fiscal
  shocks? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 69-104.

Bhamra, H.S., Kuehn, L.A. and Strebulaev, I.A., 2010. The aggregate dynamics of capital
  structure and macroeconomic risk. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 4187-4241.

Booth, L., Aivazian, V., Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V., 2001. Capital structures
  in developing countries. The Journal of Finance, 56, 87-130.

Carlin, W. and Mayer, C., 2003. Finance, investment, and growth. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 69(1), 191-226.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S. and Nenova, T., 2000. Corporate Risk around the World. SSRN
  Working Paper.

DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L. and Whited, T.M., 2011. Capital structure dynamics and
  transitory debt. Journal of Financial Economics, 99(2), 235-261.

DeAngelo, H. and Roll, R., 2015. How stable are corporate capital structures?. The
  Journal of Finance, 70(1), 373-418.

De Jong, A., Kabir, R. and Nguyen, T.T., 2008. Capital structure around the world: The
  roles of firm- and country-specific determinants. Journal of Banking and Finance, 32,
  1954-1969.


                                          28
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V., 1996. Stock market development and financing
  choices of firms. The World Bank Economic Review, 10(2), 341-369.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, finance, and firm growth. The Jour-
  nal of Finance, 53(6), 2107-2137.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V., 1999. Institutions, financial markets, and firm
  debt maturity. Journal of Financial Economics, 54(3), 295-336.

European Central Bank, 2006. Indicators of financial integration in the Euro area. Avail-
  able at   https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200609en.pdf



Fan, J.P., Titman, S. and Twite, G., 2012. An international comparison of capital struc-
  ture and debt maturity choices. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47(01),
  23-56.

Foley-Fisher, N., Ramcharan, R. and Yu, E.G., 2014. The impact of unconventional
  monetary policy on firm financing constraints: Evidence from the maturity extension
  program. SSRN Working Paper.

Frank, M.Z. and Goyal, V.K., 2003. Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 67(2), 217-248.

Frank, M.Z., and Goyal, V.K., 2007. Trade-off and pecking order theories of debt. In
  Espen Eckbo ed.: Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance.

Friedman, B.M., 1986. Implications of government deficits for interest rates, equity re-
  turns, and corporate financing. In Financing Corporate Capital Formation. University
  of Chicago Press, 67-90.

Giannetti, M., 2003. Do better institutions mitigate agency problems? Evidence from
  corporate finance choices. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 185-
  212.

Graham, J.R., Leary, M.T. and Roberts, M.R., 2014. How does government borrowing
  affect corporate financing and investment? NBER Working Paper 20581.


                                                   29
Graham, J.R., Leary, M.T. and Roberts, M.R., 2015. A century of capital structure: The
  leveraging of corporate America. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3), 658-683.

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. and Stein, J.C., 2010. A gap-filling theory of corporate debt
  maturity choice. The Journal of Finance, 65(3), 993-1028.

Hackbarth, D., Miao, J. and Morellec, E., 2006. Capital structure, credit risk, and macroe-
  conomic conditions. Journal of Financial Economics, 82, 519-550.

Halling, M., Yu, J. and Zechner, J., 2016. Leverage dynamics over the business cycle.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 122, 21-41.

Hennessy, C.A. and Whited, T.M., 2005. Debt dynamics. The Journal of Finance, 60(3),
  1129-1165.

Korajczyk, R.A. and Levy, A., 2003. Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions
  and financial constraints. Journal of Financial Economics, 68(1), 75-109.

Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for Treasury
  debt. Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 233-267.

Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2015. The impact of Treasury supply on
  financial sector lending and stability. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3), 571-600.

Leary, M.T. and Roberts, M.R., 2014. Do peer firms affect corporate financial policy?
  The Journal of Finance, 69(1), 139-178.

Lemmon, M.L., Roberts, M.R. and Zender, J.F., 2008. Back to the beginning: Persistence
  and the cross-section of corporate capital structure. The Journal of Finance, 63(4),
  1575-1608.

Levine, R. and Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth. American
  Economic Review, 88(3), 537-558.

Ma, Y., 2016. Non-financial firms as cross-market arbitrageurs. SSRN Working Paper.




                                            30
Pagano, M. and Von Thadden, E.L., 2004. The European bond markets under EMU.
  Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 20(4), 531-554.

Rajan, R.G. and Zingales, L., 1995. What do we know about capital structure? Some
  evidence from international data. The Journal of Finance, 50(5), 1421-1460.

Ramey, V.A. and Shapiro, M.D., 1998. Costly capital reallocation and the effects of
  government spending. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48,
  145-194.

Strebulaev, I.A., 2007. Do Tests of Capital Structure Theory Mean What They Say? The
  Journal of Finance, 62 (4), 1747-1787.

Taggart Jr, R., 1986. Have US corporations grown financially weak? In Financing cor-
  porate capital formation. University of Chicago Press, 13-34.

Titman, S. and Wessels, R., 1988. The determinants of capital structure. The Journal of
  Finance, 43 (1), 1-19.

Welch, I., 2004. Capital structure and stock returns. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1),
  106-132

Welch, I., 2011. Two common problems in capital structure research: The financial debt
  to asset ratio and issuing activity versus leverage changes. International Review of
  Finance, 11(1), 1-17.




                                            31
                     rE − rD




                                                              θ(d − λ)




            ∗ − r∗
           rE    D



                                                                       ρv 0 (ρd)

                                                                                       d
                                λ            d∗


Figure 1: Baseline model This figure shows the equilibrium level of debt-to-capital ratio (d∗ )
for the baseline case without government sector.




                rE − rD




                                                            θ(d − λ)




         ∗ − r∗
        rE    D
         ∗∗ − r ∗∗
        rE     D

                                                                    ρv 0 (ρd)
                                                                  ρv 0 (ρd + (1 − ρd)wG )
                                                                                   d
                            λ          d∗∗d∗


Figure 2: Government sector This figure shows the impact of government debt on the equilib-
rium level of debt-to-capital ratio (d) for corporations.



                                                    32
                   rE − rD



                                                  θH (d − λ)

                                                                       θL (d − λ)

             ∗ − r∗
            rE    D

            ∗∗ − r ∗∗
           rE     D




                                                                                             d
                                 λ d∗∗ ∗
                                    H dH          d∗∗
                                                   L       d∗L


Figure 3: Two firms with different financing frictions This figure shows the impact of
the introduction of government sector on the equilibrium level of debt-to-capital ratio for two firms with
different levels of financing frictions.




                                                   33
Figure 4:       EMU Integration This figure depicts scatter plots of ∆Government Debt-to-
GDPt−1,t−2 and ∆Book Leveraget,t−1 in countries that are members of the EMU and all other countries
over the 17-year period around the integration (1990-2006). The lines represent the linear regression fits
before 1999 and after 1998.




                                                   34
                                   Table 1: Sample Distribution

This table reports the frequency distribution of countries in our sample.


                                   Number of Number of     Number of
                  Country              Years      Firms Observations   Minimum Maximum


                  Argentina                8         57          266        1998   2014
                  Australia               25      1,986       16,390        1990   2014
                  Austria                 25        116        1,173        1990   2014
                  Belgium                 25        140        1,525        1990   2014
                  Brazil                  13        230        1,472        2001   2014
                  Canada                  25      2,927       20,202        1990   2014
                  Chile                   18        136        1,292        1997   2014
                  China                   19      2,343       17,209        1996   2014
                  Denmark                 22        186        1,878        1993   2014
                  Finland                 25        152        1,881        1990   2014
                  France                  25        939        9,247        1990   2014
                  Germany                 23        884        8,805        1992   2014
                  Greece                  17        231        2,219        1997   2014
                  Hong Kong               13        127        1,243        2002   2014
                  India                   19      2,451       14,743        1996   2014
                  Indonesia               12        360        2,578        2002   2014
                  Ireland                 25         93          911        1990   2014
                  Israel                  17        344        2,145        1998   2014
                  Italy                   25        303        2,941        1990   2014
                  Japan                   25      3,821       53,437        1990   2014
                  Malaysia                19        978       10,659        1996   2014
                  Mexico                  18        116        1,153        1997   2014
                  Netherlands             25        240        2,676        1990   2014
                  New Zealand             23        145        1,285        1992   2014
                  Norway                  25        291        2,300        1990   2014
                  Peru                    15         72          609        2000   2014
                  Philippines             19        155        1,526        1996   2014
                  Poland                  18        433        2,881        1997   2014
                  Portugal                20         77          703        1995   2014
                  Russia                  13        156          953        2002   2014
                  Singapore               24        700        6,951        1991   2014
                  South Africa            19        344        3,243        1996   2014
                  South Korea             19      1,478        9,432        1996   2014
                  Spain                   23        171        1,842        1992   2014
                  Sweden                  21        568        4,427        1994   2014
                  Switzerland             25        243        3,084        1990   2014
                  Thailand                18        507        5,223        1997   2014
                  Turkey                  13        237        1,851        2001   2014
                  United Kingdom          25      2,522       22,421        1990   2014
                  United States           25     11,517       98,627        1990   2014


                  Total                  813     38,776      343,403        1990   2014




                                                   35
                              Table 2: Summary Statistics by Country

This table shows the summary statistics for the country-level variables. Book Leverage is defined as the
ratio of total book debt of all firms in a country to sum of their assets. Debt-to-Capital is the ratio of
total corporate debt to total corporate capital (book value of debt plus equity) in each country. Market
Leverage is defined as the ratio of total book debt of all firms in a country to their market value of assets.
Government Debt is gross government debt divided by GDP, GDP Per Capita is measured in current
U.S. dollars, Unemployment is measured as a proportion of the labor force, and Exchange Rate is denoted
in local currency units per U.S. dollar. Ln(S&P Index) and Ln(CPI Level) are calculated by taking the
natural logarithm of the level of S&P Global Equity Index and the level of CPI.


                      Book    Debt-to-   Market Gov. Debt   Ln(GDP             Ln(S&P Unemploy-   Ln(Exchange
  Country          Leverage    Capital Leverage   to GDP Per Capita) Ln(CPI)    Index)     ment         Rate)


  Argentina            0.27       0.36     0.19      0.39       9.19    5.08      5.08     0.11          0.72
  Australia            0.27       0.38     0.18      0.21      10.24    5.02      5.25     0.07          0.29
  Austria              0.25       0.43     0.21      0.67      10.37    4.88      4.80     0.05          0.87
  Belgium              0.28       0.45     0.21      1.12      10.32    4.89      5.21     0.08          1.30
  Brazil               0.31       0.44     0.06      0.66       8.80   22.21      5.81     0.08          0.75
  Canada               0.27       0.39     0.20      0.84      10.27    4.93      5.17     0.08          0.22
  Chile                0.28       0.37     0.22      0.11       8.94    6.03      4.83     0.08          6.27
  China                0.26       0.36     0.22      0.34       7.50    5.59      4.96     0.04          2.03
  Denmark              0.27       0.39     0.17      0.51      10.64    4.94      5.64     0.07          1.82
  Finland              0.29       0.44     0.18      0.42      10.36    4.92      5.73     0.09          0.51
  France               0.27       0.48     0.20      0.61      10.28    4.88      5.15     0.09          0.58
  Germany              0.26       0.49     0.20      0.61      10.38    4.92      5.54     0.08          0.05
  Greece               0.31       0.45     0.24      1.11       9.86    5.93      5.35     0.12          1.52
  Hong Kong            0.17       0.23     0.09      0.01      10.30    5.33      6.28     0.05          2.05
  India                0.33       0.46     0.24      0.73       6.58    5.81      5.27     0.04          3.79
  Indonesia            0.32       0.43     0.19      0.37       7.57    6.62      4.25     0.08          9.15
  Ireland              0.33       0.46     0.18      0.68      10.30    4.96      5.34     0.10         -0.29
  Israel               0.34       0.51     0.23      0.80      10.07    5.96      5.40     0.08          1.39
  Italy                0.30       0.53     0.26      1.08      10.17    5.10      4.79     0.09          2.81
  Japan                0.32       0.49     0.26      1.48      10.47    4.72      3.93     0.04          4.70
  Malaysia             0.28       0.38     0.21      0.42       8.64    5.09      4.16     0.03          1.22
  Mexico               0.30       0.43     0.21      0.43       8.89    6.87      5.70     0.04          2.36
  Netherlands          0.25       0.44     0.15      0.63      10.40    4.88      5.47     0.05          0.13
  New Zealand          0.32       0.41     0.17      0.30       9.96    4.96      4.67     0.06          0.48
  Norway               0.30       0.46     0.23      0.37      10.80    4.93      5.12     0.04          1.90
  Peru                 0.24       0.31     0.19      0.36       8.10   15.85      5.66     0.08          1.14
  Philippines          0.35       0.47     0.28      0.53       7.24    5.83      3.87     0.09          3.76
  Poland               0.22       0.31     0.18      0.46       8.92   10.19      5.32     0.13          1.20
  Portugal             0.39       0.59     0.29      0.70       9.69    5.41      5.22     0.09          1.14
  Russia               0.20       0.24     0.16      0.19       8.82   11.82      5.37     0.07          3.37
  Singapore            0.22       0.32     0.13      0.85      10.22    4.86      5.14     0.03          0.44
  South Africa         0.20       0.30     0.11      0.39       8.44    5.96      4.85     0.24          1.92
  South Korea          0.33       0.51     0.31      0.23       9.68    5.36      4.74     0.04          6.99
  Spain                0.35       0.56     0.23      0.56       9.94    5.19      5.35     0.16          1.56
  Sweden               0.25       0.38     0.13      0.51      10.55    5.02      5.78     0.08          2.03
  Switzerland          0.25       0.38     0.15      0.52      10.82    4.87      5.75     0.03          0.25
  Thailand             0.37       0.49     0.25      0.44       8.01    5.27      3.42     0.02          3.57
  Turkey               0.25       0.35     0.18      0.49       8.92   12.51      6.01     0.10          0.34
  United Kingdom       0.22       0.35     0.13      0.49      10.27    5.00      5.25     0.07         -0.50
  United States        0.28       0.42     0.16      0.68      10.50    5.00      5.54     0.06          0.00


  Total                0.28       0.42     0.19      0.58       9.68    6.02      5.15     0.07          1.68

                                                      36
       Table 3: Summary Statistics for Country- and Firm-Level Variables

This table shows the summary statistics for the country-level (Panel A) and firm-level (Panel B) variables.
We use three leverage measures for our firm-level analyses. Book Leverage and Market Leverage are total
debt over book value of assets and total debt over market value of assets, respectively. Debt-to-Capital is
the ratio of total corporate debt to total corporate capital (book value of debt plus equity) in each country.
Tangibility is defined as the ratio between the value of property, plant, and equipment (PPE) and total
assets. We use the natural logarithm of book value of total assets (Ln(Assets)) in order to account for the
impact of firm size on leverage. Return on assets (ROA) is defined as operating income scaled by total
assets. Finally, Market-to-Book is defined as the ratio between the market value and the book value of total
assets. Country-level corporate variables are calculated by aggregating the numerator and the denominator
over all firms with non-missing dependent and control variables in a given year and country. Domestic
Government Debt is total debt net of debt owed to nonresidents. All country-level ratio variables and all
firm-level ratio variables are winsorized at 1% on both ends of the distribution.


  Panel A: Country-Level Variables
                                    Mean    Std. Dev.    25th Perc.    Median      75th Perc.   Num. Obs.


  Book Leverage                     0.283        0.065        0.239        0.277        0.318           813
  Debt-to-Capital                   0.423        0.098        0.359        0.420        0.481           813
  Market Leverage                   0.195        0.079        0.140        0.185        0.237           813
  Gov. Debt-to-GDP                  0.583        0.335        0.372        0.527        0.725           813
  Domestic Gov. Debt-to-GDP         0.204        0.169        0.080        0.167        0.292           671
  External Gov. Debt-to-GDP         0.380        0.301        0.190        0.307        0.513           671
  Ln(GDP Per Capita)                9.684        1.118        9.145       10.048       10.477           813
  Ln(CPI Index Level)               6.019        2.900        4.881        5.094        5.633           813
  Ln(S&P Index Level)               5.146        0.795        4.605        5.183        5.714           813
  Ln(Exchange Rate)                 1.680        2.162        0.030        1.118        2.311           813
  Unemployment Rate                 0.074        0.045        0.043        0.068        0.091           813
  Tangibility                       0.405        0.108        0.329        0.403        0.477           813
  Ln(Assets)                       12.092        1.595       10.936       11.983       13.134           813
  ROA                               0.126        0.033        0.103        0.121        0.146           813
  Market-to-Book                    1.780        2.071        1.232        1.470        1.795           813



  Panel B: Firm-Level Variables
                                    Mean    Std. Dev.    25th Perc.      Median    75th Perc.   Num. Obs.


  Book Leverage                     0.217        0.205        0.034        0.184        0.340       343,403
  Debt-to-Capital                   0.297        0.253        0.049        0.270        0.483       336,487
  Market Leverage                   0.180        0.179        0.019        0.131        0.289       330,249
  Tangibility                       0.305        0.232        0.112        0.261        0.446       343,403
  Ln(Assets)                        5.101        2.088        3.724        5.070        6.424       343,403
  ROA                               0.042        0.253        0.025        0.084        0.141       343,403
  Market-to-Book                    1.778        1.665        0.950        1.242        1.886       343,403



                                                    37
                     Table 4: Baseline Specification (Country Panel)

Panel A and Panel B report the estimation results for the fixed effects and first differences specifications,
respectively. Leverage denotes one of the following debt measures: Book Leverage is defined as the ratio of
total book debt of all firms in a country to their total assets; Debt-to-Capital is the ratio of total corporate
debt to total corporate capital (book value of debt plus equity) in each country; and Market Leverage is
defined as the ratio of total book debt of all firms in a country to their market value of assets. All other
variables are explained in Tables 2 and 3. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”,
“**” and “***”, respectively.



                                   Panel A: Fixed Effects                           Panel B: First Differences


                                 Book          Debt-to-            Market           Book         Debt-to-        Market
                               Leverage         Capital           Leverage        Leverage        Capital       Leverage


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1          −0.074∗∗∗       −0.096∗∗∗          −0.055∗∗        −0.068∗∗∗      −0.109∗∗∗      −0.059∗
                              (−3.523)         (−2.984)           (−2.277)        (−3.211)       (−3.611)       (−1.837)
                                                         ∗                                  ∗∗             ∗∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )         0.014           0.048              0.029           0.031          0.046          0.042∗
                                (0.646)         (1.926)            (0.998)         (2.189)        (2.265)        (1.957)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )        0.017           0.030            −0.020          −0.034         −0.047         −0.021
                                (0.645)         (0.878)           (−0.506)        (−1.007)       (−0.816)       (−0.353)
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )      −0.016          −0.032∗            −0.049∗∗∗       −0.004         −0.003         −0.011
                              (−1.326)         (−1.984)           (−3.635)        (−0.839)       (−0.393)       (−1.346)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗                  ∗∗∗
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )        −0.014          −0.014             −0.013          −0.002         −0.001         −0.003
                              (−3.660)         (−2.021)           (−3.584)        (−0.993)       (−0.237)       (−1.118)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Unemployment Ratet−1           0.266           0.322              0.130         −0.104         −0.074         −0.099
                                (2.914)         (2.417)            (1.157)        (−1.213)       (−0.594)       (−0.729)
  Tangibilityt−1                 0.048         −0.062               0.139           0.005        −0.077         −0.030
                                (0.645)        (−0.591)            (1.605)         (0.095)       (−0.989)       (−0.474)
  Ln(Assetst−1 )               −0.001            0.006            −0.010          −0.000           0.005          0.013∗∗
                              (−0.151)          (0.611)           (−1.095)        (−0.068)        (0.646)        (2.188)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗             ∗
  ROAt−1                       −0.812          −1.171             −1.055          −0.148         −0.187         −0.142
                              (−5.541)         (−5.659)           (−4.235)        (−2.179)       (−1.943)       (−1.216)
  Market-to-Bookt−1            −0.000            0.003∗           −0.007∗∗∗       −0.001∗∗       −0.001∗∗∗      −0.003∗∗
                              (−0.108)          (1.902)           (−2.790)        (−2.498)       (−2.905)       (−2.071)


  Observations                    813             813                813             780            780            780
  Adj. R-squared                 0.697           0.748              0.712           0.188          0.191          0.389
  Year FE                        YES             YES                YES             YES            YES            YES
  Country FE                     YES             YES                YES              NO             NO             NO




                                                             38
                   Table 5: Domestic vs. External Debt (Country Panel)

This table investigates the impact of external government debt on corporate leverage by repeating the
baseline fixed effects and the first differences specifications after decomposing Government Debt-to-GDP
as Domestic Government Debt and External Government Debt measured in percent of GDP. External
Government Debt is government debt owed to nonresidents. Domestic Government Debt is Government
Debt-to-GDP net of external debt. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.



                                  Panel A: Fixed Effects                        Panel B: First Differences


                                Book          Debt-to-         Market           Book      Debt-to-     Market
                              Leverage         Capital        Leverage        Leverage     Capital    Leverage


  Domestic Gov. Debtt−1       −0.128∗∗∗       −0.180∗∗        −0.130∗∗∗       −0.130∗∗∗   −0.153∗∗∗   −0.139∗∗∗
                             (−3.075)         (−2.574)        (−3.188)        (−5.597)    (−5.039)    (−3.307)
  External Gov. Debtt−1         0.017         −0.009            0.042           0.010     −0.010        0.000
                               (0.418)        (−0.184)         (0.965)         (0.321)    (−0.227)     (0.007)
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )        0.027           0.065∗∗         0.038           0.034∗∗     0.042∗∗     0.037
                               (1.349)         (2.677)         (1.187)         (2.525)     (2.494)     (1.430)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )       0.022           0.013         −0.043          −0.015        0.022     −0.047
                               (0.533)         (0.239)        (−0.705)        (−0.391)     (0.440)    (−0.582)
                                                        ∗∗              ∗∗∗
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )     −0.015          −0.036          −0.045          −0.005      −0.004      −0.014
                             (−1.163)         (−2.093)        (−2.964)        (−0.826)    (−0.451)    (−1.493)
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )       −0.004          −0.001          −0.003          −0.000        0.001     −0.001
                             (−1.414)         (−0.091)        (−1.512)        (−0.064)     (0.307)    (−0.323)
  Unemployment Ratet−1          0.222           0.312           0.025         −0.038      −0.070        0.005
                               (1.638)         (1.664)         (0.141)        (−0.434)    (−0.590)     (0.033)
                                                                        ∗∗
  Tangibilityt−1                0.087         −0.026            0.182           0.001     −0.062        0.005
                               (1.245)        (−0.248)         (2.049)         (0.024)    (−0.893)     (0.070)
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                0.000           0.011         −0.007            0.000       0.009       0.016∗
                               (0.034)         (1.129)        (−1.029)         (0.006)     (0.801)     (1.920)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  ROAt−1                      −0.690          −0.980          −1.033          −0.063      −0.107      −0.091
                             (−5.141)         (−5.004)        (−4.223)        (−0.863)    (−1.025)    (−0.665)
                                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Market-to-Bookt−1             0.001           0.003         −0.006          −0.001      −0.000      −0.004
                               (1.608)         (2.713)        (−2.276)        (−1.123)    (−0.459)    (−1.204)


  Observations                   671             671             671             630         630         630
  Adj. R-squared                0.723           0.772           0.732           0.197       0.199       0.416
  Year FE                       YES             YES             YES             YES         YES         YES
  Country FE                    YES             YES             YES              NO          NO          NO




                                                         39
             Table 6: Constant Elasticity Specification (Country Panel)

Corporate Debt is calculated by summing the dollar values of debt over all firms in a country and year.
Ln(Government Debt) is the natural logarithm of the dollar value of government debt outstanding. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are
denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.




                                   Panel A: Fixed Effects          Panel B: First Differences


                                        Ln(Corp. Debt)                    Ln(Corp. Debt)


       Ln(Gov. Debtt−1 )                    −0.145∗∗                          −0.198∗∗∗
                                           (−2.297)                          (−2.924)
                                                      ∗
       Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )                 0.151                           −0.042
                                             (1.702)                         (−0.360)
       Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )                0.112                             0.237
                                             (1.073)                           (0.696)
       Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )                0.034                             0.161∗∗∗
                                             (0.794)                           (3.818)
                                                      ∗∗∗
       Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )                −0.041                              0.025
                                           (−2.902)                            (1.440)
                                                      ∗∗∗
       Unemployment Ratet−1                   1.134                           −0.529
                                             (2.831)                         (−0.634)
       Tangibilityt−1                         0.097                             0.181
                                             (0.350)                           (0.484)
                                                      ∗∗∗
       Ln(Assetst−1 )                         1.006                             0.896∗∗∗
                                           (25.759)                           (11.848)
                                                      ∗∗∗
       ROAt−1                               −2.025                              0.506
                                           (−3.978)                            (1.215)
       Market-to-Bookt−1                      0.002                             0.002
                                             (0.720)                           (0.441)


       Observations                           813                                779
       Adj. R-squared                         0.990                             0.681
       Year FE                                YES                               YES
       Country FE                             YES                                NO




                                                  40
                        Table 7: Baseline Specification (Firm Panel)

Panels A and B report the estimation results from firm-fixed effects and first differences regressions. All
regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical signifi-
cance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.




                                   Panel A: Fixed Effects                        Panel B: First Differences


                                Book           Debt-to-         Market           Book         Debt-to-       Market
                              Leverage          Capital         Leverage       Leverage        Capital      Leverage


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1          −0.066∗∗∗       −0.074∗∗∗        −0.046∗∗∗      −0.104∗∗∗      −0.104∗∗∗     −0.078∗∗∗
                              (−4.903)         (−4.025)         (−2.965)       (−3.544)       (−4.263)      (−3.587)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )       −0.027          −0.024           −0.010           0.006          0.006       −0.001
                              (−3.485)         (−2.615)         (−0.706)        (0.421)        (0.534)      (−0.046)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )        0.015           0.039            0.022        −0.051         −0.046        −0.042
                                (0.614)         (1.088)          (0.773)       (−1.227)       (−1.292)      (−0.836)
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )      −0.015∗∗        −0.017∗          −0.046∗∗∗      −0.004         −0.002        −0.008
                              (−2.359)         (−1.915)         (−5.744)       (−1.308)       (−0.522)      (−1.276)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗              ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )        −0.010          −0.010           −0.012         −0.003         −0.004        −0.002
                              (−3.400)         (−2.199)         (−2.741)       (−3.427)       (−3.899)      (−1.006)
  Unemployment Ratet−1           0.016           0.054          −0.121           0.018        −0.037        −0.216∗∗
                                (0.216)         (0.487)         (−1.112)        (0.218)       (−0.348)      (−2.057)
  Tangibilityt−1                 0.126∗∗∗        0.147∗∗∗         0.103∗∗∗       0.043∗∗∗       0.054∗∗∗      0.036∗∗∗
                                (7.544)         (6.115)          (6.153)        (5.460)        (5.417)       (5.564)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                 0.037           0.048            0.042          0.006          0.011         0.020∗∗∗
                                (8.040)         (7.565)         (10.189)        (3.502)        (7.336)       (8.559)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  ROAt−1                       −0.105          −0.102           −0.075         −0.031         −0.017        −0.015∗∗∗
                              (−7.984)         (−5.547)         (−5.337)       (−5.015)       (−6.471)      (−9.308)
  Market-to-Bookt−1            −0.004∗∗∗       −0.005∗∗∗        −0.010∗∗∗      −0.001∗∗∗      −0.002∗∗∗       0.001∗∗∗
                              (−3.628)         (−2.791)        (−12.379)       (−2.866)       (−4.324)       (3.354)


  Observations                 343,403          336,487         330,249         299,013        293,694       288,145
  Adj. R-squared                0.639            0.707           0.727          0.0104         0.0113        0.0644
  Year FE                        YES             YES              YES            YES            YES           YES
  Firm FE                        YES             YES              YES             NO             NO            NO




                                                          41
                     Table 8: Firm Characteristics and Crowding Out

This table reports the results from firm-fixed effects regressions with firm size and profitability interactions.
Large equals one if a firm’s lagged book assets is in the top 20 percentile of its country distribution and
zero otherwise. Profitable indicates whether a firm’s lagged ROA is above its country median in a given
year. All regressions include firm- and year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.



                                 Book          Debt-to-            Market            Book          Debt-to-         Market
                               Leverage         Capital            Leverage        Leverage         Capital         Leverage


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1          −0.063∗∗∗       −0.070∗∗∗           −0.044∗∗∗       −0.060∗∗∗       −0.069∗∗∗        −0.042∗∗∗
                              (−4.600)         (−3.784)            (−2.866)        (−4.627)        (−3.861)         (−2.764)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗                  ∗∗
    X Large                    −0.012          −0.014              −0.010
                              (−2.792)         (−1.964)            (−2.299)
    X Profitable                                                                   −0.017∗∗∗       −0.021∗∗∗        −0.017∗∗∗
                                                                                   (−6.063)        (−6.753)         (−6.488)
                                         ∗∗              ∗                   ∗∗∗
  Large                          0.016           0.018               0.016
                                (2.695)         (2.002)             (2.784)
  Profitable                                                                       −0.005          −0.014∗∗∗        −0.014∗∗∗
                                                                                   (−1.326)        (−3.172)         (−3.814)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗                                  ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )       −0.028          −0.025              −0.011          −0.027          −0.024           −0.010
                              (−3.463)         (−2.698)            (−0.735)        (−3.290)        (−2.741)         (−0.655)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )        0.015           0.039               0.023           0.014           0.037            0.021
                                (0.624)         (1.095)             (0.785)         (0.569)         (1.036)          (0.734)
                                         ∗∗              ∗                   ∗∗∗             ∗∗              ∗
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )      −0.015          −0.017              −0.047          −0.016          −0.018           −0.047∗∗∗
                              (−2.325)         (−1.892)            (−5.648)        (−2.401)        (−1.982)         (−5.688)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗                  ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )        −0.010          −0.010              −0.012          −0.010          −0.010           −0.012∗∗
                              (−3.392)         (−2.196)            (−2.734)        (−3.371)        (−2.193)         (−2.694)
  Unemployment Ratet−1           0.021           0.061             −0.115            0.017           0.053          −0.123
                                (0.293)         (0.551)            (−1.067)         (0.229)         (0.480)         (−1.090)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Tangibilityt−1                 0.126           0.147               0.103           0.126           0.148            0.104∗∗∗
                                (7.559)         (6.128)             (6.182)         (7.466)         (6.028)          (6.176)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                 0.036           0.047               0.041           0.037           0.048            0.042∗∗∗
                                (7.806)         (7.460)             (9.814)         (8.025)         (7.517)         (10.308)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  ROAt−1                       −0.104          −0.101              −0.074          −0.093          −0.080           −0.055∗∗∗
                              (−7.864)         (−5.485)            (−5.275)        (−9.152)        (−5.723)         (−5.563)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Market-to-Bookt−1            −0.004          −0.005              −0.010          −0.003          −0.004           −0.009∗∗∗
                              (−3.685)         (−2.825)           (−12.711)        (−2.864)        (−2.223)        (−12.594)


  Observations                  343,403         336,487            330,249          343,403         336,487         330,249
  Adj. R-squared                 0.639           0.707              0.727            0.640           0.709           0.730
  Year FE                         YES            YES                 YES             YES             YES              YES
  Firm FE                         YES            YES                 YES             YES             YES              YES




                                                             42
                  Table 9: Country Characteristics and Crowding Out

This table reports the results from fixed effects regressions with government debt-to-GDP ratio interacted
with proxies for the availability of alternative means of external financing. Each year, we split the sample
below and above the median based on lagged Bank Dependence and Market Capitalization. Bank Depen-
dence is measured by total bank credit to private sector as a fraction of GDP. Market Capitalization is
total market value of public firms as a percent of GDP. All regressions include the control variables from
the baseline specification in Table 4, year- and country-fixed effects as well as the interactions of Bank
Dependence and Market Capitalization dummy variables with the control variables (including year-fixed
effects) which are not reported to save space. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.




                                        Book         Debt-to-        Market         Book      Debt-to-     Market
                                      Leverage        Capital       Leverage      Leverage     Capital    Leverage


 Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1                  −0.110∗∗∗      −0.150∗∗∗      −0.085∗∗∗     −0.098∗∗∗   −0.143∗∗∗   −0.073∗∗∗
                                     (−5.719)        (−3.509)       (−3.870)      (−4.668)    (−4.008)    (−3.187)
                                                ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗
   X High Bank Dependencet−1            0.073          0.091          0.064
                                       (2.141)        (2.092)        (1.920)
   X Low Market Capitalizationt−1                                                   0.031∗      0.052∗∗     0.024
                                                                                   (1.746)     (2.124)     (1.296)
 High Bank Dependencet−1              −0.189         −0.140           0.047
                                     (−0.924)        (−0.471)        (0.211)
 Low Market Capitalizationt−1                                                       0.089       0.134       0.010
                                                                                   (0.932)     (0.999)     (0.079)


 Observations                            761            761            761           767         767         767
 Adj. R-squared                         0.713          0.759          0.731         0.714       0.769       0.739
 Control variables                      YES            YES            YES           YES         YES         YES
 Year FE                                YES            YES            YES           YES         YES         YES
 Country FE                             YES            YES            YES           YES         YES         YES
 Interactions with controls             YES            YES            YES           YES         YES         YES
 Interactions with year FE              YES            YES            YES           YES         YES         YES




                                                       43
                       Table 10: Instrumental Variable Specification

This table reports the first and second stage estimation results from instrumental variables regressions
where Gov. Debt-to-GDP (Panel A) and Domestic Government Debt-to-GDP (Panel B) are instrumented
by lagged Military Expenditures-to-GDP. We drop firms in industries that are defense dependent. All
regressions include year- and country-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.


     Panel A: Total Government Debt
                                               First Stage                      Second Stage


                                                                      Book        Debt-to-     Market
                                           Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1      Leveraget     Capitalt    Leveraget


     Military Expenditures-to-GDPt−2             11.923**
                                                  (2.116)
     Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1                                             -0.142**      -0.174*     -0.188**
                                                                     (-2.140)     (-1.934)     (-2.034)
     Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )                      -0.210***            0.001         0.036       -0.001
                                                  (-2.851)           (0.047)       (1.281)     (-0.029)
     Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )                      -0.260*             -0.004        0.007       -0.057
                                                  (-1.940)           (-0.108)      (0.156)     (-1.306)
     Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )                     -0.115***           -0.024*      -0.040**    -0.062***
                                                  (-2.821)           (-1.706)     (-2.042)     (-3.957)
     Unemployment Ratet−1                        2.445***            0.436**       0.540**     0.508*
                                                  (3.627)            (2.321)       (2.105)     (1.777)
     Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )                         0.009            -0.014***     -0.014**    -0.012***
                                                  (0.703)            (-3.189)     (-1.962)     (-2.850)
     Tangibilityt−1                                0.089              0.051        -0.054      0.158*
                                                  (0.354)            (0.681)      (-0.543)     (1.830)
     Ln(Assetst−1 )                                0.024              -0.001        0.006       -0.007
                                                  (0.843)            (-0.080)      (0.604)     (-0.777)
     ROAt−1                                        0.115            -0.802***     -1.112***   -1.011***
                                                  (0.242)            (-5.231)     (-5.324)     (-3.750)
     Market-to-Bookt−1                            -0.003              -0.000       0.003**    -0.008***
                                                  (-0.716)           (-0.237)      (2.351)     (-3.955)


     Underidentification test:
     Kleibergen-Paap rk LM                         4.60
     P-value                                       0.032
     Weak identification test:
     Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F                     4.48


     Observations                                   800                800          800          800
     Adj. R-squared                                                   0.660         0.721       0.652
     Year FE                                       YES                YES           YES         YES
     Country FE                                    YES                YES           YES         YES



                                                 44
                             Instrumental Variables (Cont.)



Panel B: Domestic Government Debt
                                       First Stage                  Second Stage


                                                           Book       Debt-to-     Market
                                   Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−2   Leveraget    Capitalt    Leveraget


Military Expenditures-to-GDPt−1         6.401***
                                         (3.293)
Domestic Gov. Debtt−1                                    -0.295**     -0.464***    -0.345**
                                                         (-2.219)     (-2.721)     (-2.206)
Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )                    0.003            0.027      0.069***      0.031
                                         (0.059)          (1.251)      (2.764)     (0.963)
Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )                 -0.219**          -0.020       -0.052       -0.092
                                         (-2.260)        (-0.333)     (-0.656)     (-1.375)
Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )                  -0.031           -0.020      -0.042**    -0.050***
                                         (-1.275)        (-1.499)     (-2.276)     (-3.203)
Unemployment Ratet−1                    1.139***         0.451**       0.669**      0.398
                                         (3.897)          (2.400)      (2.493)     (1.637)
Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )                   0.046***           0.003        0.012       0.005
                                         (4.365)          (0.393)      (1.165)     (0.564)
Tangibilityt−1                           -0.142            0.066       -0.065      0.163*
                                         (-0.815)         (0.885)     (-0.569)     (1.739)
Ln(Assetst−1 )                           0.045*            0.007       0.023*       0.003
                                         (1.959)          (0.634)      (1.883)     (0.337)
ROAt−1                                   0.478*          -0.631***    -0.792***   -0.937***
                                         (1.859)         (-4.039)     (-3.890)     (-3.628)
Market-to-Bookt−1                       -0.004**           0.001       0.002*     -0.006***
                                         (-2.571)         (0.658)      (1.790)     (-2.672)


Underidentification tests:
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM                     7.28
P-value                                   0.007
Weak identification tests:
Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F                 10.84


Observations                               659             659          659          659
Adj. R-squared                                             0.672        0.702       0.668
Year FE                                   YES              YES          YES         YES
Country FE                                YES              YES          YES         YES




                                           45
                                    Table 11: EMU Integration


This table analyzes the impact of the EMU integration on the sensitivity of corporate leverage to govern-
ment debt. Panels A and B report the results from fixed effects and first differences regressions, respectively.
EMU is a variable that indicates whether the country is a member of the European Monetary Union. After
1998 is an indicator for the period between 1999 and 2006. All regressions include macroeconomic and
firm-level controls as well as their interactions with EMU, After 1998, and EMU X After 1998. Sample
period is from 1990 to 2006. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.



                                   Panel A: Fixed Effects                       Panel B: First Differences


                                 Book         Debt-to-         Market           Book         Debt-to-     Market
                               Leverage        Capital        Leverage        Leverage        Capital    Leverage


   Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1         −0.147∗∗∗      −0.203∗∗∗       −0.140∗∗∗       −0.147∗∗∗      −0.315∗∗∗   −0.166∗∗
                              (−4.450)        (−4.256)        (−3.703)        (−3.543)       (−4.176)    (−2.708)
     X EMU                       0.069          0.032           0.081         −0.062           0.085       0.026
                                (1.070)        (0.302)         (1.504)        (−1.091)        (0.726)     (0.198)
     X After 1998                0.010          0.039         −0.009            0.022          0.176     −0.128
                                (0.441)        (1.115)        (−0.378)         (0.262)        (1.381)    (−1.245)
                                         ∗∗                             ∗∗∗             ∗∗
     X After 1998 X EMU          0.116          0.087           0.151           0.313          0.074       0.382∗
                                (2.599)        (1.067)         (3.749)         (2.223)        (0.376)     (1.833)


   Observations                   498            498             498             465            465         465
   Adj. R-squared                0.831          0.822           0.814           0.143          0.155       0.230
   Control Variables             YES            YES             YES             YES            YES         YES
   EMU Interactions              YES            YES             YES             YES            YES         YES
   After 1998 Interactions       YES            YES             YES             YES            YES         YES
   After 1998 X
   EMU Interactions              YES            YES             YES             YES            YES         YES
   Country FE                    YES            YES             YES              NO             NO          NO




                                                         46
                                       Appendix


A.1   Equilibrium Leverage and Financing Costs

   The following equation summarizes the relation between the equity premium and the
leverage ratio in equilibrium:


                           θ(d∗ − λ) = ρv 0 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG ).                     (8)


Notice that in equilibrium, the leverage ratio is above the firm’s target debt level. Hy-
pothetically, assume the opposite such that d∗ < λ. Given our assumption that v 0 (.) is a
decreasing function and v 0 (1) = 0, this implies ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG > 1 or ρd∗ > 1. Since
ρ ≤ 1, this generates a contradiction such that d∗ > 1.
   Taking the derivative of both sides of equation (8) with respect to θ yields

                    ∂d∗                    d∗ − λ
                        = 2                                        ≤ 0,                (9)
                    ∂θ   ρ (1 − wG )v 00 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG ) − θ

which suggests that higher financing frictions are associated with lower leverage ratios in
equilibrium. Given that d∗ ≥ λ, the negative sign for the derivative implies that firms
with higher financing costs have equilibrium leverage ratios that are closer to the target.



A.2   Proof of Proposition 1

   We take the derivative of both sides in equation (8) with respect to wG to obtain the
following expression

                    ∂d∗     ρ (1 − ρd∗ ) v 00 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG )
                        =                                            ≤ 0.             (10)
                    ∂wG   θ − ρ2 (1 − wG )v 00 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG )

Given that v 00 (.) ≤ 0 and ρd∗ ≤ 1, equation (10) implies a negative partial derivative of
leverage with respect to government debt.
   Conversely, suppose that ρd∗ > 1 holds which implies ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG > 1. The


                                             47
lower bound for v 0 is chosen such that households don’t obtain additional utility from
holding more debt if all their wealth is already invested in government debt securities
(i.e. v 0 (1) = 0). Therefore in equilibrium, ρv 0 (ρd∗ (1 − wG ) + wG ) < 0 which implies
that d∗ < λ. Given that λ < 1 and ρ ≤ 1, d∗ < λ and d∗ > 1 cannot be satisfied
simultaneously. Hence, ρd∗ ≤ 1 must hold in equilibrium.
   Using equation (4), one can show that

                               ∗
                             ∂wD   ∂d∗
                                 =     (1 − wG ) − d∗ ≤ 0.
                             ∂wG   ∂wG


Thus, as government debt increases, both d∗ and wD
                                                 ∗
                                                   decrease relative to the previous
equilibrium. Similarly, one can also show that the equity premium decreases with gov-
ernment debt as well
                                   ∂µ∗    ∂d∗
                                       =θ     ≤ 0.
                                   ∂wG    ∂wG




                                           48
                                  Table A1: Variable Definitions

This table details the variable construction for the analysis of the sample. Panel A lists the definitions of
Compustat variables. The variable Xpressfeed pneumonics are given in italics. The country-level variables
follow firm-level definitions and are calculated by aggregating the numerator and denominator values over
all firms in a given year and country. Panel B lists the data source for and the definitions of macro variables.
If a variable is available through two different sources for a country, we use the data source that provides
us with the longest series.




 Panel A: Compustat Variables


 Variable                        Definition and Compustat Item Name


 Ln(Assets)                      Ln(Total Book Assets) = Ln(at)
 ROA                             Operating Income (Before Depreciation) / Assets = oibdp / at
 Tangibility                     Net PPE / Assets = ppent / at
 Market Value of Equity          MVE = prcc × cshoc
 Market Value of Assets          MVA = at - ceq + MVE
 Market-to-Book                  MVA / Total Book Assets
 Total Debt                      Short-Term Debt + Long-Term Debt = dltt + dlc
 Book Leverage                   Total Debt / Total Book Assets = (dltt + dlc) / at
 Debt-to-Capital                 Total Debt / Total Capital = (dltt + dlc) / (ceq + dltt + dlc)
 Market Leverage                 Total Debt / MVA



 Panel B: Macro Variables


 Variable                        Data Source                    Definition


 Gov. Debt-to-GDP                WEO data on IMF                Gross government debt (%GDP)
 GDP Per Capita                  World Bank                     GDP per capita (current US$)
 Inflation                       World Bank and IMF             Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)
 S&P Return                      World Bank                     S&P global equity indices (annual % change)
 Unemployment Rate               World Bank and IMF             Unemployment, total (% of total labor force)
 Nominal Exchange Rate           World Bank and ECB             Official exchange rate (LCU per US$, period avr.)
 External Government Debt        IMF, World Bank and ECB        Gross external debt (%GDP)
 Bank credit to private sector   BIS                            Bank credit (% GDP)




                                                     49
       Table A2: Subsample Analysis - OECD Countries (Country Panel)

This table reports the fixed effects and first differences estimation results for the baseline specification
using the panel of OECD countries. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the country level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and
“***”, respectively.



                                  Panel A: Fixed Effects                           Panel B: First Differences


                                Book          Debt-to-            Market           Book          Debt-to-         Market
                              Leverage         Capital           Leverage        Leverage         Capital        Leverage


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1         −0.079∗∗∗       −0.098∗∗           −0.048∗         −0.064∗∗        −0.083∗∗        −0.026
                             (−3.270)         (−2.445)           (−1.997)        (−2.683)        (−2.458)        (−0.920)
                                                                                           ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )      −0.028            0.020              0.020           0.062           0.097           0.082∗∗∗
                             (−0.898)          (0.532)            (0.540)         (4.014)         (4.383)         (4.734)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )       0.032           0.064              0.002         −0.066          −0.083          −0.036
                               (0.992)         (1.074)            (0.051)        (−1.514)        (−0.971)        (−0.527)
                                                        ∗                  ∗∗
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )     −0.024          −0.044             −0.049          −0.003          −0.003            0.001
                             (−1.331)         (−1.936)           (−2.429)        (−0.352)        (−0.295)         (0.145)
                                                                           ∗
  Unemployment Ratet−1          0.128           0.200              0.140         −0.048          −0.057          −0.044
                               (1.088)         (1.150)            (1.796)        (−0.598)        (−0.425)        (−0.402)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗                  ∗∗∗
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )       −0.012          −0.012             −0.008          −0.001            0.000         −0.002
                             (−3.269)         (−1.795)           (−2.843)        (−0.611)         (0.145)        (−0.871)
  Tangibilityt−1                0.033         −0.017               0.077           0.053           0.011         −0.004
                               (0.388)        (−0.127)            (1.045)         (0.646)         (0.093)        (−0.051)
                                        ∗∗              ∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                0.027           0.028              0.017           0.007           0.012           0.016∗∗
                               (2.294)         (1.795)            (1.434)         (1.058)         (1.115)         (2.221)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗              ∗
  ROAt−1                      −0.844          −1.313             −0.855          −0.229          −0.272          −0.280∗∗
                             (−4.792)         (−5.061)           (−3.915)        (−2.530)        (−1.901)        (−2.689)
  Market-to-Bookt−1             0.007           0.015            −0.022∗           0.001           0.001         −0.007∗∗
                               (1.039)         (1.406)           (−1.728)         (0.374)         (0.325)        (−2.510)


  Observations                  567              567                567             546             546             546
  Adj. R-squared                0.665           0.705              0.753           0.230           0.236           0.469
  Year FE                       YES             YES                YES             YES             YES             YES
  Firm FE                       YES             YES                YES              NO              NO              NO




                                                            50
           Table A3: Subsample Analysis - OECD Countries (Firm Panel)

This table reports the firm-fixed effects and first differences estimation results for the baseline specification
using the panel of OECD countries. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the country level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and
“***”, respectively.




                                    Panel A: Fixed Effects                       Panel B: First Differences


                                 Book          Debt-to-         Market           Book         Debt-to-       Market
                               Leverage         Capital         Leverage       Leverage        Capital      Leverage


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1          −0.060∗∗∗       −0.061∗∗         −0.050∗∗       −0.106∗∗∗      −0.097∗∗∗     −0.093∗∗∗
                              (−3.412)         (−2.624)         (−2.296)       (−4.066)       (−4.145)      (−3.223)
                                                                                        ∗∗∗           ∗∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )       −0.005          −0.016             0.015          0.031          0.023         0.011
                              (−0.387)         (−0.770)          (1.031)        (4.769)        (2.397)       (0.979)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )        0.049           0.116∗           0.016          0.065          0.046       −0.100∗
                                (1.180)         (1.988)          (0.348)        (0.689)        (0.606)      (−1.834)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗              ∗∗∗
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )      −0.021          −0.023           −0.053         −0.007         −0.001        −0.014
                              (−2.868)         (−2.120)         (−6.403)       (−1.577)       (−0.200)      (−1.432)
  Unemployment Ratet−1         −0.077          −0.130           −0.117           0.025        −0.072        −0.161∗
                              (−0.939)         (−1.101)         (−1.090)        (0.338)       (−0.672)      (−1.826)
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )        −0.009∗∗∗       −0.010∗∗         −0.011∗∗       −0.003∗∗∗      −0.004∗∗∗     −0.002
                              (−3.294)         (−2.183)         (−2.707)       (−3.721)       (−4.075)      (−1.144)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Tangibilityt−1                 0.121           0.141            0.098          0.044          0.053         0.038∗∗∗
                                (5.653)         (4.595)          (4.822)        (4.498)        (4.245)       (4.906)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗            ∗∗∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                 0.032           0.041            0.038          0.005          0.010         0.019∗∗∗
                                (9.274)         (8.724)         (11.384)        (2.590)        (7.000)       (6.492)
  ROAt−1                       −0.095∗∗∗       −0.088∗∗∗        −0.063∗∗∗      −0.030∗∗∗      −0.014∗∗∗     −0.013∗∗∗
                              (−7.867)         (−5.820)         (−5.657)       (−4.377)       (−6.725)      (−8.901)
                                         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Market-to-Bookt−1            −0.004          −0.006           −0.009         −0.001         −0.002          0.001∗∗
                              (−4.255)         (−3.385)        (−10.371)       (−3.399)       (−5.526)       (2.591)


  Observations                 273,291          267,165         263,410         239,021        234,347       230,985
  Adj. R-squared                 0.629           0.702           0.724          0.0121         0.0123        0.0606
  Year FE                        YES             YES              YES            YES            YES           YES
  Firm FE                        YES             YES              YES             NO             NO            NO




                                                          51
                            Table A4: External Debt (Firm Panel)

This table investigates the impact of external government debt on corporate leverage by repeating both
the firm-fixed effects and the first differences specifications after decomposing Government Debt-to-GDP
as Domestic Government Debt and External Government Debt measured in percent of GDP. External
Government Debt is government debt owed to nonresidents. Domestic Government Debt is Government
Debt-to-GDP net of external debt. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.




                                   Panel A: Fixed Effects                          Panel B: First Differences


                                Book          Debt-to-            Market           Book          Debt-to-         Market
                              Leverage         Capital            Leverage       Leverage         Capital        Leverage


  Domestic Gov. Debtt−1       −0.039∗∗        −0.037              −0.049∗∗       −0.072∗∗∗       −0.089∗∗∗       −0.051∗∗∗
                             (−2.198)         (−1.424)            (−2.113)       (−2.784)        (−3.945)        (−2.806)
  External Gov. Debtt−1         0.020           0.010               0.048        −0.001          −0.016          −0.022
                               (0.515)         (0.198)             (1.052)       (−0.035)        (−0.426)        (−0.519)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )      −0.025          −0.022              −0.018           0.011           0.009         −0.003
                             (−3.054)         (−1.792)            (−1.345)        (0.796)         (0.871)        (−0.135)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )       0.031           0.052               0.024        −0.015          −0.015            0.015
                               (1.278)         (1.445)             (0.830)       (−0.281)        (−0.318)         (0.368)
                                        ∗                                  ∗∗∗             ∗∗
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )     −0.010          −0.013              −0.030         −0.005          −0.004          −0.000
                             (−1.718)         (−1.522)            (−4.044)       (−2.146)        (−1.048)        (−0.034)
  Unemployment Ratet−1        −0.084          −0.038              −0.268           0.024         −0.045          −0.215∗
                             (−0.889)         (−0.334)            (−1.668)        (0.230)        (−0.362)        (−1.789)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗                 ∗∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )       −0.008          −0.009              −0.008         −0.002          −0.003          −0.002
                             (−3.017)         (−2.166)            (−2.236)       (−2.190)        (−3.682)        (−0.788)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Tangibilityt−1                0.130           0.154               0.101          0.042           0.051           0.035∗∗∗
                               (7.698)         (6.058)             (5.988)        (5.117)         (4.775)         (5.053)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )                0.035           0.045               0.041          0.005           0.011           0.020∗∗∗
                               (8.257)         (7.402)            (10.051)        (2.929)         (7.934)         (7.371)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  ROAt−1                      −0.098          −0.093              −0.068         −0.031          −0.015          −0.014∗∗∗
                             (−8.317)         (−5.935)            (−5.794)       (−4.996)        (−6.246)        (−8.205)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Market-to-Bookt−1           −0.004          −0.005              −0.009         −0.001          −0.002            0.001∗∗∗
                             (−2.916)         (−2.284)           (−10.697)       (−2.848)        (−4.098)         (3.202)


  Observations                 294,821         288,513            282,841         252,956         248,124         243,030
  Adj. R-squared                0.635           0.707              0.732           0.009           0.011           0.066
  Year FE                       YES             YES                 YES            YES             YES             YES
  Firm FE                       YES             YES                 YES             NO              NO              NO




                                                            52
                                      Table A5: Debt Maturity

This table reports the results from fixed effects and first differences regressions of Long-Term Debt and
Short-Term Debt as well as their ratio. Long-Term Debt is total debt due in more than one year. Short-
Term Debt is debt in current liabilities. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are denoted by “*”, “**” and “***”, respectively.



                                 Panel A: Fixed Effects                            Panel B: First Differences


                            Long-Term       Short-Term           Long- to       Long-Term       Short-Term        Long- to
                             Debt to         Debt to         Short-Term          Debt to         Debt to         Short-Term
                             Assets           Assets              Debt           Assets           Assets           Debt


  Gov. Debt-to-GDPt−1        −0.031∗         −0.034∗∗∗           −0.032          −0.044∗∗∗       −0.056∗∗∗        −0.003
                            (−1.955)         (−3.569)            (−0.679)       (−3.325)         (−3.482)         (−0.153)
  Ln(GDP Per Capitat−1 )     −0.017          −0.010              −0.024          −0.004            0.008          −0.012
                            (−1.268)         (−0.627)            (−0.572)       (−1.075)          (0.784)         (−0.474)
  Ln(CPI Index Levelt−1 )    −0.029            0.043             −0.138          −0.045          −0.008           −0.079
                            (−0.654)          (1.416)            (−1.026)       (−1.380)         (−0.416)         (−0.985)
  Ln(S&P Index Levelt−1 )    −0.001          −0.015∗∗∗             0.015          0.001          −0.005∗          −0.000
                            (−0.159)         (−4.154)             (1.192)         (0.361)        (−1.889)         (−0.103)
  Unemployment Ratet−1       −0.024            0.037               0.075         −0.112∗∗          0.113          −0.072
                            (−0.281)          (0.512)             (0.294)       (−2.100)          (1.500)         (−0.364)
  Ln(Exchange Ratet−1 )      −0.007∗∗∗       −0.003∗∗            −0.009∗         −0.003∗∗∗       −0.000           −0.004∗
                            (−3.078)         (−2.220)            (−1.995)       (−3.616)         (−0.616)         (−1.969)
                                      ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗             ∗∗               ∗∗∗
  Tangibilityt−1              0.078            0.045               0.067          0.014            0.029          −0.028∗∗∗
                              (5.105)        (12.094)             (3.915)         (2.271)         (9.086)         (−3.000)
                                      ∗∗∗              ∗∗                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
  Ln(Assetst−1 )              0.027            0.010               0.037          0.005            0.002            0.007∗∗∗
                             (14.444)         (2.533)            (22.127)         (5.305)         (1.441)          (2.896)
                                      ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
  ROAt−1                     −0.044          −0.051                0.021         −0.012          −0.014           −0.006
                            (−8.122)         (−6.080)             (2.032)       (−6.809)         (−3.945)         (−0.993)
  Market-to-Bookt−1          −0.001          −0.003∗∗∗             0.004∗∗∗      −0.001∗∗        −0.001∗∗∗          0.001
                            (−1.283)         (−7.472)             (4.301)       (−2.078)         (−3.236)          (1.449)


  Observations               343,403         343,403             295,318         299,034         299,116          249,865
  Adj. R-squared              0.629           0.556               0.542           0.004           0.005            0.001
  Year FE                     YES              YES                YES             YES              YES              YES
  Firm FE                     YES              YES                YES              NO              NO               NO




                                                            53
