                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ACCOUNTING FOR GROWTH IN THE AGE OF THE INTERNET:
             THE IMPORTANCE OF OUTPUT-SAVING TECHNICAL CHANGE

                                         Charles Hulten
                                       Leonard Nakamura

                                       Working Paper 23315
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23315


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2017, Revised September 2018




The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and should not be attributed to
any organization with which they are affiliated, including the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at the meeting of the Society for Economic Measurement,
July 2016, in Thessaloniki, Greece; the Federal Reserve Day-Ahead Meeting on Productivity,
September 2016, Cincinnati; the 2017 ASSA meetings in Chicago; and at the CRIW Workshop at
the NBER Summer Institute, July 18, 2017. We thank Roger Betancourt, John Fernald, Brent
Moulton, Dan Sichel, Chad Syverson, and the participants at the various presentations for their
comments and suggestions on earlier drafts. Remaining errors and interpretations are our
responsibility.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23315.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Charles Hulten and Leonard Nakamura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Growth in the Age of the Internet: The Importance of Output-Saving Technical
Change
Charles Hulten and Leonard Nakamura
NBER Working Paper No. 23315
April 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. E01,O3,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

We extend the conventional neoclassical production and growth framework, with its emphasis on
total factor productivity as the primary macroeconomic mechanism of innovation, to allow for
technical change that affects consumer welfare directly. Our model is based on Lancaster’s “New
Approach to Consumer Theory,” in which there is a separate consumption technology that
transforms goods, measured at production cost, into utility. This technology can shift over time,
allowing consumers to make more efficient use of each dollar of income. This is an output-saving
technical change, in contrast to the resource-saving technical change of the TFP residual. The
output-saving formulation is a natural way to think about the free information goods available
over the Internet, which bypass GDP and go directly to the consumer. It also leads to the concept
of expanded GDP (EGDP), the sum of conventional supply-side GDP and a willingness-to-pay
metric of the value of output-saving innovation to consumers. This alternative concept of GDP is
linked to output-saving technical change and incorporates the value of those technology goods
that have eluded the traditional concept. It thus provides a potentially more accurate
representation of the economic progress occurring during the digital revolution. One implication
of our model is that living standards, as measured by EGDP, can rise at a faster rate than real
GDP growth, which may shed light on the question of how the latter can decline in an era of rapid
innovation.


Charles Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3114, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu

Leonard Nakamura
Economic Research
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia PA 19106-1574
USA
leonard.nakamura@phil.frb.org
                                                  I. Introduction

The digital revolution presents an interesting paradox. On the one hand, the revolution has
transformed the economic landscape and has had a powerful impact on daily lives. On the other,
real GDP growth has slowed in recent years, despite the evident boom in information
technology. Per capita GDP growth declined from its 1995–2006 rate of 2.3 percent to 1.5
percent from 2010 to 2015. Various explanations of this seeming paradox have been offered. The
sharp and prolonged decline is seen by some as pointing to a more serious problem than a
prolonged recession. Robert Gordon (2016) has also argued that the decline reflects the relatively
anemic character of the digital revolution compared with earlier technological revolutions.
         The disconnect between macroeconomic estimates of GDP and microeconomic analyses
of innovation is reminiscent of the famous Solow (1987) paradox: “You can see the computer
age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.” Solow’s remark was interpreted by many as a
mild rebuke to those enthusiasts who overhyped the impact of computers on productivity growth.
It could also be interpreted as an observation about the failure of national statistics to capture the
true impact of the computer revolution, a position championed by Alan Greenspan around the
same time. 2 We are now in a similar debate about the later stages of the digital revolution, again
raising the question of whether there is less than meets the eye because there really is less of an
impact on true GDP than enthusiasts imagine, or whether the impacts are concealed by the
mismeasurement of real GDP.
         We suggest that both may be true to some extent and that the impact of the digital
revolution cannot be properly assessed by focusing exclusively on how innovation affects the
supply side of the economy. There is a growing conviction in the recent literature on growth
accounting that the current round of innovation is not adequately captured by conventional real
GDP, particularly that which is available without a direct cost, and there is also an emerging
view that it may bypass GDP entirely. 3


2
  Greenspan’s concerns were first expressed in remarks at an FOMC meeting in late 1996 in regard to a staff
analysis of sectoral productivity trends (Corrado and Slifman, 1999).
3
  In her book on the history of GDP, Coyle (2014) concludes that “gross domestic product is a measure of the
economy best suited to an earlier era” (p. 125). Feldstein (2017) reaches a similar conclusion: “A great deal of effort
and talent has been applied over past decades to the measurement of real income and inflation. These problems are
extremely difficult. In my judgment, they are far from being resolved, and as a result, substantial errors of unknown


                                                                                                                      2
         How might this happen? The Internet accelerates the flow of information, and the
increased flow can increase the utility that a consumer derives from a given amount of income.
The mechanisms at work here include an improved consumer awareness of alternative options,
more timely access to information, and superior matching of goods to wants. An important
implication is that a general increase in the availability of information can increase consumer
utility without an increase in GDP. Moreover, the growth in consumer welfare over time may
reflect both improvements in the efficiency of production and improvements in the efficiency of
consumption. If this is true, a declining rate of real GDP growth may be consistent with the
perception of a vibrant technological environment and the microeconomic analysis that supports
it.
         In any event, Koopman’s 1947 warning about the perils of measurement without theory
suggests that a theoretical framework is needed that at least allows for an alternative non-GDP
channel through which innovation operates. In this paper, we propose an extension of the
conventional production-function approach to growth analysis that permits consumers to make
more efficient use of each dollar of income and allows for the possibility that living standards
can be rising at a greater rate than is signaled by the growth rate of real GDP.
         Our model is based on Lancaster’s “New Approach to Consumer Theory” (1966a), which
we adapt to the growth accounting problem in a way consistent with the assumptions of the
conventional TFP residual model. In the Lancaster framework, there is a separate consumption
technology that transforms the goods acquired from their producers, measured at production cost,
into consumption activities or commodities that give utility based on their characteristics. We
draw from the Lancaster model the idea that the utility function can shift over time as the
technology of consumption becomes more efficient. Efficiency can increase through costless
improvements in product quality that allow better products to be purchased for the same amount
of money or through an increase in effective information that allows the consumer to get more
utility from a given amount of expenditure. 4 An outward shift in the consumption technology


size remain in our ability to measure both real output and inflation” (p. 161). Others point to the need to look beyond
GDP (as, for example, Ahmad and Schreyer (2016), Brynjolfsson et al (2017), Nakamura (2014), Nakamura,
Samuels and Soloveichik (2016), Hulten (2015), and Varian (2009, 2016).
4
  Search engines provide a concrete example of how the Internet makes consumer choice more efficient. A
consumer faced with a choice between different products can often find information about product specifications


                                                                                                                     3
causes the macroeconomic utility possibility frontier (UPF) to shift outward, even if the supply-
side production possibility frontier (PPF) remains unchanged. The shift in the UPF is, in effect,
output-saving technical change, and it is particularly relevant for understanding the growth
dynamics of the consumer-oriented digital age, with its “free” goods.
         There is, however, an important empirical asymmetry between the two sides of the
growth account: Unlike GDP, utility is not directly observable in a way that permits direct
measurement. This leads us to reformulate our expanded growth model in terms of the associated
expenditure function and the compensating and equivalent variations for which metrics exist and
which, indeed, underpin much of the recent empirical literature on valuing the Internet and other
seemingly free goods. This literature makes extensive use of the willingness-to-pay concept of
valuation associated with these metrics, as well as the related concept of consumer surplus. This
expenditure function approach then leads us to introduce a concept we term expanded gross
domestic product (EGDP), which is simply the notional sum of conventional GDP plus the
compensating/equivalent variation due to output-saving technical change. This expanded concept
of GDP is a dollar metric of the welfare side of the economy, including output-saving technical
change, and therefore provides a more complete account of the growth of the “new” economy.
EGDP also provides an analytical “home” for the results of those studies seeking to measure the
willingness-to-pay or consumer surplus associated with the hard-to-measure new goods of this
economy.
         The paper then moves beyond costless technical change to allow for resource-costly
innovation. Whereas costless innovation envisions technical progress on the supply side as a
process based on inspiration, learning, and knowledge spillovers, the alternative view treats
innovation as a matter of systematic investments in technology, including, for example,
expenditures for research and development (R&D). These intangible inputs essentially “produce”
innovation using resources that must be paid for one way or another. From a welfare standpoint,
the gains from fully costed innovation are of a different nature: Innovation of the costly sort does


and capabilities, the experience of other consumers, and explicit comparisons from rating organizations. Someone
looking to buy a particular product can go on Amazon, for example, and see not only the price and availability of
that item but also a range of similar items that may turn out to be preferable. And this can be done while shopping in
a store to see if a better price is available online, using a smartphone or other mobile device. GPS and traffic maps
are often of great utility when traveling, as is immediate access to health information in times of need. Timely access
to general medical information can also be of great value.


                                                                                                                     4
not convey the same benefits as the costless “manna from heaven” sort, be they output-saving or
resource-saving technical change.
       This paper does not attempt to resolve the debate over whether, or by how much, the
benefits of economic growth are actually understated by the way GDP is currently measured.
Rather, it attempts to extend the conventional growth accounting framework in such a way that
the debate might, in time, be resolved. However, while the paper is essentially about theory, we
do offer some comments on the growing body of empirical work on the boundaries of the digital
economy to indicate both the current state of play and some of the orders of magnitude involved,
as well as their implications for the EGDP measure of welfare growth.

                              II. Information, Utility, and Innovation

In their book How Google Works, Schmidt and Rosenberg (2014) argue that the world has
entered an era in which “the Internet has made information free, copious, and ubiquitous” to the
consumer. This is one of the defining characteristics of what they call the “Internet Century.” At
the same time, there are many other sources of economic growth that affect consumer well-
being, and this raises the question of how to measure the contribution of “free, copious, and
ubiquitous” information to GDP and its relative importance compared with other factors. The
question currently on many minds is whether the contribution is large enough to offset what
appears to be a slowdown in real GDP growth, but there is the larger theoretical question of how,
and whether, consumer information should be included in measured GDP.
       Where in the models of standard growth theory does an increase in information enter the
analysis? This question has a long history, and the answer given by Hayek in 1945 was that it
was largely absent. He argued that the standard model of economic theory was so closely
wedded to the formal mathematics of optimization that it took as given the information needed
for the optimization process. Hayek argued “that the ‘data’ from which the economic calculus
starts are never for the whole society ‘given’ to a single mind which could work out the
implications, and can never be so given” (page 519). No individual consumer can hope to
possess all the information relevant to fully rational choice, or even to form preferences for items
or circumstances never before encountered and not likely to be encountered in the future. In




                                                                                                   5
either case, the provision of “free, copious, and ubiquitous” information has ample opportunity to
increase consumer utility.
        Stigler (1961) proceeded along much the same conceptual path in his analysis of price
dispersion and the prevalence of advertising expenditures. He took academic economists to task
for failing to recognize the importance of information:

    “One should hardly have to tell academicians that information is a valuable resource:
    Knowledge is power. And yet this occupies a slum dwelling in the town of economics. Mostly
    it is ignored: The best technology is assumed to be known; the relationship of commodities to
    consumer preferences is a datum. And one of the information-producing industries,
    advertising, is treated with a hostility that economists normally reserve for tariffs and
    monopolists” (page 213).
Both Hayek and Stigler emphasized that the link between consumer goods and consumer
preferences cannot be treated as “a datum.” Five years later, Lancaster (1966a) went further in
his “New Approach to Consumer Theory,” in which utility depends on the characteristics of
goods consumed and not the goods themselves, and which introduced his concept of a
consumption technology. He also proposed in a companion paper (1966b) that this technology
could change over time.
        The goal of this paper is to incorporate these ideas into conventional growth accounting
analysis in order to expand the discourse on how innovation can affect consumer welfare. The
impact of innovation on consumer welfare has received a lot of attention since the 1960s but has
largely not found its way into conventional growth accounting, which has followed the
neoclassical model developed by Robert Solow (1957), with a path-breaking extension by
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967). 5 This model intentionally abstracts from many thorny real-
world problems, like imperfect information and uncertainty, that make theoretical and empirical
work difficult. The largest leap of faith, however, is the assumption that the myriad goods and
services produced in a economy can be characterized by a single, stable, index of aggregate
output and that this output is produced by aggregate indexes of labor and capital. Indeed, Solow,
in the first sentence of his 1957 article, acknowledges that “… it takes something more than a


5
  An overview of the development of the basic growth accounting model and the extensions that followed is given
in Hulten (2001). The model is largely nonstochastic, but some randomness does creep into the model through
fluctuations in demand, adjustment costs, and the discount and revaluation rates in the cost of capital variable.
Information, in the form of R&D inputs, found its way into growth analysis in the 1960s.


                                                                                                                    6
‘willing suspension of disbelief’ to talk seriously of the aggregate production function.” Thirty
years later, in his Nobel lecture, he added, “I would be happy if you were to accept that [growth
accounting results] point to a qualitative truth and give perhaps some guide to orders of
magnitude” (Solow, 1988). Samuelson (1962) called this aggregative approach a parable with a
useful heuristic value.
         The usefulness of this model in providing insights into the process of economic growth
has been widely accepted. It has become an official program at the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) and the mainstay of the current debate about the causes of slower growth. The question
raised in this paper is whether the conventional framework, by itself, continues to provide a
useful guide for understanding the digital economy. We suggest that this may no longer be the
case in its current form and that it should be extended to allow for the possibility that freely
available information can be used to improve the efficiency of consumer choice. Our approach is
to merge Lancaster’s idea of a consumption technology into the supply-side model, with its
emphasis on the production technology.

                                III. The Lancaster Model and Its Application

The essential feature of the Lancaster model is the specification of a utility function whose
arguments are the “characteristics” of items that provide utility rather than the goods and services
that enter the conventional utility function. Lancaster uses the example of a meal, which is more
than just the items of food consumed, but a complex interaction of various factors. 6 In its fullest
form, the conceptual model is quite complex. The model he actually works with is a simplified
form, in which he assumes that characteristics, Ct, are functionally connected to outputs, Qt. In
this case, Ct= BQt, where B is a set of parameters that define the consumer’s “technology” for
transforming a collection of goods into the bundle of characteristics that provide utility. The
associated utility function is then U(Ct) = U(BQt). In the conventional formulation of utility
theory, goods and commodities are identical and B = 1. In a more general form, one that will be


6
  “A meal (treated as a single good) possesses nutritional characteristics but it also possesses aesthetic
characteristics, and different meals will possess these characteristics in different relative proportions. Furthermore, a
dinner party, a combination of two goods, a meal and a social setting, may possess nutritional, aesthetic, and perhaps
intellectual characteristics different from the combination obtainable from a meal and a social gathering consumed
separately” (Lancaster (1966a), page 133). Subjective factors like ambience, mood, and novelty matter.



                                                                                                                       7
used in this paper, the consumption technology is Ct = gt(Qt). It indicates that different levels of
utility can be obtained from a given Qt, depending on the efficiency with which the
transformation occurs.
       The consumption technology is central to the concerns of this paper (the characteristics
approach less so). The availability of reliable information is clearly an important determinant of
effective decision-making, and once this is accepted, it is but a straightforward extension to
accept the possibility that increases in information could lead to increases in utility U(g(Qt))
holding Qt constant. If technical innovation can shift the structure of production toward greater
productivity, why cannot it also shift the productivity of consumers in converting expenditure to
well-being using the information disseminated via the Internet? As Stigler points out, the utility
function is a process in which choices are made, and not a given “datum.”

                                 IV. Generalized Growth Accounting
                             A. The Conventional Supply-Side Analysis
Innovation operates through many “micro” channels and affects consumption technology in
many complex ways, but the same can be said of the conventional Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches-
BLS growth accounting model on the production side. Indeed, technical change in the aggregate
production function is necessarily macroeconomic in its nature and is thus something of a black
box that sweeps together microeconomic changes in technology along with much else. Since this
paper extends this model to allow for a consumption technology in a way consistent with its
assumptions, we treat this technology as a black box as well.
       The standard version of the aggregate growth accounting parable starts with the aggregate
production function. In this paper, we further assume this function has the Cobb-Douglas form
with constant-returns-to-scale and Hicks-neutral technical change:

       (1)     Qt = eλt (Rt)α(Et)δ(St)π(Lt)1-α- δ -π.

This function relates the units of output produced (Q) to the inputs of intangible capital (the
stock, R), tangible information and communication technology capital (ICT) equipment (the
stock, E), and other non-ICT capital (the stock, S), as well as labor input (L). Output grows over
time as the inputs increase or as technical change improves the productivity of outputs (here at
the rate λ). The parameter α is the intangible capital’s output elasticity, δ is ICT’s elasticity, and


                                                                                                         8
π is the non-ICT elasticity. Under the assumption of constant returns to scale, elasticities sum to
one and (1-α-δ-π) is the residual labor elasticity. In this case, the production function (1) can be
expressed in “intensive” form as

         (1’)     Qt/Lt = eλt (Rt/Lt)α(Et/Lt)δ(St/Lt)π.

The growth equation associated with (1’) can then be expressed in terms of output per worker as:

         (2)      q - ℓ = λ + α (r-ℓ) + δ (e-ℓ) + π (s-ℓ).

Here, lowercase letters denote rates of growth. This formulation is based on the output
elasticities (α, δ, and π) but could equally be formulated in terms of the corresponding shares in
factor income (νR, νE, and νS) under the assumption of competitive factor pricing. This is the way
Solow proceeded in his derivation of the TFP residual. The factor shares can be computed from
accounting data, as are the inputs and output, leaving the shift factor λ to be estimated as a
residual.
         The growth in output per worker is often used as an indicator of the growth in well-being
enabled by the process of economic growth. Equation (2) indicates the growth in output per
worker will increase when there is an increase in the productivity with which resources are used,
λ, and when there is more capital per worker, in its various forms, weighted by their respective
output elasticities (or income shares).
         In this framework, technological innovation, in its broadest sense, involves the first three
terms on the right-hand side of (2): costless increases in productivity, λ, and the deepening of
intangible capital stocks like R&D and coinvestments in ICT, α(r-ℓ) and δ(e-ℓ). The first is
resource-saving innovation associated with the shift in the production function (λ); the second
and third are resource-using innovation associated with the growth in intangible capital and ICT
equipment. However, innovation also occurs in non-ICT capital via embodied technical change. 7




7
  It might also be noted that costless increases in the quality of capital and intermediate goods that go unmeasured
will appear as increases in λ.



                                                                                                                       9
                   B. Expanding the Conventional Framework to Include Utility

The taxonomy of innovation based on the decomposition shown in (2) follows the conventional
practice of focusing on the sources of output growth originating on the supply side of the
economy. This focus implicitly ignores the possibility that innovation can also occur in the
consumption of goods, and specifically, that the consumption technology might also shift over
time. It ignores, in effect, the “free, copious, and ubiquitous” information of Schmidt and
Rosenberg’s Internet Age. Our proposed remedy has two components. First, we assume that
conventional growth accounting should, indeed, be extended to include the utility function even
if the consumption technology were ignored, and second, that the utility function should include
this technology.
       The first step follows a well-traveled path, one forged by dynamic optimization theory, in
which a standard intertemporal utility function is maximized subject to technology and labor,
which grow at given rates, and an initial endowment of capital (which is thereafter an
endogenous decision variable). The growth equation (2) can be regarded as a structural equation
tracking the year-to-year movements along the optimal growth path of the economy, but the path
described by (2) need not, in fact, be dynamically optimal. What is required is that factor inputs
are paid the value of their marginal products and that the marginal rates of transformation on the
supply side of the economy are equal to the marginal rates of substitution on the demand side in
each year.
       Our paper is by no means the first to link welfare change to the growth rate of real output
and the sources of its growth. For example, Hulten (1979) uses the standard intertemporal utility
maximization framework to develop a “dynamic residual,” which is the weighted sum of the
annual TFP residuals. When labor and technical change grow at constant rates, steady-state
consumption per worker grows at the Harrodian rate of technical change, which is also equal to
the dynamic residual. Capital is absent, here, because it is endogenous. An important implication
is that it is the Harrodian rate, the TFP rate divided by labor’s share of income, that drives long-
term welfare and output growth and not TFP itself (see also Hulten and Schreyer (2010)). This
result is, however, consistent with the Basu and Fernald (2002) and Basu et al. (2016) result that
the annualized growth of welfare per capita is proportional to TFP and capital stock growth.
Since our paper expands the conventional growth accounting model to include utility, it too


                                                                                                   10
follows the annualized approach (indeed, makes many of the assumptions of Basu et al. (2016),
although there are also differences). Our main contribution relative to the past literature is to
expand this line of analysis to include both a consumption technology and output-saving
technical change.
         Once the desirability of expanding the growth accounting model in this way is accepted,
there is then the question of how an increase in Q affects U(Q). One of the first issues that needs
to be settled is whether U(Q) should be regarded as an ordinal or cardinal function. The ordinal
approach is usually adopted in price and allocation theory, while discussions of social welfare
and income redistribution theory implicitly assume some degree of cardinality. In the latter, it is
generally assumed that interpersonal and intertemporal comparisons of utility are meaningful and
that marginal utility is an increment to actual well-being. The further assumption of diminishing
marginal utility of income supports the case for progressive income taxation and income
redistribution, as well as being associated with risk aversion. However, in the growth context, a
declining marginal rate implies that a steady rate of real GDP growth brings progressively less
well-being. Conventional growth theory thus implicitly assumes that this marginal utility is
unitary, implying that the growth rate of well-being is identical to the growth rate in real GDP. 8
This in turn implies that the latter is a valid proxy for the former. Again, since the framework of
this paper builds on the conventional nonparametric growth accounting model that implicitly
assumes marginal utility is unitary, we, too, will make this assumption (and also avoid the need
to formally parameterize the model).
         Yet another question arises about the aggregation of utility. Does U(Q) represent the total
utility experienced by the population of size N from the consumption of Q units of output (the
sum of individual utilities, somehow aggregated), or is it the utility of the representative
consumer who receives Q/N units of output? Since the focus of this paper is on the welfare
benefits of output growth and not how the benefits of growth are distributed across a population,
we opt for the representative agent approach.

8
  As a concrete illustration of these issues, consider the Maddison (2007) estimate that U.S. real GDP per capita
income increased around 20-fold between 1820 and the end of the 20th century. If each increment to income implies
progressively less utility, this increase in income does not imply a 20-fold improvement in average living standards
or personal well-being, whereas a constant marginal utility of income implies exactly this. Moreover, ordinal utility
cannot speak to this issue, since it only implies that the standard of living in 2000 is preferred to 1820. It is hard to
think about, much less estimate, the full benefits of economic growth and technological innovation if that were all
that could be said.


                                                                                                                      11
         Finally, it should be understood that the introduction of a utility function into growth
analysis (particularly one that includes a consumption technology) moves growth accounting
from an exercise based on a metric that is objective and in principle measurable (units of output
largely transacted in markets) to one that is subjective and for which no directly measurable
yardstick is available (utility). The lack of an operational yardstick is one reason that the utility
side, which is part of the general equilibrium structure of an economy, is largely absent from
traditional growth accounting. However, the fact that utility is subjective and impalpable does
not mean that it can be ignored in an analysis of how innovation affects well-being, particularly
when there is reason to believe that this is how many of the benefits of the digital revolution are
realized. 9

          C. Expanding the Conventional Framework to Include Consumption Technology

The approach to the utility function model we adopt in this paper is shown in equation (3). The
utility of the representative agent is assumed to be a function of the consumption of that agent,
Ct/Nt, where consumption Ct is the fraction (1-σt) of output Qt not saved, or Ct = (1-σt)Qt. We
also assume that the labor force Lt is connected to the population Nt by the labor force
participation rate, ρt , so that Lt=ρt Nt. The utility of the representative agent then has the form

         (3)    U(Ct/Nt) = m (Ct/Nt) = m[ρt (1-σt)(Qt /Lt)].

The m, here, is a scalar number. We assume, for simplicity, that σ is constant and the same for
all agents, allowing us to avoid the problem of modeling the utility of future consumption by
making saving a fixed proportion of output. We also assume that ρ is constant, implying that a
consumer’s endowment of time is allocated in a fixed proportion between work and leisure and
that the labor force participation rate is also constant.
         Solow’s “suspension of disbelief” comment must be extended to the formulation in (3) as
well as to (1) and (2). The utility function in (3) is a highly reductive parable of the factors that

9
   Introducing a utility-welfare interpretation on growth accounting results is sometimes challenged on the grounds
that GDP is a measure of resource use, not a measure of welfare. This is certainly true; Q is not U(Q). Indeed, that is
precisely the point of this study: There may be welfare effects of innovation that are not reflected in GDP. Both need
to be included in a full assessment of innovation, and the welfare effects should be treated separately and not be
shoehorned into an expanded measure of GDP.



                                                                                                                    12
lead to human well-being. In this regard, the World Happiness Report, 2013, reports that six
variables explain three-quarters of the international differences in average “life evaluations,” to
which GDP per capita contributes only about one-fifth of the total. 10
        Introducing a consumption technology into (3) adds a further degree of complexity to the
link between GDP and utility, particularly when this technology is allowed to shift. This shift can
be modeled in different ways, but for the purposes of this paper, we will again adopt a minimalist
specification that preserves symmetry with the growth accounting model of equations (1) and
(2). This specification is basically the conceptual analogue of Hicks-neutral productivity change
on the production side of the model in which the information available to the consumer increases
at the rate θ and the information effect, e θt, is multiplicative:

        (4)     Ut(Ct/Nt) = m e θt [ρt (1-σt)(Qt /Lt)].

The utility function in (4) is a straightforward extension of (3) that allows for a shift in the
Lancaster consumption technology and permits the utility index to grow more rapidly over time
when holding output constant (in a subsequent section, we will also allow for a shift in the
consumption technology due to costless improvements in product quality).
        When the utility function (4) is expressed in growth rate form, the result is an expanded
growth accounting equation that combines the growth accounting equation (2) with the consumer
parameter θ. The expanded sources-of-growth account has the form:

        (5)     u = θ + (q-ℓ) = θ + λ + α (r-ℓ) + δ (e-ℓ) + π (s-ℓ).
The first equality in (5) indicates that the growth rate of utility is driven by the shift in the
consumption technology and the growth rate of output per worker. It thus expands the discourse
on the benefits of growth and innovation beyond the conventional output effect to include the
non-GDP benefits of the information revolution. A further implication is that real GDP growth
alone is not a sufficient statistic for assessing the impact of technological revolutions on the



10 Other factors included years of healthy life expectancy, having someone to count on in times of trouble,
perceptions of corruption, prevalence of generosity, and “freedom to make life choices” (Chapter 2 of the report by
Helliwell and Wang). How these are linked to economic growth and the structural changes they bring is a question
that goes far beyond economic theory, but major technological innovation is surely an important contributor. See
also Stevenson and Wolfers (2013) for the link between income and happiness.



                                                                                                                 13
standard of living, nor does a slowdown in the growth of real GDP necessarily imply that the
growth of living standards has slowed.
        We note, finally, that innovation in (3) and (4) is treated in essentially the same analytical
way it is in the production side equations (1) and (2), although different underlying mechanisms
are at work. In both cases, the innovation is simply a time shift, either in the production
function, F(X,t), where X represents the vector of inputs, or in the utility function U(Q,t). An
alternative formulation would be to replace the time variable t with a variable Z that quantifies
the factors involved in innovation; in other words, F(X,Zq) and U(Q,Zu). This approach requires
a theory of innovation, in which components of Z variables are specified and their relation to the
other variables made explicit. The commoditization approach adds more structure to the
analysis, but it also introduces a host of measurement problems. The Z innovation variables are
often vaguely formulated, without secure units of quantity or the corresponding prices.
        These problems are avoided when the F(X,t) and U(Q,t) “time residual” approach of this
paper is used. The time residual sweeps together all the various sources of innovation without
the need for full enumeration and specification. This is a both a virtue and a vice, since the
residual includes other non Z variables that go unmeasured, as well as pure measurement errors.
Abramovitz (1956) famously called the residual a measure of our ignorance.
        However, it produces an actual measure. The Z commoditization approach requires
prices, PZ, to implement. However, when Z goods like the Internet and its applications are
distributed without a charge, PZ is zero, creating the very problems that our expanded framework
seeks to address. As we will show in the next section, the value of innovation can be estimated
using only the observable commodity prices PX and PY.

                                          D. The Price Dual
The TFP residual approach works empirically because both the left-hand side variable of the
production function, output, and the right-hand side factor input variables are observable. The
technology parameters can then be estimated nonparametrically via the TFP residual or
parametrically using econometric methods. This is not the case with the expanded growth
accounting model (5), since the left-hand side variable is consumer utility. Because the utility
variable is subjective and not directly observable, it is useful to recast the analysis in one that is:
the consumer expenditure.


                                                                                                     14
       Under certain restrictive conditions, the utility formulation can be represented by its price
dual, the expenditure function, which is the minimum expenditure associated with a given level
of utility U* and output price level P. When a consumption technology is added to the analysis,
as in (4), the generic expenditure function has the form

       (6)    e(P,U*) = e-θt ξ(P ,U*).

This is the minimum expenditure needed to maintain utility at the level U* given P and the level
of consumer information. The growth rate of expenditures over time depends on the expenditure-
share weighted growth rates of the prices, the negative growth rate of the information parameter
θ, and the rate of change of U*. This analysis can also be framed using the indirect utility
function associated with the expenditure function.
       The factor price frontier associated with a generic constant-return Hicks-neutral
production function Q = eλt f(L,K) has the form P = e-λt ϕ(PL, PK). Substitution into (6) gives

       (7)      e(P ,U*) = e-θt ξ(e-λt ϕ(PL, PK),U*).

The minimum expenditure needed to support U* falls with an increase in information, when
goods are produced more efficiently and their price falls. In its growth rate form, equation (7) is
the dual counterpart of the primal form (4).
       The expenditure function offers a natural way to think about the consequences of
innovation, since it defines the compensating variation (VC) and the equivalent variation (VE) of
duality theory. When a change in the price of a good causes the level of utility to rise or fall, the
compensating variation is the amount of expenditure needed to regain the old utility level at the
new prices (P*). Expressed in terms of the expenditure function, the compensating variation can
be written:
       (8)      VC = e(P* ,U1) - e(P* ,U0).

Since utility in the new period is increased by eθt, U1 is defined as e-θt U0. This formulation thus
provides a willingness-to-pay metric for the change in utility resulting from change in θ, and, in
principle, provides a method for estimating the size of this parameter. The equivalent variation,
VE, has a parallel formulation in terms of the original prices.




                                                                                                    15
         What is the relevance of this analysis for the issues at hand? The parameter θ is a proxy
for the “free, copious, and ubiquitous” information available to the consumer as a result of the
digital revolution. The compensating and equivalent variation approach provides a way of
estimating the value of this information, which is otherwise missing from GDP. It is worth
noting that this estimation relies on the commodity price, P, and not the price of the information
whose value is estimated by V.

            V. Expanded GDP and Welfare Measures in a Model with Multiple Outputs
                               A. An Illustrative Two-Product Model

The simple model of the preceding sections is formulated with a single good. This simplicity is
adequate for demonstrating how, in principle, consumer well-being may increase more rapidly
than GDP. However, it is also true that Lancaster’s original conception of the consumer
technology involves multiple goods and the idea that utility is derived as much from the way
goods are combined as from the goods per se (the meal versus its separate components). In this
section, we extend our model to the case of two goods in order to draw out the intuition behind
output-saving innovation and its link to a generalized concept of GDP. The two-good case
permits the use of graphical analysis and conveys the same result as the more general case of N
goods.
         The two-good case introduces a new degree of complexity into the analysis. Instead of
representing the aggregate economy with the single-good production function (1), there are now
separate production functions for each good and a multiproduct production possibility frontier
(PPF), indicating the maximal combinations of the goods that can be produced with these
functions by a given amount of total labor, capital, and the technologies for producing the two
goods. The dynamics are also more complex: Technological innovation in the production of
individual goods (λ1 and λ2) may change the composition of output as well as changing its overall
quantity. The latter is the shared-weights sum of λ1 and λ2 (Hulten (1978)).
         The geometry of the two-good case is shown in Figure 1 for goods X and Y, along with
the production possibility frontier, PPF, and the utility function of the representative consumer,
U (we also switch to a discrete-time analysis to accommodate the use of graphs). The
equilibrium between utility and production (supply and demand) is initially at the tangency point



                                                                                                   16
A in Figure 1, where the ratio of marginal costs equals the ratio of marginal utilities. The relative
prices are defined by the slope of the tangent line at A, which also defines the initial level of
GDP, PX0X0 +PY0Y0.
        The PPF shifts outward from the origin as the inputs of labor and capital increase and as
improvements in technology increase the productivity of these inputs (the λ-effect). Since the
focus of this paper is on innovation, we concentrate on the λ-effect by holding capital and labor
constant in this figure. This effect is shown in the figure as a shift from PPF0 to PPF1 for the
case of price-neutral shift in the technologies of the two sectors. The output bundle shifts from
(X0,Y0) at the point A to (X1,Y1) at the point B on the line bb, and real GDP increases from GDP0=
PX0X0+PY0Y0 to GDP1 = PX0X1+PY0Y1. Given that the industry rates of productivity change, λi =
λ, are the same in the production of both goods, (X1,Y1) equals ((1+ λ)X0, (1+ λ)Y0). The level of
utility increases from U0 to U1.
        Where Figure 1 illustrates the supply-side λ-effect, Figure 2 shows the consumer-side θ-
effects of output-saving innovation. A neutral change in information increases the amount of
utility attainable from a given bundle of X and Y, and it appears as an inward shift in the utility
function in Figure 2. 11 The old U0 shifts inward to a point C in the figure, interior to the PPF, at
which the bundle (X’1,Y’1) yields the same utility as the (X0,Y0) bundle before the shift. However,
the expenditure needed to attain U0 falls to PX0X’1+PY0Y’1, as represented by the line cc in the
figure. Since the indifference curve U1 is now tangent to the PPF at A, the same amount of GDP,
PX0X0+PY0Y0, supports a higher level of well-being. This is the essence of output-saving
technical change: innovation that results in a higher level of utility obtainable from the same
amount of income.

          B. Output-Saving Innovation, the Compensating Variation, and Expanded GDP

The value of a higher level of utility in monetary terms is one of the central interests of this
study, and, in fact, of much of the empirical literature on recent trends in innovation. A common
solution is to employ the compensating variation, V, of equation (8) for this purpose. In the
context of this paper, the compensating variation can then be used as a dollar metric of output-

11
   The two-good utility function shown in the figures is defined in a three-dimensional space, and the individual
indifference curves shown in the figures are projections of the three-dimensional function onto the two-dimensional
product space, XY. An upward shift in the former thus leads to an inward shift in the latter.


                                                                                                                 17
saving innovation. The requisite V is implicit in the price lines cc and aa in Figure 2, which
define a monetary metric of the distance between the indifference curves U0 and U1.
         The main question of this paper is whether conventionally measured GDP provides an
adequate account of the benefits of the technological revolution currently under way. To get at
this question, Figure 3 expresses the monetary metric V in a way that clarifies its relation to
GDP. In this figure, an upward translation of the indifference curves now places U0 tangent to
the invariant equilibrium point A, i.e., (X0,Y0). U1 in now associated with a different point in
Figure 3 than it was in Figure 2. This upward translation of the utility function also translates the
units of measurement. These must now be in utility-effectiveness units Xe and Ye. Since X0 = X1
and Y0 = Y1 at A, one solution is to express the values at B in Figure 3 in utility-loading units, Xe1
= eX0 and Ye1 = eY0. These utility-loaded values are located on the utility-possibility frontier
UFPe shown in that figure. The compensating variation, V, is now repositioned relative to GDP,
but while its position has changed, its magnitude remains the same.
         The geometry of Figure 3 can be used to relate V directly to the rate of output-saving
technical change, θ. Given the outward (1+θ) shift in U1, the point (Xe1,Ye1) is equivalent to
((1+θ)X0, (1+θ)Y0). In view of (8),

         (9)    V = (PX0 Xe1+PY0 Ye1) – (PX0X0 +PY0Y0 ) = θ (PX0X0 +PY0Y0 )= θ GDP0. .

This implies that the discrete-time rate of change of V equals the unobserved θ divided by the
level of initial GDP0. In other words, the V in (9) captures the monetary effect of a θ-shift in the
utility function. This shift plays the same role in the consumption technology that the λ-shift does
in the production technology seen in Figure 1, with the difference that the value of the λ-shift is
measured by the change in real GDP as per the conventional TFP residual (indeed, where the
magnitude of the residual is a measure of the value of the λ shift). The V in Figure 3, on the other
hand, is measured outside of the GDP framework using a willingness-to-pay (WTP) metric, and
the V operationally defines the location of the new level of utility U1 (though, conceptually, it is
equally the other way around). 12


12
  To elaborate, both the λ process and the θ process represent costless increases in the stock of knowledge, the
former relevant to production and the latter to consumption. Costless increments to the stocks give rise to an implicit
willingness to pay. The TFP residual establishes the value of the former, whereas external valuation is needed for
the latter. By extension, there is an implicit willingness to pay for the respective λ and θ stocks. Discovering the


                                                                                                                    18
           The estimation of the compensating variation V (in one form or another) is the subject of
many empirical studies (some of which are reviewed in a subsequent section). The contribution
of the framework of equation (9) is to show how the results could be used to identify the
unobserved output-saving technical change parameter θ and the associated the change in utility.
           What do these results mean for the measurement of GDP? A further extension links the
monetary metric V to an alternative measure of GDP that includes the value of output-saving
technical change. It is evident in Figure 3 that the higher utility, U1, is supported by a notional
expenditure line aa at the point A. This line indicates the amount of aggregate value associated
with A, which is the sum of the value of goods produced, GDP, and the willingness to pay for the
information that makes consumption of those goods more efficient. We term this notional
amount EGDP and observe that

     (10) EGDP = PX0X*1 +PY0Y*1. = V + PX0X0 +PY0Y0 = V + GDP0 = (1+θ) GDP0.

EGDP is a welfare-based index that indicates how much the consumer would have had in the
previous period to spend in order to attain the utility level, U1, made possible by costless
innovation. It thus provides (in principle) a monetary metric for assessing the consequences of
innovation on economic prosperity, beyond the contribution of GDP. 13
           EGDP in (10) is based on Figure 3, which treats GDP as a constant, but this need not be
the case. A more general formulation combines all the factors that cause GDP to grow: a shift in
the PPF due both to the productivity change λ (as in Figure 1) and growth in the inputs of labor
and capital, as well as the output-saving innovation of Figure 3.

           (10’)      EGDP = V + GDP1 = (1+θ) GDP1 = (1+θ) [GDP0 +ΔGDP0],

where the change in real GDP is

           (11)                    ΔGDP0 = PX0 (Xe1-X0) + PY0(Ye1-Y0)Ye1.



WTP values of the implicit stock is by no means an easy task, since it involves the unknown rate of depreciation of
knowledge in the respective stocks. This exercise would be of value in establishing the size of the total stocks of
capital, which form part of the true wealth of a nation.
13
     Again, it is useful to interpret V as an implicit investment that increases utility.



                                                                                                                 19
The changes in Y and X at the industry level can be further broken down into their growth
accounting components, as per the BLS Multifactor Productivity estimates.
         The overall result is that EGDP can be used as a monetary metric to summarize the
combined effects of the factors influencing output growth and welfare. Other factors that affect
GDP and EGDP will be introduced in subsequence sections. Another implication is that EGDP
can grow more rapidly than GDP during surges in innovation, implying consumer welfare may
grow faster than output measured at resource cost.

                            C. Consumer Surplus and the Problem of Empirics

Since neither utility nor expenditure in (10’) are directly observable, ways must be found to
estimate V from non-GDP sources. The most promising current candidate is the willingness-to-
pay approach used in a variety of contexts, like cost-benefit studies of government regulations,
environmental damage, infrastructure projects, and, increasingly, the study of “free” technology
goods like Internet applications. Different approaches have been used in the literature to get at
benefits of these technology goods, including consumer surplus, valuation of time, and
estimation of systems of demand equations. 14 All involve restrictive special assumptions, both in
their application and aggregation into a total across goods.
         The consumer surplus method is an important case in point. The consumer surplus is the
area under the demand function for a given good and above its supply function, and it can be
measured by estimating these functions. However, this estimation is subject to the vagaries of
model specification and other econometric issues, and it is cumbersome when applied to the
estimate of a time series of the V required for an implementation of EGDP in (10’). Moreover,
consumer surplus is a partial equilibrium technique, and using it to estimate individual Vi leads to
a problem of aggregating the result to get at a total V. Varian (1992) shows that exact
aggregation is only possible under strong restrictions on the utility function. Finally, the demand
framework of consumer surplus presupposes the existence of an underlying price and quantity
for what is essentially a commoditized Z-good discussed earlier.


14
   A partial list of recent studies includes Goolsbee and Klenow (2006), Varian (2009, 2016), Greenstein and
McDevitt (2011), Brynjolfsson and Oh (2012), Chen et al. (2014), Nevo (2016), Brynjolfsson et al. (2017), and
Cavallo (2017). This list does not include references to the large literature on health care. For an expenditure
function approach, see Redding and Weinstein (2017).


                                                                                                                   20
       The use of econometric methods applied to the expenditure functions and system of
demand equations is also subject to econometric issues. Redding and Weinstein use the latter, but
this approach assumes that time-varying demand shifts cancel, on average. This assumption
identifies many important parameters but may be problematic when applied to capturing the
benefits of a general shift in the expenditure function due to improvement in consumer
information.
       A problem also arises when relative prices change over time. This leads to the problem of
which prices to use: before or after those changes, or a combination of the two (in continuous
time models, the problem is one of “path dependence” (Hulten (1973)). This is the well-known
problem of the compensating versus the equivalent variation. It is, on the other hand, attenuated
by the fact that the two variations bracket consumer surplus for a wide variety of utility
specifications. Moreover, these estimation problems are certainly not unique to EGDP. The GDP
accounts have been around for many decades, and, despite a great deal of progress in improving
the statistical system, they remain a work in progress.

                  VI. Accounting for Costless Improvements in Product Quality
                              A. Product Quality Change and EGDP

Much of the innovation occurring during the recent revolution in technology has come in the
form of new or improved products. Part of this innovation is the result of resource-costly
expenditures on R&D and marketing, but another part has accrued to consumers at little or no
cost (successive models of computers and cell phones, Internet applications, and in the area of
health, vaccines). We will explore the costly dimension of innovation in a subsequent section and
focus now on the costless aspects and their relation to EGDP. This is motivated by the fact that
costless improvements in product quality improve the efficiency of consumption expenditures as
better products become available that satisfy the same wants but cost less. The consumer can
thus obtain more utility from a given level of expenditure, as with a costless increase in
information, increasing EGDP for a given level of GDP.
       In keeping with the treatment of θ in the preceding analysis, we assume that the costless
component of product quality grows at a constant rate β and that it augments the utility function




                                                                                                   21
in (4) in the same manner as the information parameter θ. The expanded utility function then has
the form

             (4’)       Ut(Ct/Nt) = m eβt eθt [ρt (1-σt)(Qt /Lt)].

The corresponding growth rate of utility function in (5) is

             (5’)       u = β + θ + (q-ℓ).

Output-saving technical change is now the sum of β and θ, and while they represent different
processes, both shift the consumption technology in Figure 3, and the combined (β+θ) affects
EGDP in the same way the θ did in the preceding sections.
        Although both result in output-saving technical change, β and θ differ in the empirics
needed to establish their respective magnitudes. A key difference lies in the fact that product
quality is embodied in the goods consumed, whereas consumer information is more about how
they are chosen and used. From a measurement perspective, product embodiment has the
advantage of producing data that can be used to estimate β. Indeed, the estimation of this
parameter is a well-traveled path. The basic idea is that one model of a particular good Q may be
better in the eyes of the consumer than the previous model because it has more of a desirable
characteristic and thus conveys more utility. The consumer is thus willing to pay a price
premium for the superior version, one which is based on the difference in marginal utilities, and
the measurement of this price premium provides a way to estimate the extent of the quality
differential. To make this explicit, we use the notation Qet to represent the effective
(characteristic-based) units of output as experienced by the consumer and continue to denote the
units of resource-based output produced by Qt (this follows the distinction made by Triplett
(1983)). The wedge between the two, if any, can then be used to define the rate of product
quality change β as Qet = eβt Qt. 15
        The measurement procedures used to estimate are based on the price analogue of this
equation. The consumer expenditure for Qt is equal price times quantity, PtQt, and this must also


15
   Computers are a good, if somewhat extreme, example of the difference between Qt and Qet. Moore’s Law has
resulted in a dramatic increase over time in the efficiency of computing, as new models of computers have embodied
more a faster processor speed, better graphics, and more memory. The resource-based quantity Qt has not increased
at anywhere near the same rate.



                                                                                                               22
equal the total amount spent on output measured in efficiency units, Pet Qet. It thus follows that
Pet = e-βtPt. Only the Pt is observed, but several methods are available to estimate Pet and β. First,
the hedonic price method regresses the observed transaction price of a sample of goods on a set
of observed characteristics to estimate the shadow price of each characteristic. The price of a
bundle with more, or a different mix, of characteristics can then be estimated and, by extension,
the efficiency price of a bundle with more characteristics. This method is typically used in cases
where there are increases the existing (observable) characteristics of a good over time, like
computers, or for products in which heterogeneous characteristics are packaged into one price,
like houses. 16
        In cases where an older version of a durable good persists in the market after the arrival
of a superior model, an overlap method can also be used. When quality change is costless and a
new model of a good appears in the marketplace, the real resource cost of the superior model
when it arrives, time t, is the same as the real cost of the inferior model one year earlier, when it
was new. If the inferior model is to remain the marketplace in time t, it must sell at a discounted
price that is competitive with the efficiency price of superior variety, i.e., Pet, that the consumer
could purchase as an alternative to the older model. In this the case, observing this discounted
price of the older surviving model, along with the resource price Pt, identifies β, in view of the
relation Pet = e-βtPt. In practice, these methods are supplemented by the BLS with other
techniques, including the matched-model and imputation methods (Groshen et al. (2017)). 17

                     B. Conflicting Approaches to Accounting for Product Quality

The decomposition of the expanded sources-of-growth model of this paper draws a boundary
between resource cost and noncost improvements in welfare. In equations (4) and (4’), costless
quality change is assigned to the consumption technology side of this boundary, whereas GDP
measured at resource cost is located on the other side. However, this is not the way it is treated

16
   Since the objective this paper is to introduce consumer utility considerations into the conventional growth
framework and examine its implications, we do not go into the many important issues raised by the characteristics
approach for price indexes or for consumer demand and expenditure (e.g., Deaton and Muellbauer, 1980).
17
  When goods drop out of the CPI sample entirely, as for example, when they are discontinued by a store or by the
producer, or are rotated out of the CPI sample, procedures are used to value the newly arrived goods. These changes
can result in various biases (as noted in the subsequent section of new and free goods). These procedures can also
simply result in reversing price discounts because of obsolescence.


                                                                                                                23
in the conventional GDP accounting theory, where the preferred concept of GDP is based on
units of effective output, Qet, rather than resource cost units of Qt. The latter reflect the units
produced by the production function, whereas units of effective output are defined with respect
to the benefits received by the user without cost and thus do not reflect the units actually
transacted in the marketplace.
        The efficiency-output paradigm envisions a production function that treats β as a shift
parameter of the production technology, rather than a shift parameter of the consumption
technology, and “output” as Qet=(1+β)t Qt (the discrete time counterpart of Qet=eβtQt). What this
means for the conventional approach of Figure 1 is shown in Figure 4, which now portrays the
commodity space in both the units of the goods produced and the efficiency units, which are
assumed to grow at the rate β for both goods. The economy is initially at the point A, at which
both efficiency and production units are the same, i.e., (Xe0,Ye0) = (X0,Y0). After the costless
change in product quality, (X0,Y0) units of the goods are still produced, but they are now the
equivalent of ((1+β)X0,(1+ β)Y0), denoted by (bX0,bY0) in Figure 4. If there is no change on the
supply-side production of output in resource units when the economy moves from A to B, the
point (X0,Y0) remains unchanged at the point A, as does the PPF0 and the ratio of the marginal
production costs. Given the assumption of proportional shifts in the indifference curves, relative
prices are thus unchanged. However, the locus of attainable product combinations measured in
efficiency units shifts to PPFe, and B is the new effective-output bundle and U1 is the new and
higher level of utility,.
        The result is that, while nominal GDP is unchanged in Figure 4, “real” GDP has risen by
the factor b =(1+β), while the corresponding efficiency prices have fallen by this factor.
However, it is important to note that “real” GDP rises because the components PX0X0 and PY0Y0
are now deflated by the efficiency-corrected price indexes PX/PXe and PY/PYe. In view the
preceding analysis, these price deflators, PXe and PYe, are determined by the ratio of the marginal
utility of new and old versions of a product. In other words, what appears as “real” GDP in
Figure 4 is actually determined on the utility side of model. It is thus no accident that the
structure of Figure 3 is virtually identical to that of Figure 4. Both e and b are utility-loaded
transformation of X0 andY0, with e equal to b,. The PPFe of Figure 4 is thus equivalent to the
UPFe of the Figure 3.



                                                                                                      24
        The difference between Figures 3 and 4 is thus essentially a matter of convention in the
way economic accounts are organized, a distinction without a difference since both reflect
changes in utility rather than resource cost. We argue in this paper that this fact be made explicit
and not buried in the synthetic concept of efficiency output. This argument for locating β on the
consumption side of the accounts is buttressed by the inability of the current efficiency-output
approach of Figure 4 to account for the information effect, θ, which refers to the more effective
use of existing goods, not to an increase in the effectiveness embodied in the nature of the goods
themselves. A further argument for situating β outside GDP is that, because of the difficulties in
measuring quality, the cost-of-goods pricing method that is widely used for deflation does not
actually capture changes in quality. This is particularly evident in expert services such as
education and medicine, where the item priced may be a doctor’s appointment or a semester of
schooling.
                                C. New Technology and Free Technology

The treatment of new goods that arrive in the marketplace is a question that looms large in
discussions of the contribution of the digital economy to GDP and welfare. A new good is one
with characteristics that have no near precedent in the choice space of the consumer, as opposed
to a good whose quality has improved. 18 Given its prior absence, how should the introduction of
this contribution be valued? How much does GDP change as a result of its arrival in the
marketplace? Valuing a new good at its observed price when it appears may understate the true
benefits it brings, since this entry price will reflect (in part) a cost of production that may be low
compared with the value of the innovation. A new vaccine may, for example, cost little in the
way of resources, but bring enormous benefits. The theoretical solution advanced by Hicks
(1940) and Rothbarth (1941), and extended by Hausman (1996, 1999) is to estimate a
“reservation” price of the new good, the price at which the quantity demanded of the good is zero
(i.e., the price at which the demand curve intersects the price axis). The result is essentially a
consumer surplus solution (Hausman, 2003), and can also be thought of in terms of the
compensating variation (Romer, 1994). In terms of the aggregate price index needed to convert

18
   A conceptual problem arises with this definition because what is a “new” good at a low level of aggregation
(Windows 7 versus 10) can also be thought of as a higher quality good at a more aggregated level (productivity
software).



                                                                                                                 25
nominal GDP into real GDP, the reservation price serves as a quality correction, one that
indicates a higher value to the consumer per units of resource cost. However, one problem with
this solution is that it is based on estimation and requires assumptions. 19 Another is that it takes
time and resources, and the BLS, which is largely responsible for the measurement of prices and
quality change in the U.S., must produce these results on a monthly basis (Groshen et al. (2017)).
         Another set of problems arises when applying techniques like consumer surplus,
expenditure functions, demand estimation, price hedonics, or matched-price models: They
presume the existence of an observable market price. This is not always the case with some of
the most important digital economy goods. The Internet and its apps are not priced as individual
goods with a price per unit consumed. Instead, a general Internet access fee may be charged by a
service provider (although access may also be freely available in some cases). Internet
applications are widely available without a direct use charge (again, with exceptions). Many
applications are supported by the marketing revenues they are able to generate or are provided
pro bono publico through such activities as crowdsourcing. The absence of observable unit
prices, or an artificial zero price, has led researchers to use alternative measurement strategies,
like the valuation of time and the use of indirect payments (for example, Nakamura et al.
(2016)).
                                              D. Contingent Goods

Griliches (1992) observes that “in many services sectors, it is not exactly clear what is being
transacted, what is the output, and what services correspond to the payments made to their
providers” (page 7). There is a wedge between the output of a good and its outcome, arising from
the contingent nature of many goods, and such a wedge is particularly prevalent in those
involving these “expert” industries. A visit to the doctor is usually in response to some perceived
health problem, but you do not buy an improvement in health per se; you buy advice and perhaps
an intervention that may or may not cause an improvement. That outcome is contingent on the
initial state of health, the doctor’s input, and the actions taken by the patient in response. Other
expert services in education, legal matters, and finance can be modeled using a similar
framework, since they represent an attempted transition from one state of being to another,
19
  Yet a further issue is that digital platforms typically involve two-sided networks. As networks expand, they
become more useful to users. This dynamic increase in utility is akin to the increase in utility due to the advance of
knowledge that we highlight and is also output-saving.


                                                                                                                    26
appropriately defined. In the case of education, schools may provide educational services, but
learning also depends on student motivation, ability, and family inputs.
       Contingent-state goods have a natural interpretation in the Lancaster framework. The
output from the standpoint of the consumer is the improvement (objective and subjective) in the
initial state of being (health, knowledge, financial, or legal status). Moreover, improvements in
subjective outcomes may be contingent on the state of health or education and may have their
greatest impacts when poor states are present. It is thus logical to locate the outcome in the
consumption technology and assign the associated expert and ancillary services to the production
side. This approach allows for the possibility that outcomes may be improved to a greater degree
than suggested by the resource commitment implied by GDP and is one channel through which
an increase in available information can shift the consumption technology.

                          VII. Technical Innovation with a Resource Cost

Our formulation of the expanded growth account (5’) includes both costless and resource-costly
innovation. Because of their different implications for welfare, as well as the growing
importance of the latter, a deeper look is in order. Costless innovation arises from several
sources. First, there are spillovers arising from the difficulty in protecting property rights for
costly innovations where rights are hard to enforce because of the nonrival nature of the good
and the free-rider problem. This often occurs with information goods like the Internet, as well as
with the technology involved in product and process innovation. Second, there is what Eric von
Hippel (2016) calls “free innovation.” This includes contributions to the common good through
crowdsourcing and pro bono innovations like open-source software. We might also include
unanticipated learning by doing. Finally, there is just plain inspiration and creativity. Costless
innovation appears in the expanded growth account (5) through the term λ in the production
technology and the θ and β of the consumption technology.
       Costly innovation, on the other hand, results from systematic investments in innovation.
Firm-specific own-account investment in intangible capital like R&D and its coinvestments in
organizational development and marketing have resulted in improvements in the processes of
production, and product quality and new goods — in effect, endogenizing some part of the λ and




                                                                                                     27
β, which are “purchased” at the cost of the resources. 20 The kind of innovation, in effect, offers
the consumer the opportunity to buy “better” goods at a higher price that reflects that cost. They
are not a gift, “manna from heaven,” as before. This implies that the transaction units of the
improved good already embody the effects of the innovation, which, in turn, implies that the
produced β belongs on the resource side of the expanded growth account in (5), whereas the
costless β belongs on the welfare side. Unfortunately, costly product quality change, β*, is
typically buried in prices of the transaction units and not recorded separately. It should,
nevertheless, be treated conceptually as a separate effect and recorded on the resource side of the
taxonomy. 21
          How does this innovation fit into the overall framework of production and growth? It is
explicitly represented in the production function (1) by the stock on intangible capital Rt, and
implicitly by the investment in intangible capital that is embedded as part of the output Qt. It also
appears as capital-embodied technical change in the ICT capital stock Et, and its investment
component of Qt. In the growth rate formulation (5) and (5’), the contributions of intangible
capital and ICT capital to the growth rate of the output per unit of labor (q-ℓ) are represented by
α(r-ℓ) and δ(e-ℓ), the share-weighted growth rates of the respective capital/labor ratios. The rate
of costless process-oriented technical change λ (the shift in the production function) is proxied by
the residual estimate of TFP, adjusted for the presence of intangible capital. 22

20
     Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2009). See also Nakamura (2001).
21
   We note, in passing, that the time-cost associated with consumption is also missing from this analysis. We have
finessed the work-leisure decision by assuming that time is allocated in fixed proportions between work and leisure,
but we recognize that a more sophisticated version of our analysis would recognize that the consumption technology
requires a time input, just as time-use enters the production technology through labor input. The information
revolution has reduced the time required for many activities and thus a saving in time cost. However, the advent of
new or improved goods may also involve start-up costs and a learning curve, and the consumption of goods takes
time (as in watching television or communicating via social media). An extension of our model, perhaps along the
lines of Stigler and Becker (1977), would enrich our analysis but would not change our basic conclusion about the
importance of the consumption technology for understanding the effects of the information revolution.
22
   The introduction of intangible capital into the growth accounting model does come at a cost. The bulk of this type
of capital is produced within firms on “own account” rather than acquired in the marketplace. It embodies much of
the proprietary intellectual property of the firm, and it is nonrival and subject to expropriation. It must therefore be
protected by patents, copyrights, or secrecy. Successful protection thus creates market power and monopolistic
pricing, if for no other reason than the necessity of recovering fixed overhead R&D and other related costs. This
resulting pricing strategy thus violates the perfect competition assumption that underlies conventional growth
accounting. Additional questions are raised when the intellectual property protection is time limited and it eventually
becomes freely available or when it is made obsolete by a superior rival innovation.



                                                                                                                    28
                                         VIII. Empirical Applications

                                              A. The Supply Side

The relative importance of the α(r-ℓ), δ(e-ℓ), and TFP terms in equation (2) has been estimated
by Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009), involving an extension of the conventional sources-of-
growth model used by the BLS. The updated numbers from this study by Corrado and Hulten
(2010, 2014) for the U.S. private business sector show a major shift in the relative importance of
resource-costly innovation vis-à-vis TFP. TFP accounted for some 60 percent of the growth in q-
ℓ in the 20 years from 1950 to 1972, the start of the energy crisis and productivity slowdown of
the 1970s. The α(r-ℓ) and δ(e-ℓ) terms accounted for only 16 percent. The 22 years before the
Great Recession saw a significant reversal in the importance of resource-costly innovation.
During the period from 1985 to 2007, the last year before the onset of the Great Recession, these
two sources of growth accounted for nearly 45 percent of (q-ℓ), while the contribution of TFP
fell to just under 40 percent. From the start of the Great Recession to 2011, the growth rate of
TFP collapsed, the magnitude of δ(e-ℓ) term fell by half, but α(r-ℓ) maintained the same growth
rate it had during the 2000–2007 period. 23
         Two further points are worth noting. When combined, costless and resource-costly
innovation account for the bulk of economic growth since 1950. When the terms α(r-ℓ) and δ(e-
ℓ) are added to TFP, they account for three-quarters of the growth of q-ℓ over the period 1950–
1972, and for 85 percent for the period 1985–2007. The acceleration is consistent with the onset
of the current phase of the digital revolution starting in the 1980s. However, while the
importance of this index of innovation has increased, its character has changed from the free
“manna” of TFP growth toward the costly systematic investments needed to obtain it.

                                       B. The Consumer Welfare Side

What is missing from the preceding analysis is the contribution of output-saving innovation. As
we argued earlier, the growth rate q-ℓ is only part of the growth rate of welfare in equation (5’),


23 An even more significant reversal occurred in the composition of investment spending. The investment rate in
intangible capital rose from 8 percent of U.S. private GDP in the late 1970s to 14 percent by 2010, and in investment
in ICT equipment increased from 4 percent to 6 percent in 2007 after peaking at 6 percent around 2000. By contrast,
the private investment rate in tangible capital fell over this period from 12 percent to 8 percent, and the non-ICT
portion fell from 8 percent to 4 percent.


                                                                                                                  29
which also includes the output-saving term β+θ. Sections V and VI have discussed some of the
issues involved in obtaining price metrics of the non-GDP component of EGDP and these
parameters, but putting a dollar amount on these non-GDP benefits is difficult and research is
still in its early days. Evidence “on the ground” suggests the contribution of these benefits may
be quite significant.
       The onset of the digital revolution and the uptake of digital economy goods have been
rapid. Surveys by the U.S. Census Bureau (2014) show that the fraction of U.S. households with
a computer at home rose from about one-quarter in 1993 to more than three-quarters in 2012 and
that the fraction with Internet use at home went from one-fifth in 1997 to four-fifths by 2012.
Studies by the Pew Research Center (Anderson (2015), Perrin (2017), Perrin and Jiang (2018),
Pew Research Center (2017)) also found that the share of adults who use at least one social
media site increased from less than one-tenth in 2005 to two-thirds in 2015, and market
penetration of smartphones more than doubled from 2011 to 2016, from 35 percent to 77 percent.
A 2018 Pew survey of U.S. adults found that one-quarter of the respondents reported being
online “almost constantly,” while 43 percent reported going online several times a day. Those in
the 18-to-29-year-old cohort were found to be particularly heavy users, with almost 40 percent
saying they were online almost constantly. This is Schmidt and Rosenberg’s “free, copious, and
ubiquitous” information revolution in action.
       Then there are major advances in medicine, which have created notable costless benefits
for consumers, even though those benefits have unfolded over a longer period of time than those
of the digital revolution. Average life expectancy has increased from 50 to 80 years over the
course of the last century, creating a huge amount of surplus value using a standard value-of-life
approach — around $1.2 million per person, according to estimates by Murphy and Topel
(2006). While not all of the increase is due to medical innovation, and that which is innovation-
related is often expensive, there has also been a lot of consumer surplus and output-saving
innovation. Vaccines are an extremely cost-effective way of preventing some of the most feared
diseases in history, a regimen of cheap low-dose aspirin can reduce the risk of heart attack, major
advances in the technology of diagnostics and record retrieval and sharing have improved health
outcomes, and minimally invasive surgical techniques have led to significant decreases in
recovery times and increases in patient comfort. Anyone who remembers a visit to the dentist 50



                                                                                                    30
years ago will appreciate the comfort factor. Assigning a dollar value to these advances is
challenging, but it is part of what Cutler and Berndt (2001) have called the “output movement”
in health economics, which attempts to measure the impact of medical care on health outcomes
rather than the amount of resources expended. The wedge between the two is part of the
difference between GDP and the EGDP of this paper, and the growth in the wedge due to
costless innovation is output-saving technical change.
         A review of the existing empirical studies of the information technology finds a wide
range of results, with estimates of its benefits in the range of $100 billion to $1 trillion. 24
Viewed against the overall size of GDP, currently around $18 trillion, the effects seem relatively
small. A comprehensive study by Groshen et al. (2017) also attributes a relatively small impact
of this technology on GDP. They cite the study by Lebow and Rudd (2003) as evidence for a 6.5
percent annual bias in the “PC services (including Internet)” component of the Personal
Consumption Expenditures price deflators used to measure the growth of real GDP, but they also
note that the GDP share of PC services and Internet was only 0.6 percent in 2015, so the overall
impact on GDP growth was only -0.04 percentage point per year. This figure jumps to -0.26
when biases in medical care deflators are counted.
         These estimates pertain to consumption expenditures. Groshen et al. provide a parallel
calculation for the information technology components of investment spending. These include
communication equipment, computers and peripherals, other information systems equipment,
and software. They cite the Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) estimates of the annual biases
in investment price deflators, which range from 0.9 percent for software to 12 percent for
computers and peripherals. However, the GDP share of these categories is still small, only 3.6
percent, so the overall bias in real GDP growth was only -0.15 percentage point per year. The
Byrne et al. study also addresses the question of whether the various biases are enough to explain
the slowdown in real GDP growth after 2007. They find “considerable evidence” of
mismeasurement bias, but “no evidence that the biases have gotten worse since the early 2000s.”
In his summary assessment of the literature, Syverson (2016) concludes that the “the surplus




24
   Brynjolfsson et al. (2017)’s preferred estimates suggest a number for Internet usage that is considerably above $1
trillion.


                                                                                                                   31
created by Internet-linked digital technologies fall far short of the $2.7 trillion or more of
‘missing output’ resulting from the productivity growth slowdown.”
         These analyses accept that biases do exist that understate the impact of these goods and
that they may be quite large, but argue that the GDP share of digital goods is too small for them
to matter much in the larger picture. However, it should also be recognized that the Internet’s
direct contribution to GDP is zero, so its share is similarly zero. Some part of the Internet’s
resource cost is recaptured in advertising fees, but the higher price of the advertised goods affect
the GDP share of those goods, not of the Internet. The small GDP share for a group of goods that
include the Internet is therefore not the final word on the problem. And, in any event, the GDP
share is not the relevant share in the EGDP approach of this paper, since it does not take into
account the compensating variation, V. The Internet may not contribute directly to GDP, but its V
may still be large: If the high-end $1 trillion estimate of digital economy value is used as an
estimate of V (a big “if”) and added to the $18 trillion GDP in 2015, EGDP is $19 trillion. The
implied digital-good share of EGDP is then about 5 percent, almost 10 times larger than the
estimated GDP share of the conventional analysis. And, if the $1 trillion estimate for digital
goods seems implausibly large relative to GDP, then think of health care and imagine the size V
associated with a cure of coronary artery disease or Alzheimer’s disease.

                                 IX. Summary and Final Thoughts

       We have proposed an extension of conventional GDP that lays the groundwork for
empirical work that may capture some of the broader effects of innovation by incorporating an
explicit utility function. It does so by integrating Lancaster’s idea of a consumption technology
into the conventional supply-side model of growth accounting and allowing certain types of
innovation to shift that technology. This shift is, in effect, output-saving because it allows
consumers to use their income more efficiency in the production of utility. We have then used
this new framework to define a welfare-based concept of GDP, EGDP, which includes the
compensating variation associated with output-saving innovation. EGDP follows Koopman’s
injunction against measurement without theory.
       Our proposed extension of growth analysis adds output-saving technical change to the list
of innovation mechanisms already familiar from conventional growth accounting, which include



                                                                                                  32
costless shifts in the production function (TFP), improvements in product quality in which a
better product is equated to more of the older lower-quality good it replaces, and resource-costly
technical and organization improvements resulting from investments in intangible capital. These
three sources are shown in the schematic diagram in Figure 5, in which technology (costless and
costless) is applied to labor and capital to produce GDP. In the conventional interpretation of
GDP, this output is then transferred to consumers and is the source of their well-being. We have
added a separate consumption technology to this chain of causality, and introduced the
possibility that innovation may cause both the production and consumption technology to shift
due to innovation, whereas the conventional TFP framework allows for shifts in the production
function alone. Adding a consumption technology to the picture allows for output-saving
technical change and adds a separate mechanism through which consumer welfare is enhanced.
We have proposed adding the value of this enhanced welfare to GDP to arrive at what we have
called EGDP.
         Figure 5 emphasizes that our intent is not to supplant GDP, which Samuelson and
Nordhaus (2000) call “One of the Great Inventions of the 20th Century,” but to augment it in a
way that allows important questions about the Internet Age to be addressed more accurately.
What we propose is, in effect, to add a fourth source of consumer value to supplement value
derived from the primary, secondary, and tertiary sectors of traditional resource-based GDP
accounting. This “quadrary” sector lies outside the resource-using boundary of GDP that largely
encompasses the other three and accounts for the non-GDP welfare gains to the consumer from
economic activity and innovation studied in this paper. 25 EGDP is offered as a comprehensive
measure of all four “sectors.” It poses real measurement challenges, but so did GDP at the
inception of the national accounting movement.




25
   Our “quadrary” sector differs from the “quaternary” sector proposed by Kennessy (1987), which rearranges the
existing resource-using sectors to form a fourth that includes finance, insurance, and real estate, other (nontransport
and nontrade) services, and government administration industries. The Kennessy taxonomy leaves aggregate GDP
unchanged, whereas our fourth sector adds to resource-based GDP to arrive at EGDP.



                                                                                                                     33
                                       REFERENCES
Abramovitz, Moses, “Resource and output trends in the United States since 1870,” American
Economic Review, 46(2), 1956, 5–23.

Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index, Toward A More Accurate Measure of
the Cost of Living, Final Report to the Committee on Finance, United States Senate, U.S.
Government Printing Office, 36-352-CC, Washington D.C., December 1996.

Ahmad, Nadim, and Paul Schreyer, “Measuring GDP in a Digitalised Economy,” OECD Working
Paper, April 2016.

Anderson, Monica, “Technology Device Ownership: 2015,” Pew Research Center, October 29,
2015.

Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald, “Aggregate productivity and aggregate technology,”
European Economic Review, 46, 6, June 2002, 963-991.

Basu, Susanto, Luigi Pascali, Fabio Schiantarelli, Luis Serven, Productivity and the Welfare of
Nations, NBER Working Paper No. 17971, issued in April 2012, revised in March 2014, and
again in February 2016.

Bils, Mark, “Do Higher Prices for New Goods Reflect Quality Growth or Inflation?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 2, May 2009, 637-675.

Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. “Quantifying Quality Growth,” American Economic Review,
91(4): September 2001, 1006-1030.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Felix Eggers, and Avinash Gannamaneni, “Using Massive Online Choice
Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-being,” MIT Working Paper, September 2017.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and JooHee Oh, “The Attention Economy: Measuring the Value of Free
Digital Services on the Internet,” 2012, www.informatik.uni-
trier.de/~ley/pers/hd/b/Brynjolfsson:Erik

Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf, “Does the United States Have a
Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
March, 2016.

Cavallo, Alberto, “Are Online and Offline Prices Similar? Evidence from Large Multi-Channel
Retailers,” American Economic Review 107, January 2017, 283-303.

Chen, Yan, Grace Jeon, and Yong-Mi Kim, “A Day without a Search Engine: An Experimental
Study of Online and Offline Searches,” Experimental Economics, 2014, 17, 4, 512-536.




                                                                                                  34
Corrado, Carol A. and Charles R. Hulten, “How Do You Measure a Technological Revolution?”
American Economic Review, May 2010, 99-104.

Corrado, Carol, and Charles Hulten, “Innovation Accounting,” in Measuring Economic Progress
and Economic Sustainability, D.W. Jorgenson, J.S. Landefeld, and P. Schreyer, eds., Studies in
Income and Wealth, vol. 72, The University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago, 2014, 595-628.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Measuring Capital and Technology: An
Expanded Framework,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger,
and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 2005, 11-41.

Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic
Growth”, Review of Income and Wealth, 55, 3, September 2009, 661-685.

Corrado, Carol and Larry Slifman, “A Decomposition of Productivity and Costs,” American
Economic Review 89, 2, May 1999, 328-332.

Coyle, Diane, GDP: A Brief But Affectionate History, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2014.

Cutler, David M., and Ernst R. Berndt, eds., Introduction, Medical Care Output and Productivity,
Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 62 , Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 2001, 1-
11.

Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer, Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge University
Press, 1980.

Feldstein, Martin, “Underestimating the Real Growth of GDP, Personal Income, and
Productivity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31, 2, Spring 2017, 145–164.

Goolsbee, Austin and Peter J. Klenow, “Valuing Consumer Products by the Time Spent Using
Them: An Application to the Internet,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96,
2, 2006, 108-113.

Gordon, Robert J., The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the
Civil War, The Princeton Economic History of the Western World, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, January, 2016.

Greenstein, Shane, and Ryan C. McDevitt, “The broadband bonus: Estimating broadband
Internet's economic value,” Telecommunications Policy, 35, 7, 2011, 617-632.

Griliches, Zvi, ed., Introduction, Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, Studies in Income
and Wealth, University of Chicago Press, 1992, 1-22.


                                                                                              35
Griliches, Zvi, “Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint,” American Economic Review, 84,
1, March 1994, 1-23.

Groshen, Erica L., Brian C. Moyer, Ana M. Aizcorbe, Ralph Bradley, and David M. Friedman,
“How Government Statistics Adjust for Potential Biases from Quality Change and New Goods in
an Age of Digital Technologies: A View from the Trenches,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
31, 2, Spring 2017, 187-210.

Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen, “Measuring the Returns to R&D,”
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Chapter 24, B. H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.),
Elsevier-North Holland, 2010, 1033-1082.

Hausman, Jerry, “Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” T.
Bresnahan and R. J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods, Chicago, Illinois: University of
Chicago Press, 1996, 209–37.

Hausman, Jerry, “Cellular Telephone, New Products, and the CPI,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 17 (2), 1999, 188–194.

Hausman, Jerry, “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer Price Index,” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17, 1, Winter 2003, 23-44.

Hayek, F.A., “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” The American Economic Review, 35, 4,
September 1945, 519-530.

Helliwell, John F., and Shun Wang, “World Happiness: Trends, Explanations And Distribution,”
Chapter 2 of World Happiness Report 2013, edited by John Helliwell, Richard Layard, and
Jeffrey Sachs, http://worldhappiness.report/ed/2013/ .

Hicks, John R., “The Valuation of Social Income,” Economica, 7:2, 1940, 105-24.

Hulten, Charles R., “Divisia Index Numbers,” Econometrica, 41, 6, November 1973, 1017-25.

Hulten, Charles R., “Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs,” Review of Economic Studies,
45, 3, October 1978, 511-518.

Hulten, Charles R., “On the ‘Importance’ of Productivity Change,” American Economic Review,
69, 1, March 1979, 126-135.

Hulten, Charles R., “Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography,” in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds., Studies in
Income and Wealth, vol. 63, University of Chicago Press for the NBER, Chicago, 2001, 1-47.




                                                                                             36
Hulten, Charles R., “Measuring the Economy of the 21st Century,” NBER Reporter, December,
2015, 1-7.

Hulten, Charles R., and Paul Schreyer, GDP, Technical Change and the Measurement of Net
Income: the Weitzman Model Revisited, NBER Working Paper 16010, May 2010.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Zvi Griliches, “The Explanation of Productivity Change,” Review of
Economic Studies, 34, July 1967, 249–83.

Kenessey, Zoltan, “The Primary, Secondary, Tertiary and Quaternary Sectors of the Economy,”
Review of Income and Wealth, 33, 4, December 1987, 359-385.

Koopmans, Tjalling C., “Measurement Without Theory,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
29, 3, August 1947, 161-172,

Lancaster, Kelvin J., “Change and Innovation in the Technology of Consumption,” American
Economic Review, 56, 1/2 March 1966a, 14-23.

Lancaster, Kelvin J., “A New Approach to Consumer Theory,” The Journal of Political Economy,
74, 2, April 1966b, 132-157.

Lebow, David, and Jeremy B. Rudd, “Measurement Error in the Consumer Price Index: Where
Do We Stand?” Journal of Economic Literature, 41(1), 2003, 159–201.

Moulton, Brent R. and Karin E. Moses, “Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the Consumer
Price Index,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1997, 305-366.

Maddison, Angus, Contours of the World Economy, 1–2030 AD, Essays in Macro-Economic
History, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007.

Murphy, Kevin and Robert H. Topol, “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal of Political
Economy, 114, 5, October 2006, 871-904.

Nakamura, Leonard, “What is the U.S. Gross Investment in Intangibles? (At Least) One Trillion
Dollars a Year!” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 01-15, 2001.

Nakamura, Leonard, “Hidden Value: How Consumer Learning Boosts Output,” Business Review,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Q3 2014, 9-14.

Nakamura, Leonard, Jon Samuels, and Rachel Soloveichik, “Valuing ‘Free’ Media: An
Experimental Approach,” Working Paper 16-24, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, August
2016.

National Research Council, At What Price? Conceptualizing and Measuring Cost-of-Living and
Price Indexes, Panel on Conceptual, Measurement and Other Statistical Issues in Developing


                                                                                             37
Cost-of-Living Indexes, Charles L. Schultze and Christopher Mackie, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2002.

Nevo, Aviv, Jon L. Turner, Jonathan W. Williams, “Usage Based-Pricing and Demand for
Residential Broadband,” Econometrica, 84 (2), March 2016, 411-443.

Nordhaus, William D., “Do Real Output and Real Wage Measures Capture Reality? The History
of Lighting Suggests Not,” T. Bresnahan and R. J. Gordon (eds.), The Economics of New Goods,
Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 58, University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago, 1997, 29-66.

Perrin, Andrew, “Social Networking Usage: 2005-2015,” Pew Research Center. October 2015.

Perrin, Andrew, and Jingjing Jiang, “About a quarter of U.S. adults say they are ‘almost
constantly’ online,” Pew Research Center, March 14, 2018.

Pew Research Center, 2017. “Mobile Factsheet” http://www.pewInternet.org/fact-sheet/mobile

Redding, Stephen J., and David E. Weinstein, “A Unified Approach to Estimating Price and
Welfare Measurement,” Working Paper, March 2017.

Romer, Paul, “New goods, old theory, and the welfare costs of trade restrictions,” Journal of
Development Economics, 43, 1994, 5-38.

Rothbarth, E., “The Measurement of Changes in Real Income under Conditions of Rationing,”
Review of Economic Studies, 8, 1941, 100-107.

Samuelson, Paul A., “Parable and Realism in Capital Theory: The Surrogate Production
Function,” The Review of Economic Studies, 29, 3, June 1962, 193-206.

Samuelson, Paul A., “Complementarity: An Essay on The 40th Anniversary of the Hicks-Allen
Revolution in Demand Theory,” Journal of Economic Literature, 12, 4, December 1974, 1255-
1289.

Samuelson, Paul A., and William D. Nordhaus, cited in J. Steven Landefeld, “GDP: One of the
Great Inventions of the 20th Century,” Survey of Current Business, January 2000.

Schmidt, Eric, and Jonathan Rosenberg (with Alan Eagle), How Google Works, Grand Central
Publishing, September 2014.

Solow, Robert M., “Technical change and the aggregate production function,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 39, August 1957, 312–320.




                                                                                                38
Solow, Robert M., Growth Theory: An Exposition, Oxford University Press, New York and
Oxford, 1988.

Solow, Robert M., “We’d better watch out,” New York Times Book Review, July 12, 1987.

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, “Subjective Well-Being and Income: Is There Any
Evidence of Satiation?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 2013,
598-604.

Stigler, George J., “The economics of information,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1961, 213-
225.

Stigler, George, ed., “The Price Statistics of the Federal Government: Review, Appraisal, and
Recommendations,” Report to the Office of Statistical Standards, Bureau of the Budget. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1961.

Stigler, George J., and Gary S. Becker, “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum,” The American
Economic Review,. 67, 2, March 1977, 76-90.

Syverson, Chad, “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the US Productivity
Slowdown,” NBER Working paper 21974, 2016.

Triplett, Jack E., “Concepts of Quality in Input and Output Price Measures: A Resolution of the
User-Value Resource-Cost Debate,” in The U.S. National Income and Product Accounts:
Selected Topics, Murray F. Foss, ed., Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 47, University of
Chicago Press, 1983, 269 312.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, “Computer and Internet Access in the
United States: 2012,” February 2014.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Trends in Multifactor Productivity, 1948-
81, Bulletin 2178, USGPO, Washington D.C., September 1983, and updates.

Varian, Hal R., Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd ed., March 1992.

Varian, Hal, “Economic Value of Google,” 2009: http://cdn.oreillystatic.com/en/assets/1/event/
57/The%20Economic%20Impact%20of%20Google%20Presentation.pdf

Varian, Hal. “A Microeconomist Looks at Productivity,” BEA Advisory Council Meeting,
December 2016, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/varian.pdf

Von Hippel, Eric, Free Innovation, MIT Press, 2016.




                                                                                                39
                                                          Figures


 Y               b     U1                                    `    Y
           PPF1                                                       a
     a                                                                           U1
                U0
Y1                                  B                                      U0

         PPF0
                                                                           c
                           A                                                                A
Y0                                                               Y0
                                                                 Yc              C
                                                   GDP1
                                        GDP0        b                                                X    GDP0
                                         a                                                       c          a
                                                    X                            Xc        X0
                      X0         X1                                                                                   X
                       Figure 1                                                            Figure 2


      Ye                                                               Ye                   U1
                b
                      EGDP
                                                                               PPFe
           a
               GDP0            U1                                                     U0
                      U0
                                                                  bY0                                     B
           PPF
                                    B
     eY0                                                                   PPF0
                                                                                                A
     Y0                                                               Y0
                           A


                                             UPF                                                               GDP0   rGDP1
                                                   b
                                               a
                               Xo eX0                   Xe                                  X0           bX0          Xe
                               Figure 3                                                             Figure 4




                                                                                                                           40
                RESOURCE-SAVING

                   Costless
                  Production                     OUTPUT-SAVING
                  Technology
                                                  Costless         EGDP
labor and                                        Consumption     Consumer
                                  Output (GDP)
 capital                                                          Welfare
                                                 Technology
                    Costly
  Intangibles     Production
                  Technology

                 RESOURCE-USING



                                  Figure 5




                                                                            41
