                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SKILL REQUIREMENTS ACROSS FIRMS AND LABOR MARKETS:
               EVIDENCE FROM JOB POSTINGS FOR PROFESSIONALS

                                        David Deming
                                        Lisa B. Kahn

                                     Working Paper 23328
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23328


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2017, Revised May 2017




Previously circulated as "Firm Heterogeneity in Skill Demands." We are grateful to Edward
Lazear, Kathryn Shaw, two anonymous referees and seminar participants at AEAs, NBER and
the Trans Pacific Labor Seminar 2016. We are especially indebted to Brad Hershbein, Dan
Restuccia, Jake Sherman, and Bledi Taska for help and provision of the Burning Glass data. This
paper was previously circulated under the title "Firm Heterogeneity in Skill Demands". The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Deming and Lisa B. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill Requirements across Firms and Labor Markets: Evidence from Job Postings for Professionals
David Deming and Lisa B. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 23328
April 2017, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F1,F16

                                          ABSTRACT

We study variation in skill demands for professionals across firms and labor markets. We
categorize a wide range of keywords found in job ads into ten general skills. There is substantial
variation in these skill requirements, even within narrowly defined occupations. Focusing
particularly on cognitive and social skills, we find positive correlations between each skill and
external measures of pay and firm performance. We also find evidence of a cognitive social-skill
complementarity for both outcomes. As a whole, the job skills have explanatory power in pay and
firm performance regressions, beyond what is available in widely-used labor market data.


David Deming
Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman 411
Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard Kennedy School
and also NBER
david_deming@gse.harvard.edu

Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu
1     Introduction
Wage inequality in the U.S. has increased markedly over the last few decades.          A large

literature in economics links rising wage inequality in the U.S. and other developed countries

to technological change, specically the computerization of the labor market (e.g.      Autor,

Levy and Murnane 2003, Autor, Katz and Kearney 2008, Acemoglu and Autor 2011, Goos,

Manning and Salomons 2014).       This work focuses on changes in relative demand across

occupations that dier in the content of the tasks that are typically performed on the job.

For example, Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) show that the falling price of computer capital

led to employment and wage reductions in routine task-intensive occupations and increases

in cognitive occupations.

    One empirical limitation in the study of technological change is that existing data sources

typically measure variation in workplace tasks across occupations, but not within them. This

work typically proceeds by linking measures of occupation task content  obtained from data

sources such as the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) or the Occupational Information

Network (O*NET) - with employment data. Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) show that

cognitive-intensive occupations such as doctors and lawyers have become a larger share of

the U.S. labor force since the 1970s. This work documents relative employment shifts across

occupations, but says nothing about whether the tasks performed by doctors and lawyers

have changed over time in response to technological change. Yet wage inequality has also

increased sharply within occupations in recent decades (e.g., Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux

2009). Perhaps rising wage inequality across space and over time is linked to changes in task

content, even within narrowly dened categories of occupations.

    In this paper we study heterogeneity in employer skill demands using a dataset of job

vacancies that encompasses nearly all jobs posted to an online source in the U.S. from 2010-

2015. We restrict our attention to job ads for professional workers because of their likely

broader scope for important variation in skill requirements. The data include detailed infor-

mation about employers' skill requirements for individual jobs, including rm identiers and

other important observable characteristics such as occupation, industry, and education and

experience requirements. The data also include a vast and detailed set of job requirements,

ranging from general skills such as problem-solving or negotiation to specic capabilities

such as prociency with specialized software (e.g., Java and SQL). Importantly, these data

allow us to move beyond the limitations of existing work and ask if there are labor market

returns to skills even within narrowly-dened occupation categories.

    We begin by winnowing down the large variety of keywords and phrases in job vacancy

posting into ten commonly observed and recognizable job skills.      Among others, these in-

clude cognitive, social, management, and nance. These skill denitions are motivated by

the task literature that ties shifts in relative demand across occupations to technological

change.   We rst show that there is substantial heterogeneity in demand for these skills,




                                               2
even within occupation, industry and location and when controlling for other characteristics

such as education and experience requirements. We next show that the prevalence of these

skills is correlated with proxies for job productivity. Dierences in employer skill demands

predict occupational wage premia across Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), even after

controlling for a rich set of characteristics.       We also show that variation in skill demands

is positively correlated with measures of rm performance. Finally, we show that the ten

job skills account for roughly 15 percent of the variation in our aggregated wage measure

across rms. Overall, our results show the measures of advertised skill requirements found

in job vacancy data are important predictors of wage patterns, beyond what is available in

widely-used labor market data.

   In principle, measures of skill requirements extracted from job vacancy data can be used

to study the returns to a variety of skills across occupations, labor markets and other con-

texts. Here we focus on just two - cognitive skills and social skills. A large literature shows

that the returns to cognitive skill have increased in recent decades, perhaps because com-

puters complement workers performing cognitively complex, abstract tasks (Autor, Levy

and Murnane 2003, Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008). More recent work suggests that the

return to cognitive skills may be evolving, with important consequences for income inequal-

ity. Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2016) show that cognitive jobs as a whole saw little wage or

employment growth in the last decade, while researchers instead point to a rising complemen-

tarity between cognitive and social skills (Borghans et al. 2014, Weinberger 2014, Deming

2016). Indeed social skills may become increasingly important as computers substitute for
                                                                          1
a wider range of non-interactive tasks (Autor 2014, Lu 2015).                 We highlight cognitive and

social skills because of their prominence in this literature linking technological change to

wage inequality, and because of the sense that they are generally important in a wide range

of professional jobs. This focus provides a clear illustration of what can be learned from the

skill requirements found in job postings, relative to existing data.

   To understand whether stated preferences for cognitive and social skills are indeed in-

dicative of higher skilled and more productive jobs, we investigate the relationship between

this stated demand and proxies for productivity of workers in the advertised jobs. Because

job ads tend not to specify wages (Kuhn and Shen 2013, Marinescu and Woltho 2016), we

link our data to two external sources measuring wages and performance at aggregated levels.

First, we obtain average wages at the location-occupation  MSA by 6-digit SOC occupation

 level from the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program.                    Second, we obtain

two measures of rm performance: whether the rm posting the add is publicly traded (as

proxied by whether we can link the name to a rm in Compustat) and revenue per worker

for publicly traded rms.

   1 For example, advances in automation of some types of cancer diagnoses and treatment, as well as in legal
e-discovery, make possible the automation of some aspects of even doctors' and lawyers' jobs (Brynjolfsson
and McAfee 2014; Demng 2016).




                                                     3
   We nd that cognitive skill and social skill requirements in job ads positively predict

occupational wage dierences across local labor markets, even after controlling for education

and experience requirements, MSA xed eects, and industry and occupation (6 digit) xed

eects. We also nd a positive correlation between demand for both skills and rm perfor-

mance, even after controlling for other skill requirements and the average frequency of rm

vacancy postings within locations and occupations. These returns are largely concentrated

among ads that post both cognitive and social skill requirements, which is consistent with

the complementarity between cognitive skills and social skills found in Weinberger (2014)

and Deming (2016).

   Our results suggest that variation in pay and performance across MSAs and rms may

partly reect dierences in skill demands. We estimate that demand for cognitive and social

skills accounts for 5 percent of the variation in rm pay, within our detailed set of controls

(occupation, industry, education and experience requirements, and the other eight general

skill requirements), and similar fractions of variation in rm performance. Our pay measure

masks considerable variation across rms since it is only available at an aggregated MSA-

occupation level. We might expect this percentage to be even larger for worker-level pay.

   Our results are thus consistent with wage inequality across rms being driven in part

by dierences in skill utilization, perhaps as some rms take better advantage of modern

production technologies. Naturally, we do not observe production technology in our data and

cannot rule out that an omitted factor, even within our detailed controls, drives both stated

skill demand and outcomes. However, these results are interesting in light of recent research

that points to widening pay dierentials across rms and across U.S. cities as important
                                                   2
contributors to the overall rise in inequality.        We use our short panel to link variation in

pay to variation in demand for tasks that are particularly associated with rising inequality

over time, even though we cannot speak to the time series on rising pay and performance

dierentials across rms and cities. We therefore provide a specic illustration of how our

data can speak to the recent debate in the inequality literature based on the changing demand

for cognitive and social skills, and the increasing complementarity between them (Weinberger

2014, Beaudry, Green and Sand 2016, Deming 2016).

   Research on the task content of occupations has furthered our understanding of broad

labor market trends in inequality (e.g., Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003, Autor and Dorn

2013), as well as human capital and worker mobility (Gathmann and Schonberg 2010, Po-

letaev and Robinson 2008, Speer 2016). Our results show the usefulness of advertised skill

requirements in explaining heterogeneity in wages across rms and labor markets, even within

narrowly dened occupations. Firm identiers in our dataset allow us to relate internal rm

practices (i.e., stated preferences) to performance, yielding additional explanatory power. In

  2 For research on rms, see other papers in this volume, including Barth, Bryson, Davis and Freeman
(2016), Card Heining and Kline (2016), and Song et al.   (2015).   For research on geographic sorting and
agglomeration economies, see Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009), Moretti (2013), Diamond (2016).




                                                   4
that spirit we are related to the important literature measuring and relating management

practices to rm performance (Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), Ichniowski, Shaw and Pren-

nushi (1997)). We also join a growing set of papers that use job vacancy data to understand

a variety of labor market issues, for example how and when rms respond to technological

change (Hershbein and Kahn 2016), rm preferences for discrimination (Kuhn and Shen

2013) and the general equilibrium impacts of unemployment insurance (Marinescu 2017).

    This paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we describe the datasets and explain how

we classify ten job skills from the thousands of key words found in the job ads. In section 3

we show that these skills have explanatory power in labor market pay and rm performance

regressions, even within a detailed set of job controls. In section 4 we decompose variation

in rm labor market pay and performance into components attributable to subsets of skills

measures, as well as controls. Section 5 concludes with a brief discussion of how job vacancy

data could be used in the future.




2      Data
2.1      Overview

Our primary data source is a database of employment vacancies provided by Burning Glass

Technologies (hereafter BG), an employment analytics and labor market information rm.

BG examines nearly 40,000 online job boards and company web sites, removes duplicates and

parses the ads into a systematic, machine-readable form. They use the resulting database to

create labor market analytic products. BG claims their database encompasses nearly all jobs

posted to an online source during the time period of measurement. The BG microdata were

rst used by Hershbein and Kahn (2016) to study whether the Great Recession accelerated

the adoption of routine-labor saving technologies.

    We restrict our attention to ads posted in professional occupations (roughly 60 percent
               3
of all ads).       This category includes almost all occupations employing college-educated work-

ers, and it has the most representative coverage in the BG data (Carnevale, Jayasundera
                                                            4
and Repnikov 2014, Hershbein and Kahn 2016).                    Furthermore, professional occupations are

the focus of the primary debate to which we would like to speak. Focusing on professional

occupations, Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2016) show that occupations requiring cognitive

skills saw no employment or wage growth in the 2000s. Deming (2016) instead nds growth

in occupations that require both cognitive and social skills, providing evidence for an increas-

    3 Specically, we restrict to major SOC categories 11-29, which include management, business and nancial
operations, computer and mathematical, architecture and engineering, the sciences, community and social
services, legal, education, arts and entertainment, and healthcare practitioners and technical occupations.
    4 Naturally, data on job ads posted to an online source will not be perfectly representative of all job ads or
of employment, even within professional occupations. See Hershbein and Kahn (2016), especially the data
appendix, for more detail on sample representativeness, how the BG sample changes over time, and how skill
requriements relate to the skills of employed workers.




                                                        5
ing complementarity precisely across higher paying occupations.                 The Burning Glass data

provide a unique view of the cross-sectional variation in skill requirements within detailed

occupations. The large sample sizes allow us to explore heterogeneity in skill demands across

cities and rms, with a particular focus on professional occupations.
                                                                                                 5
    Our resulting dataset contains nearly 45 million ads, for the years 2010-2015.                   The BG

data include education and experience requirements, detailed industry and occupation codes

(6-digit SOC), the location, the date the ad was posted and rm identiers (where available)

for each job vacancy.       BG also parses the actual text of each job vacancy and codes key

words and phrases as additional job requirements. In our sample, 93 percent of ads have

at least one such requirement, and, conditional on having any requirement, post an average

of 9. In the next subsection, we describe how we distill over ten thousand unique keywords

and phrases identied by BG into a subset of general job skills that could be useful across
                        6
a wide range of jobs.

    We focus on two samples: (1) the full set of professional ads (hereafter, the full sample)
                                                                    7
and (2) the 63 percent of ads with a non-missing rm.                   This latter sample allows us to

estimate heterogeneity in skill requirements across rms. For the rm sample, we further

focus our attention on the remaining 96 percent of ads from rms that have posted at least

ten ads total and ads in at least two dierent professional occupations and at least two
                                               8
dierent MSAs over our sample period.              These restrictions help clean out some noise in the

rm-level variation in skill requirements that we explore. The resulting database, hereafter,

the rm sample, contains nearly 86,000 unique rms.

    Only 13 percent of professional ads post the wage that is oered, which prevents us from
                                                                                                            9
studying the relationship between skill demands and wages for individual job vacancies.

Instead, we use two sources of external data that allow us to relate average skill demands to

wages across labor markets and performance across rms.

    We obtain data on average wages for MSA-occupation (6-digit SOC) cells from the OES

program produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The OES is a large survey of

non-farm establishments, especially designed to produce data at sub-state levels. Six percent

of job vacancies are posted in MSA-occupations that cannot be matched to OES data, or

have suppressed wage data, likely because they are too small, and these cells are removed

   5 We exclude Micropolitan Statistical Areas from our analysis (roughly 5 percent of ads) since external
data on wages and location characteristics is either unavailable or much less precise.
   6 BG cleans and codes the text of job ads into a taxonomy of thousands of unique, but standardized
requirements. Beginning with a set of pre-dened possible skills, BG using machine learning algorithms to
search text in an ad for an indication that the skill is required. For example, for team work, they search for
the key words team work but also look for variations such as ability to work as a team.
   7 Ads that do not contain a rm identier are typically obtained from recruiter websites where the poster
does not wish to reveal the information. We explore robustness to this sample restriction, below.
   8 Firms with a very small number of posts likely represent data errors, containing fragments of text from
the ad that do not correspond to rm name.
   9 It is well-known that vacancies rarely post wage oers. See for example Kuhn and Shen (2013) and
Marinescu and Woltho (2016).




                                                       6
from this analysis.
                                                                                                          10
    We obtain rm performance data from Compustat North America by Standard & Poors.

All publicly traded companies are required to track accounting and balance sheet data,

making Compustat the most complete database of this information for U.S. rms. We are

able to match about 30 percent of ads in the rm sample to a publicly traded rm in
             11
Compustat.        Our main rm performance measures are whether or not the rm is publicly

traded, as measured by whether or not the rm can be linked to Compustat, and conditional

on the link being possible, the rm's revenue per worker.

    We also obtain MSA demographic characteristics to use as control variables from Amer-

ican Community Survey (ACS) data. Here, again, we can match all but a small fraction of
                                                                                                   12
our sample (making up 3.5 percent of ads) to the ACS, excluding some small cities.

    Both wages and revenue per worker are available at an annual frequency.                       However,

because the time series in the BG data is fairly short and because job ads likely represent

intentions for the ow of new workers, while wages and rm performance variables reect

the stock of existing workers, we aggregate all data sources, taking an unweighted average

across the years 2010-2015. We thus restrict our attention to cross-sectional relationships

between average skill requirements at the MSA-occupation or rm-level and wages or rm

performance. This aggregation has the advantage of smoothing out time variation in skill

requirements driven by factors outside the scope of this analysis, such as labor supply shocks
                                 13
or labor market conditions.

    Appendix table A1 provides summary statistics for ads in the full sample (Panel A), the

rm sample (Panel B) and the Compustat-matched sample (Panel C). The full sample has

coverage in 56,611 MSA-occupation (6-digit SOC) cells, containing an average of nearly 800

ads, though there is a wide range. The ad-weighted average wage is $42/hour in our sample

of professional occupations.

    The rm sample (Panel B) contains nearly 86,000 rms, posting in an average of 301

ads, each, again with a wide range. The average ad is from a rm that posts in roughly 100

occupations (out of 352) and roughly 100 MSAs (out of 371). This sample has coverage across

  10 We obtain these data via Wharton Research Data Services.
  11 After cleaning rm names in both BG and Compustat to remove words like Incorporated and its
associated abbreviations, as well as all punctuation, we match based on exact name (75 percent of matched
rms). We then use a fuzzy match algorithm to link rms with at least a 95 percent chance of being the
same (3 percent of matched rms). Finally we match based on a regularized subset of words. Hershbein and
Kahn (2016) also use this match. They point out that total employment in Compustat was 50 percent of US
employment in these sample years, though employment is not collected in a standardized way in Compustat
and includes foreign aliates.
  12 Demographic controls from the ACS include MSA-level share female, black, Hispanic, Asian, married,
and moved in the last year. We also control for education (high school dropouts, exactly high school, some
college, exactly BA) and age (less than 18, 19-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-64) distributions. We set all controls to
zero if the MSA did not match and include a dummy for whether the MSA matched to ACS data.
  13 Hershbein and Kahn (2016) show a persistent shift in skill requirements in MSAs hit harder by the
Great Recession that is consistent with an increased adoption of routine-labor saving technologies. Sasser
Modestino, Shoag and Ballance (2016) show that skill requirements are responsive to a labor supply shock:
returning U.S. troops from Iraq and Afghanistan.



                                                     7
nearly as many MSA-occupation cells as the full sample (55,241), though with typically fewer

ads per cell.

    Panel C shows that the 3,622 rms that can be matched to Compustat are bigger. They

post in an average of 2,138 ads across a larger number of MSAs and occupations. They still

have coverage in over 45,000 MSA-occupation cells, with an average of 173 ads per cell. The

average ad is posted to a rm with roughly half a million dollars in revenue per worker and

they pay slightly more for professional workers ($44/hour).



2.2     Job Skills in the Burning Glass Data

One contribution of this paper is to distill and analyze the keywords and phrases coded from

the open text of ads in the BG data. But BG also codes the more standard skill measures,

education and experience. From table A1, 59 percent of professional ads specify an education

requirement that averages 15.7 years of school (tting modal years to degree requirements).

58 percent of ads specify a requirement for experience in the eld that averages 4 years. The

propensity to specify these requirements is higher in the rm sample and even higher in the

Compustat-matched sample. Interestingly, Hershbein and Kahn (2016) show that average

education requirements in BG align well with the education levels of employed workers at the

occupation and MSA levels. This shows that, for the most part, rms continue to specify skill
                                                                                                          14
requirements, even for high-skilled jobs where an education requirement might be assumed.

    Figure 1 provides some intuition for the relationship between education requirements and

earnings among professional occupations. We plot demeaned hourly wages (blue bars) from

the OES ordered by their city wage rank for the 50 largest MSAs in terms of employment in

professional occupations (according to the OES). Wage bars are followed by the correspond-

ing demeaned years of schooling required for job vacancies posted in that same MSA in the

full sample. As Figure 1 shows clearly, average wages (from the OES data) and average years

of schooling required (from the BG data) are strongly correlated (about 0.84 when weighted

by MSA employment). This correlation is reassuring that the BG data generally preserve

the ranking of labor markets by skill.

    We next explain how we make sense of the key words and phrases coded by BG. Using the

more than ten thousand unique elds as our starting point, we create ten categories of job

skills that could be useful across a wide range of jobs. Table 1 lists the ten skills and provides

the corresponding words and phrases that fall in each category. We code an ad as having

a particular job skill requirement if it has at least one of the key words or phrases listed,

though it may have many. The skills are mutually exclusive but not collectively exhaustive
                                                                                           15
- indeed, there are many other categories of job skills that one could study.

    The rst two skills listed in Table 1 are cognitive and social. Job vacancies that require

  14 For example, most ads posted on the Job Openings in Economics website specify a Ph.D. requirement.
  15 Examples range from skills that are particularly useful in certain jobs (e.g. plumbing) to business
processes (e.g. six sigma) to very general attributes that are hard to categorize (e.g. quick learner).



                                                      8
                                       Figure 1: Wages and Education Requirements by City Wage Rank
                                 15                                                                                                   0.80




                                                                                                                                      0.60
                                 10


                                                                                                                                      0.40




                                                                                                                                              Demeaned Years Schooling Requirement
                                  5
                                                                                                                                      0.20
                Demeaned Wages




                                  0                                                                                                   0.00
                                       1    6      11      16         21        26        31         36        41         46
                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Hourly Wage
                                                                                                                                                                                     Avg. Yrs. Of Schooling
                                                                                                                                      ‐0.20
                                  ‐5


                                                                                                                                      ‐0.40


                                 ‐10
                                                                                                                                      ‐0.60




                                 ‐15                                                                                                  ‐0.80
                                                                       MSA Wage Ranking

                      Notes: Dark bars show MSA average wages for professional occupations, obtained from the OES 2010‐2015. Light bars show MSA average
                      years schooling required in Burning Glass job ads 2010‐2015, conditional on having any stated requirement. Chart includes top 50 MSAs (in
                      terms of employment in professional occupations) and is ordered by MSA wage rank.




                                                           Table 1: Description of Job Skills
Job Skills                                  Key words and phrases
Cognitive                                   Problem Solving, Research, Analytical, Critical Thinking, Math, Statistics
Social                                      Communication, Teamwork, Collaboration, Negotiation, Presentation
Character                                   Organized, Detail‐oriented, Multi‐tasking, Time Management, Meeting Deadlines, Energetic
Writing                                     Writing
Customer Service                            Customer, Sales, Client, Patient
Project Management                          Project Management
People Management                           Supervisory, Leadership, Management (not project), Mentoring, Staff
Financial                                   Budgeting, Accounting, Finance, Cost
Computer (general)                          Computer, Spreadsheets, Common Software (e.g. Microsoft Excel, Powerpoint)
Software (specific)                         Programming language or specialized software (e.g. Java, SQL, Python, etc.)
Notes: Authors categorization of open text fields in Burning Glass data.




                                                                                          9
cognitive skills ask for key words and phrases such as problem solving, research, and

analytical. We chose these skills deliberately to match the description of the nonroutine

analytical job tasks used in Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) and other related work. We

group key words such as communication, teamwork, and collaboration under the heading

of social skills, following closely the denition used in Deming (2016). For both cognitive

and social skills, we check each key phrase to ensure that its prevalence corresponds with
                                                                                                 16
occupations that the previous literature tends to classify as cognitive or social.

    We categorize eight additional skill groups and show that these are important in explain-

ing pay dierentials across labor markets and performance dierentials across rms.The third

skill, character, is an umbrella term for key words and phrases such as organized, detail-

oriented, and time management. Here we follow the large literature on non-cognitive or

soft skills, which discusses the labor market returns to personality traits such as conscien-

tiousness and agreeableness as well as personal attributes such as self-control and positive

aect (e.g. Heckman and Kautz 2012).

    Our criteria for the other seven job skills is that they be commonly listed and generally

applicable to a wide range of jobs. For example, writing, customer service, sales and project

management are among the top fteen most commonly listed text elds in BG data from

2014. We also create the skill categories people management and nancial from a range

of related key words and phrases.           Finally, we include categories for general and specic

computer skills. BG codes these categories themselves. The former encompasses the generic

phrase computer skills as well as key phrases for common software such as Microsoft Excel,

while the latter includes specialized software such as SQL, Java, or C++.

    To provide intuition for these job skills, appendix table A2 shows the share of job vacan-

cies that require each skill for selected occupations in the full sample. As can be seen, this

skill demand is fairly high for cognitive, social and character skills, which are required across

a broad range of jobs. Also, job skills line up well with occupation titles and perceived job

tasks. 84 percent of vacancies for accountants and auditors require nancial skills, compared

to an average of only 16 percent across all professional occupations.                   Similarly, the share

of computer systems analysts requiring project management skills is particularly high, as is

the share of computer programmers requiring skill in a specic software program. Ads for

registered nurses are more likely to specify a customer service requirement. Finally, there is

a lot of variation in skill requirements even within detailed occupation categories. For exam-

ple, among managers, nancial manager vacancies are much more likely to require nancial

skills, than sales and general managers. In contrast, customer service skills are much more

likely to be requested for sales managers than for the other types.

    Our exercise falls very much in the spirit of the task literature, which catalogs task re-

  16 Specically, at the occupation level, we nd that the share of ads containing a given key word is positively
related to an index score for how cognitive or social the occupation is. Index scores are based on O*NET
18.1 and stem from measures used in Deming (2016) based on an earlier time period. Hershbein and Kahn
(2016) also follow this approach.



                                                      10
quirements at the occupation level using the DOT or O*NET and explores variation over

time or over a career (Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003, Poletaev and Robinson 2008, Gath-

mann and Schonberg 2010). In what follows, we primarily focus on cognitive skills and social

skills because they are important predictors of productivity and wages in a wide variety of

occupations and because of their prominence in the literature linking technological change to

wage inequality (e.g. Weinberger 2014, Deming 2016). While we can show that the remain-

ing skill measures have explanatory power in pay and performance regressions, we refrain

from interpreting (or showing) the signs or magnitudes of the coecients on the other eight

job skill measures. This is because we do not have a general framework for analyzing them.

Some skills may be valuable, the higher the requirement, while some may reect horizontal

dierentiation in production or selection of workers, and others may substitute or comple-

ment each other. For example, listing character skills might be a signal of lower-paying

jobs where obedience is required, even if character skills themselves are valuable in all jobs.

We leave questions such as these for future work.



2.3     Variation in Skill Requirements

Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics for these measures. 37 percent of profes-

sional jobs specify a cognitive skill requirement and 36 percent specify a social requirement.

A quarter of ads specify both requirements. Frequency of appearance for the other job skills

ranges from one-ninth of ads (project management) to nearly a third (character and soft-

ware). Skill requirements are a bit more prevalent in the rm sample, and especially for ads

in the Compustat-matched sample.

    There is also substantial variation in skill requirements across ads. Figure 2 illustrates

variation in skill requirements that can be accounted for by the other characteristics found in

the ads. We regress the probability that an ad posts a given skill on our most detailed set of

controls: 6-digit occupation, MSA, and rm xed eects as well as education and experience
                17
requirements.        We estimate this regression on the rm sample, which restricts to rms with

at least 10 ads and postings in at least 2 MSAs and 2 occupations, to limit noise in the rm

xed eects.

    The bottom bar (solid dark blue) plots the variance in the tted values for the occupation

xed eects. Occupation typically accounts for a fairly small fraction of the total variance

in skill requirements, between 2 and 8 percent, except in nance and software, where it

accounts for nearly 20 percent. This is intuitive given the nature of the skill requirements,

and it gives us condence that our measures capture real variation in employer demands for

the indicated skill.

    The next bar (pattern) plots the variance in tted values for the remaining controls

  17 Education controls include an indicator for whether the ad has any education requirement and the
number of years required if there is a requirement (otherwise zero), and experience controls are analogous.




                                                    11
                                      Figure 2: Variances of Skill Requirements
         0.25




          0.2




         0.15




          0.1




         0.05




             0
                 Cognitive   Social    Character     Cust Serv   Writing    Project Mgt People Mgt   Finance   Computer   Software
                                        Occupations       Additional Controls    Firm effects   Residuals
Notes:    Based on the rm sample.                 We regress an indicator for whether an ad has the skill requirement

on occupation (6 digit) xed eects, additional controls (MSA xed eects and education and experience

requirements) and rm xed eects. Bars plot variances of tted values based on specied controls or the

residuals.



except rm eects. Controls for location, and the more typical skill measures (education and

experience) tend to account for roughly 15 percent of the total variation. This is because,

as we explain below, almost all of the skill measures are positively correlated with education

and experience requirements and because the skill requirements in a location tend to reect

the skill of employed workers in the location (see Hershbein and Kahn 2016).

    The third bar (vertical lines) plots the variance in tted values for the rm xed eects.

Interestingly, we nd that there is substantial systematic variation across rms in their

tendency to specify these skill requirements. They account for nearly 30 percent of the total

variation for most of the skill measures. Firms clearly have large systematic dierences in

their recruiting strategies, and possibly dierences in skill utilization, even controlling for

the distribution of occupations and MSAs they post in.

    Finally, there is substantial remaining variation across ads in the propensity to specify

these skill requirements, even within this very detailed set of controls. The residual variances

tend to be about half of the total variation in requirements.

    Table 2 presents bivariate correlations for each pair of skill requirements, weighted by ads,

in the rm sample. There are two main takeaways from Table 2. First, cognitive skill and

social skill requirements are positively correlated with each other, with years of education




                                                                      12
and experience required, and with most of the other eight job skills. This suggests that they

are general skills deemed important by employers across a wide range of occupations and

labor markets. Second, the correlations between education and experience requirements and

job skills are mostly positive but relatively small. This suggests that there is wide variation

in employer skill demands even after accounting for education and experience requirements.




                                              13
                                                                                   Table 2: Correlations of Skill Requirements
                                                  Education Experience Cognitive                     Social      Character Writing Cust Serv Proj Mgmt Ppl Mgmt Financial Computer Software
     Years of Education Required                    1.00
     Years of Experience Required                    0.30      1.00
     Cognitive                                       0.20      0.37       1.00
     Social                                          0.05      0.25       0.64                        1.00
     Character                                      ‐0.06      0.14       0.59                        0.69           1.00




14
     Customer Service                               ‐0.27      ‐0.38     ‐0.03                        0.17           0.14           1.00
     Writing                                         0.12      0.24       0.57                        0.52           0.52          ‐0.07           1.00
     Project Management                              0.20      0.57       0.55                        0.45           0.39          ‐0.20           0.39             1.00
     People Management                              ‐0.05      0.01       0.35                        0.34           0.38           0.13           0.30             0.27   1.00
     Financial                                       0.02      0.21      0.43                         0.35           0.37          ‐0.04           0.36             0.38   0.39    1.00
     Computers (General)                            ‐0.06      0.27       0.52                        0.52           0.54          ‐0.02           0.50             0.40   0.24    0.41   1.00
     Software (Specific)                             0.26      0.61      0.36                         0.25           0.11          ‐0.33           0.24             0.50   ‐0.06   0.02   0.27   1.00
     Notes: Table shows ad‐weighted bivariate correlations across all skill measures at the firm level using the firm sample. See table 1 for skills definitions.
3     Skill Demands and Worker and Firm Outcomes
The goal of this paper is to understand whether pay dierentials across markets and rms

are associated with dierences in demand for skills.   In particular, are rms and markets

that pay more also more likely to require employees to have cognitive skills, social skills or

both? Dierences in demand for these skills and associated returns in terms of wages and

rm performance may reect variation in production technology, especially within narrowly

dened occupations. Since we do not measure individual productivity or wages directly in

our dataset, we use three proxies. The rst is the average wage in the MSA-occupation cell,

obtained from OES data, which should be correlated with wages paid by rms posting ads

in those same cells.   The second is whether or not the rm is publicly traded, measured

by whether we can link the rm name to Compustat. Publicly traded rms are generally

larger, higher-paying, more successful rms and we can ask whether this rm-performance

measure is correlated with the types of skills demanded. The third is log revenue per worker,

conditional on being matched to Compustat. For this subset of rms, all of whom are at

least successful enough to be publicly traded, we can ask whether dierences in skill demand

correlate with dierences in their bottom line.

    In thinking about the relationship between job skills and wages, a few examples may be

instructive. First, consider computer programmers in Washington, DC versus Manchester-

Nashua, NH. Hourly wages for computer programmers are about 25 percent higher in Wash-

ington DC compared to New Hampshire. 35 percent of computer programmer vacancies in

Washington, DC require social skills, compared to only 21 percent in Manchester-Nashua,

and rms with computer programmer vacancies in Washington, DC have about 10 percent

higher revenue per worker than their New Hampshire counterparts.

    Hourly wages for management analysts are about 25 percent higher in San Jose, CA

compared to San Diego.      84 percent of management analyst vacancies in San Jose, CA

require cognitive skills, compared to only 75 percent in San Diego, CA, and rms with

management analyst vacancies in San Jose are also about 2 percentage points more likely to

be publicly traded.

    Our hypothesis is that while most computer programmer vacancies require cognitive skills,

computer programming jobs in DC that also require social skills are performing more complex

functions, perhaps strategizing with clients or overseeing coworkers, and are therefore more

productive. Similarly, while all management analysts likely require social skills to interact

with clients, those in San Jose may engage in more complex problem-solving and analysis.

These are only illustrative examples, and of course we cannot observe production technology

in our data. But we nd the subsequent evidence on stated preferences of rms compelling

and consistent with this hypothesis.

    Of course, wages and job skill requirements may be correlated for a variety of reasons.

Washington, DC and San Jose are more expensive cities with more educated workers and




                                             15
dierent amenities than their counterparts. We want to understand whether the skill require-

ments reect dierences in how workers produce or simply pick up city- or occupation-wide

dierences. To that end, we estimate regressions of the following general form:




(1)                       log(wage)om = α + Skillom β 0 + controls + om

      For a 6-digit SOC occupation,     o, and MSA, m, we regress the mean log wage (log(wage))
as measured by the OES on a         vector of average skill requirements (Skillom ) of ads posted in

the MSA-occupation in the BG data. We experiment with a few dierent sets of controls,
                                                                                            18
always including the more standard skill measures, education and experience.                     Additional

controls are added successively and described below.              All regressions are weighted by the

number of ads in each MSA-occupation cell, although results are very similar when we

instead weight by employment.

      Table 3 presents results from estimates of equation (1) on the full sample.                  Column

1 summarizes a sparse model that includes the 10 skill measures and the education and

experience variables. The coecient of         0.11   on cognitive skills is statistically signicant at

the less than 1 percent level. The magnitude of the coecient implies that a 10 percentage

point increase in the share of job vacancies requiring cognitive skills is associated with 1.1

percent higher wages.         Alternatively, a one standard deviation increase in the propensity

to specify a cognitive skill requirement across occupation-MSAs (0.17) increases wages by

nearly 2 percent. We estimate that adding any cognitive skill requirement is associated with

a roughly equivalent wage gain to increasing the education or experience requirement by

one year. The coecient on social skills is much larger in magnitude and also statistically

signicant at the less than 1 percent level. A standard deviation increase (0.12) in demand

for social skill is associated with a 5 percent wage increase.

      Column 2 adds the share of vacancies in each MSA-occupation cell with both a cognitive

skill and social skill requirement. Like Weinberger (2014) and Deming (2016), we nd strong

evidence of complementarity between cognitive skills and social skills. Each of the positive

correlations between cognitive or social skill requirements and wages (found in column 1)

is explained by vacancies that ask for both types of skills.             The coecient implies that a

one standard deviation increase (0.10) in the share of vacancies requiring both cognitive and

social skills increases wages by 14 percent. Surprisingly, we nd a negative wage return for

ads that require only cognitive or only social skills, though this eect reverses with controls.

We also report F-statistics on the cognitive and social variables (including the requirement

for both in even columns) and for the full set of skills.           In both columns we can strongly

  18 We control for the average years of education (experience) required in the cell, as well as the share of
ads with any education (experience) requirement. For MSA-occupation cells with no education (experience)
requirement, the years variable is set to 0 and the share of ads with any requirement will equal 0, thus
indicating this imputation.




                                                      16
                                Table 3: Average Wages and Skill Requirements

                                    Dependent variable: Log(mean wages) in MSA‐Occupation
                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
Cognitive                                    0.113***   ‐0.413***  0.245***                         0.181*** 0.0792*** 0.0465***
                                             (0.00908)   (0.0166)  (0.00784)                         (0.0139)  (0.00873)   (0.0122)
Social                                       0.429***  ‐0.0919*** 0.301***                          0.236*** 0.0517***      0.0202
                                              (0.0155)   (0.0206)   (0.0121)                         (0.0167)  (0.00966)   (0.0127)
Both required                                           1.319***                                    0.157***             0.0760***
                                                         (0.0349)                                    (0.0278)              (0.0198)
Years of Education                           0.131***    0.129*** 0.0764***                        0.0765*** 0.00865*** 0.00873***
                                            (0.000770) (0.000763) (0.000844)                       (0.000844) (0.000995) (0.000995)
Years Experience                             0.160***    0.161*** 0.0848***                        0.0849*** 0.0318*** 0.0318***
                                             (0.00120)  (0.00118)  (0.00120)                        (0.00120)  (0.00102)  (0.00102)
Base controls                                                           x                                x
Detailed Controls                                                                                                  X           X
F-stat (cog and social)                         553.1             855.0             1004               680.4     69.66       51.35
F-stat (all 10 skills)                          1874              2054              612.6              560.1     59.93       55.83
MSA-Occ Cells                                  56,611            56,611            56,611             56,611     56,611     56,611
R-squared                                       0.702             0.710             0.846              0.846     0.940       0.941
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: All regressions control for the share of ads with each of the 8 other job skill, education and experience requirements. Years of education and
experience equal 0 if the msa‐occupation cell has no ads that specify requirements. Dependent variable is the log of median hourly earnings in the MSA‐
occupation, obtained from OES data. Base controls include MSA characteristics from the ACS, four‐digit SOC occupation fixed effects, and the share of
ads in the MSA‐occupation that are in each of the 2‐digit NAICS industries. Detailed controls include MSA and six‐digit SOC occupation fixed effects and
the industry shares. Observations are from the full sample, weighted by number of ads in the MSA‐occupation cell. See table 1 for skills defintions.




                                                                    17
reject that these groups of coecients are equal to zero (p    = 0.000).
     Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 add a base set of controls:          four-digit SOC occupation

xed eects, MSA characteristics from the ACS and the distribution of ads across two-digit

NAICS industries. These controls help adjust for a range of alternative explanations for the

positive correlation between skill requirements and wages. First, as noted, rms may post

skill requirements in cities that have more skilled workers, which may also be more expensive

cities where wages are higher. Second, occupation and industry controls adjust for a range

of factors including dierences in representation in online job ads, the propensity to not

post requirements because skills are assumed, and the propensity to post requirements as

a way of signalling something about the job other than skill utilization in production. For

example, jobs for a salesperson may in general not specify a social skill requirement because

it is always assumed, but within ads for salespeople, the prevalence of key words may signal

a slightly dierent focus.

     Even within these controls, the pattern of results is similar to the raw correlations.

While the coecient on cognitive skill requirements increases and the coecient on social

skills decreases, both remain positive and statistically signicant at the less than 1 percent

level, and the interaction between the two skills in Column 4 is also positive and statistically

signicant. We see positive returns for each skill individually that doubles when the two are

required together. We can again strongly reject that the coecients on cognitive and social

skills are jointly equal to zero, and likewise for all ten skills together (p    = 0.000   in both

cases).

     Columns 5 and 6 fully saturate the model, controlling for six-digit occupation xed

eects and MSA xed eects, in addition to industry shares. MSA xed eects control for

any pay dierences across labor markets that are due to common factors such as cost of

living or local amenities. Even in this highly controlled specication, we can strongly reject

that the coecients on cognitive and social skills - and all skills jointly - are equal to zero

(p   = 0.000   in both cases). Cognitive and social skill requirements are positively correlated

with occupation-MSA wages, with the majority of the return concentrated among ads that

specify both requirements.

     The results in Table 3 show clearly that data on the average skill requirements of jobs in

local labor markets have explanatory power beyond what is available in conventional data

sources. Labor markets paying relatively high wages to a particular occupation are likely to

advertise for relatively higher cognitive and social skill requirements. We still nd a positive

return for cognitive skills, and it nearly triples when social skills are also required. It is also

worth noting that the controls for the other job skills suggest that the returns to cognitive

and social skills are not driven by their relative concentration in particular job types, such

as managerial or nance jobs, that earn high returns. Appendix Table A3 shows that these

results are very similar in the rm sample.

     Next we ask whether larger and more productive rms post systematically dierent skill



                                                18
requirements for the same occupations.          We estimate the correlation between rm perfor-

mance and skill requirements in a regression framework:




(2)                   f irm_perff = α0 + Skillf β 0 + I¯fo + X̄f γ 0 + I¯fm + θn + f

      Skillf   is a vector of rm average shares of job vacancies that require each skill,      I¯fo   is the

share of each rm's postings belonging to each occupation code,             X̄f   is a vector of average

education and experience requirements, I¯
                                        m
                                        f is the share of each rm's postings belonging to
each MSA, or the ad-weighted average MSA characteristics of the rm, and                 θn   is industry

xed eects. We weight by the share of ads posted by the rm.

      Table 4 presents estimates of equation (2) for both rm performance outcomes.                      We

alternately include our base set of controls and more detailed controls, as in Table 3. Columns

1-4 present results where the outcome is an indicator variable for whether the rm is publicly

traded, and is estimated on the rm sample.              We nd evidence of a positive association

between being publicly traded postings ads with cognitive skill and social skill requirements.

This result holds with both the base set of controls (Column 1), and when controlling for

occupation, industry and MSA xed eects (Column 3). The coecients on cognitive skill

requirements are positive in Column 1 and Column 3, but only statistically signicant when

more detailed controls are included. The coecients on social skill requirements are larger

than the results for cognitive skills, and moreover they are positive and statistically signicant

at the less than 1 percent level in both specications. In column 1, the coecients imply that

a one standard deviation increase in the share of vacancies with a social skill requirement

(the standard deviation across rms is about 0.2 for both skills) is associated with a 3.2

percentage point increase in the probability that a company is publicly traded.                This is a

10 percent increase relative to the baseline 30 percent probability that an ad is posted to a

publicly traded rm.

      Column 2 and Column 4 add the share of vacancies that require both types of skills.

We see strong evidence of complementarity in both specications. A one standard deviation

increase in the probability that both skills are required (0.16) is associated with a 6 percentage

point increase in the probability of being publicly. Note also that the social and cognitive

coecients are jointly signicant, as is the full set of skill requirements. These skill measures

thus add explanatory power above and beyond the typically available control variables.




                                                    19
                                                             Table 4: Firm Outcomes and Average Skill Requirements

                                                                             Publicly Traded                                                          Log(Revenue per Worker)
                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)                 (7)                 (8)
     Cognitive                                      0.0131            ‐0.170***           0.0318**            ‐0.136***            0.469***             0.624***            0.379***              0.0761
                                                   (0.0122)            (0.0180)            (0.0129)            (0.0185)             (0.117)              (0.190)             (0.136)             (0.218)
     Social                                        0.162***             0.0165            0.0934***           ‐0.0364**            0.218**              0.348**              0.239*             ‐0.00813
                                                   (0.0114)            (0.0155)            (0.0115)            (0.0154)             (0.105)              (0.164)             (0.123)             (0.185)
     Both required                                                     0.365***                                0.328***                                  ‐0.268                                   0.531*
                                                                       (0.0262)                                (0.0260)                                  (0.259)                                 (0.298)
     Years of Education                            ‐0.00212            ‐0.00141           ‐0.00242*            ‐0.00203            0.00423              0.00312             0.00979              0.00974
                                                  (0.00134)           (0.00134)           (0.00135)           (0.00135)            (0.0222)             (0.0222)            (0.0266)            (0.0266)
     Years Experience                             0.0236***           0.0239***           0.0125***           0.0128***           0.0851***            0.0839***            0.119***            0.120***




20
                                                  (0.00150)           (0.00150)           (0.00157)           (0.00157)            (0.0144)             (0.0145)            (0.0182)            (0.0182)
     Base Controls                                      x                   X                                                           X                    X
     Detailed Controls                                                                          X                   X                                                            X                   X
     F-stat (cog and social)                        110.2                138.1               41.93               81.19                12.43               8.644               6.560               5.432
     F-stat (all 10 skills)                         181.6                183.1               130.3               133.2                10.96               10.06               4.072               3.993
     # Firms                                        85,695               85,695              85,695              85,695               3,622               3,622               3,622               3,622
     R-squared                                      0.246                0.248               0.330               0.332                0.511               0.511               0.736               0.737
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: Observations are at the firm level, weighted by number of ads posted by the firm. All regressions control for the share of ads with each of the 8 other job skill, education and experience
     requirements. Years of education and experience equal 0 if the firm has no ads that specify requirements. In columns 1‐4 the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the firm can be matched to
     Compustat; in columns 5‐8 it is equal to the log of revenue per worker, conditional on being matched to Compustat. Base controls include two‐digit NAICS industry fixed effects and the ad‐weighted
     distributions of four‐digit occupation fixed effects and MSA characteristics from the ACS. Detailed controls included industry fixed effects and the ad‐weighted distributions of MSA and six‐digit SOC
     occupation fixed effects. See table 1 for skills defintions.
     Columns 5 through 8 report results for log revenue per worker, among the 3,622 rms in

our data that are publicly traded. Since this restriction limits our sample to the 30 percent of

adds that are posted by a publicly-traded rm, we view these results with caution. Still, it is

interesting to note that the correlation between skill requirements and revenue per worker, a

proxy for rm productivity, holds even within a small sample of large, publicly traded rms.

Column 5 shows that rms with higher revenue per worker also have signicantly higher

cognitive skill and social skill requirements. In our base specication returns load primarily

on the main eects of cognitive and social and not on the requirement for both (column 6).

However with the full set of controls in Column 8, the return is entirely concentrated in ads

that have a joint requirement. Again, in all specications, we can reject the hypotheses that

skills are jointly equal to zero. Overall, the results in Table 4 show that skill requirements
                                                                        19
are strongly correlated with proxies for rm productivity.

     In this section, we have shown that job skills have signicant explanatory power for wages

and rm performance, above and beyond variation explained by typical controls of detailed

occupation, industry and location. Furthermore, we nd evidence of a complementarity be-

tween stated preferences for cognitive and social skills in that they are positively related

to pay and rm performance, especially with our strictest set of controls.                      Our preferred

explanation is that the stated preferences indicate dierences in skill utilization, perhaps

indicating that some rms take better advantage of modern technologies (which may require

cognitive skills, social skills, or both) and with commensurate productivity gains. Naturally,

we cannot rule out that these correlations are driven by unobserved aspects of labor mar-

kets and rms. However, we add to the previous literature by showing that these positive

correlations hold within a rich set of controls, and most notably, 6-digit occupation xed

eects.




4       Heterogeneity across Firms and Skill Demand
We have shown that jobs requiring more cognitive and social skills pay more and that rms

requiring more of these skills perform better. Furthermore, the full set of job skills explains

a signicant amount of variation in worker pay and rm performance, even when we include

detailed controls for occupation, industry, and location. Variation in rm pay, controlling for

worker quality, accounts for an important fraction of the rise in income inequality over the

last 30 years (Barth, Bryson, Davis and Freeman (2016), Card Heining and Kline (2016),

and Song et al.        (2015)).    If rms also vary systematically in their propensity to ask for

    19 It may seem surprising that the average years of education required by the rm is not positively correlated
with rm performance.      However, as noted, we also control for the share of ads that have any education
requirement. This variable is highly correlated with the years required, since rms demanding more skilled
workers are both more likely to post any requirement and also post for more years conditional on having a
requirement. We nd that the coecient on the share of ads with any requirement is positive and usually
highly signicant, even while the number of years required, conditional on any, is not.




                                                        21
particular skills in job vacancies, then perhaps skill requirements can also account for some

share of the variation in pay across rms.

      Based on the relationship between skill requirements and pay and performance established

above, we can calculate how much of the variation in pay across rms can be accounted for

by any variation in skill requirements. Consider equation 3, which expresses          log(wages) for
an occupation,    o,   MSA,   m,   and rm,   f . βf   are rm xed eects and   controls are typical
controls found in other datasets (our base controls).           This regression is estimated at the

rm-occupation-MSA level and is weighted by the number of ads in a cell.



(3)                            log(wages)omf = β f + controls + omf

      The rst column of Table 5 gives a general sense of variability in    log(wages) that can be
                                                                                       f
attributed to rms. Here we present the ad-weighted standard            deviations of β in the raw

data (column 1), including our base set of controls (column 2), and including our detailed

controls (column 3).      The wage measure masks substantial heterogeneity since it simply

maps MSA-occupation OES wages onto rms by taking a weighted average across markets

a rm posts in. However, in row 1 column 1, we still nd substantial variation across rms;

a rm that pays a standard deviation higher wages pays about 21 percent more (0.19 log

points). From column 2, we nd that half of this variation remains when we include base

controls. However, naturally, full controls for MSA, and 6-digit occupation absorb most of

the variation in MSA-occupation level wages (column 3). This is a limitation of the fact that

we cannot link wages to actual job postings.

      The remaining rows of Table 5 summarize rm-level variation for the remaining vari-

ables. We provide standard deviations for the rm-level outcomes though, since we cannot

separately identify control variables, we omit estimates in columns 2 and 3. A rm that is

one standard deviation more likely to be publicly traded is 46 percentage points more likely,

while a rm with one standard deviation higher revenue per worker is producing about

double (0.83).

      The table also shows variation in the average propensity to specify each job skill, and

again, as noted in Section 2.3, we nd substantial variation across rms.              The standard

deviation of rm eects for skill requirements is about 0.2 (20 percentage points) for both

cognitive skill and social skill, and the variation shrinks only a little even after including

detailed controls.     The pattern is very similar for the other eight job skills, although the

variation is generally smaller for most of them (especially after including detailed controls in

Column 3). Thus, Table 5 shows substantial heterogeneity in rm skill demands even within

occupation, industry and MSA.

      To illustrate the importance of employer skill demands, we combine the positive corre-

lation between skill requirements and job outcomes shown in Section 3 with the variation




                                                       22
                Table 5: Standard Deviations of Firm Eects in Outcomes and Skills
                                                                  (1)                            (2)                          (3)
                                                              No Controls                   Base Controls              Detailed Controls
 Log Hourly Wages                                                0.190                          0.101                        0.027
 Publicly Traded                                                 0.459                            ‐‐                           ‐‐
 Log Revenue per Worker                                          0.827                            ‐‐                           ‐‐
 Cognitive                                                       0.203                          0.176                        0.168
 Social                                                          0.201                          0.190                        0.186
 Cognitive and Social                                            0.162                          0.149                        0.145
 Character                                                       0.188                          0.172                        0.167
 Customer Service                                                0.180                          0.160                        0.149
 Writing                                                         0.154                          0.143                        0.140
 Project Management                                              0.106                          0.098                        0.081
 People Management                                               0.125                          0.122                        0.116
 Financial                                                       0.141                          0.101                        0.091
 Computers (General)                                             0.185                          0.168                        0.163
 Specific Software                                               0.244                          0.172                        0.136
 Notes: We regress the variable in each row on firm fixed effects and specified controls. The table reports standard deviations of the firm
 fixed effects, weighted by the number of postings to each firm. Base controls include MSA characteristics, 4‐digit occupation fixed effects
 and industry fixed effects. Detailed controls include MSA, 6‐digit occupation and industry fixed effects. Specifications including controls are
 omitted for Publicly Traded and Log Revenus per Worker, since they vary only at the firm level.


                                                                                                20                                           f
documented in Table 5 in a simple variance decomposition.                                            The rm xed eects (β                        in

equation 3) incorporate unobserved systematic dierences in earnings across rms. We ex-

press these as a function of a vector of skill demands (skill f ) and a residual (νf ) in equation

4.    δ   is the coecient on the residual and                    α   is a vector of coecients on the skills variables.



(4)                                                        β f = skillf α0 + δνf

      Plugging equation              4   into 3 yields



(5)                             log(wages)omf = skillf α0 + δνf + controls + omf

This model provides a way to decompose the variance of log wages across rms into skill

requirements and other components. In particular, the variance in the rm eects,                                                   V ar(β f ),
is equal to      V ar(skillf α0 + δνf ).              We can calculate the variance in                       βf    that is attributable

to the skills variables, or to a subset of the skills variables, by setting the other coecients
                                                                                                     21
(components of the vector,                  α)   to   0   and calculating the variance.                   We also use the variance-

covariance matrix of the skills variables as an input.                                  Importantly, while variation in rm

     20 This decomposition follows the spirit of Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2014) who decompose variation in
the returns to college major over time into changes in the returns to tasks preformed in jobs typically held
by workers with a given major.
     21 For example, to understand the fraction of the variance in                     βf   attributed to cognitive and social skills,
                                 0
we calculate    V ar(skillf α + δνf )        using the estimated coecients for cognitive social and the interaction but
set use a value of 0 for all other components of                α   and for   δ.



                                                                       23
                     Table 6: Decomposing Firm Eects in Wages on Skill Demands

                                                                                                Log (Wages)
                                                                               (1)             (2)       (3)                  (4)
           Total Standard Deviation of Firm Effect                            0.190           0.190     0.084                0.025
           Share attributed to skills:
                                                         Total                11.6%           33.9%          20.9%            6.3%
                                     Social and Cognitive Skills              11.6%           5.5%           4.7%            1.3%
                                                   Other Skills                               11.3%          7.3%            0.6%
                                    Education and Experience                                  17.1%          8.9%            4.5%
                                                      Residual                88.4%           66.1%          79.1%           93.7%
                                               Additional Skills                                 X               X               X
                                                 Base Controls                                                   X
                                             Detailed Controls                                                                   X
                                                       # Firms                                       85,695
           Notes: Base controls are MSA characteristics and 4‐digit occupation fixed effects. Detailed controls are MSA and 6‐digit
           occupation fixed effects. Social and cognitive skills include requirements for each and the share of ads specifying both.
           Other skills include the 8 additional job skills listed in table 1. Education and experience include both years required and
           the share of ads that have any requirement. We regress the firm fixed effect in wages on the firm fixed effect for each of
           the skills measures (and controls if included). We use coefficients and the variance‐covariance matrix of the skills to fit the
           share of the variance in wages that can be attributed to various components (by fitting variances with the other
           coefficients set to 0).




xed eects in both wages and skill requirements is in part driven by measurement error,

the correlations in the vector                α   are unlikely to include such measurement error.

       We estimate equations 3-5 on a disaggregated MSA-occupation-rm-level dataset. Re-

sults are presented in table 6. Column 1 shows a simple decomposition which includes no

controls and only the social, cognitive, and combined skill measures.                                                Column 2 adds the

remaining 8 job skills, as well as education and experience requirements. Column 3 adds our

base controls (excluding industry xed eects since those are collinear with rm xed eects

βf )   and column 4 ads detailed controls.

       From column 1, the total standard deviation of the rm wage eect without controls is

0.19    (the same number as in column 1, row 1 of table 5). We nd that 12 percent of this

variation can be accounted for by variation in the propensity to list cognitive and social

skill requirements and the positive wage return of these skills.                                        The remaining 88 percent

goes unexplained. In Column 2, we also allow the remaining skill measures to account for

rm-level variation in wages. When we do, we nd that the share attributed to cognitive

and social skills falls in half to 5.5 percent because these two skills are correlated with other

skill measures. Education and experience requirements account for the largest fraction, 17

percent, while the other eight job skills account for 11 percent. In total, we can account for

a third of the variation in raw earnings gaps across rms with these skill measures.

       Once we include our base controls (column 3), the rm wage gap narrows by about half

(as we saw in table 5).                Also, we nd that the full set of skills measures accounts for 21

percent of this residual variation. All of the skill measures are important in accounting for



                                                                       24
                Table 7: Decomposing Firm Performance Outcomes on Skill Demands
                                                     Publicly Traded         Log Revenue per Worker
                                                   (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)
 Total Standard Deviation of Firm Effect          0.459           0.459        0.685         0.685
 Share attributed to skills:
                                       Total       7.2%            13.2%      14.8%           21.4%
                 Social and Cognitive Skills       7.2%            1.7%       14.8%           9.4%
                                 Other Skills                      3.8%                       3.1%
                Education and Experience                           7.7%                       8.9%
                                    Residual      92.8%            86.8%      85.2%           78.6%
                             Additional Skills                      X                          X
                                     # Firms              85,695                      3,622
 Notes: See table 6.




this variation, with nearly half accounted for by education and experience requirements, and

a third by the other eight skill measures. In both columns 2 and 3, we nd that the set of 10

skills account for roughly 15 percent of the variation in rm pay, while cognitive and social

skills account for 5 percent.

    The fourth column includes the detailed controls. As noted above, controls for MSA and

6-digit occupation xed eects absorb almost all of the variation in rm pay. This is because

rm variation in our pay measure comes only from variation in the MSA-occupations rms

post in. As such, this exercise naturally has limitations. However, the results in table 6 show

that skills measures are important in accounting for rm-level variation in these aggregated

wages. This suggests they might also be important for job-level wages.

    We can also do a form of this decomposition for the rm performance measures. These

measures vary only at the rm level so we cannot include controls.             We instead estimate

an analogous version of equations 3-5 with no controls or residuals. We can still report the

fraction of the variation in performance across rms that can be attributed to variation in

skill requirements.

    We nd that the skill measures account for a modest fraction of the variation across rms

in performance.           The 10 skills account for 5 percent of the variation in the probability of

being publicly traded (Column 2), and roughly 12 percent of the variation in log revenue

per worker.            For the latter, the bulk of the explanatory power comes from cognitive and

social skill requirements.          Education and experience requirements contribute substantial

explanatory power as well. Overall, we can account for 13 and 20 percent of the variation in

whether a rm is publicly traded and log revenue per worker, respectively, with the full set

of 10 skills and the more standard education and experience requirements.

    This exercise is only illustrative since we do not have ad-level variation in wages or

productivity. However, we still nd that rms vary widely in both wages (as measured by

average wages in the markets they post ads in) and performance outcomes. Also, we nd




                                                     25
that rm-level variation in demand for the job skills explains substantial fractions of rm-

level variation in these outcomes. Cognitive and social skill requirements alone account for

about 5 percent of the variation in log(wages) and 10 percent of the variation in log(revenue

per worker). These results suggests the job skill measures we introduce in this paper provide

useful information about the variation in skill utilization across rms and why they have

diverse outcomes.




5     Conclusion
In this paper we use data from online job vacancies posted in the U.S. between 2010 and

2015 to study heterogeneity in employer skill demands. We use key words and phrases from

the actual text of job vacancies to form measures of 10 distinct job skills such as cognitive

skills, social skills, management and nance. We show that the prevalence of advertisements

for high-level job skills is positively correlated with relative wages across labor markets and

performance dierences across rms, even after controlling for education and experience

requirements and detailed occupation and industry codes. This suggests that our measures

of job skills add explanatory power beyond what is available in typical labor market data.

Using a simple decomposition, we show that variation in these 10 skill requirements can

explain about 12 percent of the variance in wages across rms (as measured by average

wages in the MSA-occupations they tend to post in), after residualizing on occupation xed

eects and MSA characteristics. These skills account for between 5 and 12 percent of the

variance in rm productivity in our sample.

    Turning to specic job skills, we nd consistent evidence that higher paying labor mar-

kets and rms demand higher levels of cognitive skills and social skills from their employees.

Moreover, we nd particularly large correlations between wages and whether a job vacancy

requires both types of skill. This is consistent with recent theory and evidence from Wein-

berger (2014) and Deming (2016), who focus on the growing importance of social skills and

growing complementarity between cognitive skills and social skills in the labor market. We

also nd that more productive rms - as measured by log revenue per worker as well as

whether the rm is publicly traded - have greater demand for cognitive skills and social

skills even after controlling for a detailed set of job characteristics such as industry and

occupation. Our decomposition shows that cognitive and social skill requirements, in par-

ticular, account for 5 percent of residual variation in wages and between 2 and 9 percent of

variation in rm productivity.

    Rising variation in pay across rms, holding constant the quality of workers they employ,

as been shown to be a primary contributor of rising wage inequality (Barth, Bryson, Davis

and Freeman (2016), Card Heining and Kline (2016), and Song et al. (2015)). Our results

show that some of the variation in pay across rms in the cross-section can be accounted

for by variation in demand for cognitive and social skills. We cannot measure production



                                              26
technologies directly in the BG data, nor do we have variation in skill demands over a long

time horizon.   However, by linking variation in pay in the cross-section to tasks that are

most associated with rising inequality over time, we hope to provide suggestive evidence on

this front. Our results are consistent with at least some of the rise in inequality across rms

being driven by a dierential ability to adopt better production technologies that are more

complementary with machines.

   More generally, this paper demonstrates the usefulness of job vacancy data for studying

employer skill demands and relative wages across labor markets and occupations.         Future

work could pair job vacancy data with detailed information about rm characteristics and

production technology.   This would enable researchers to study changes in the returns to

specic skill requirements with a better understanding of how heterogeneity in skill demands

translates to rm production technology.




References
 [1] Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011), Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for

    employment and earnings, Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 1043-1171.


 [2] Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2014), Trends in Earnings Dif-

    ferentials across College Majors and the Changing Task Composition of Jobs, American

    Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 104(5): 387393.


 [3] Autor, David H. (2014), Polanyi's paradox and the shape of employment growth, Na-

    tional Bureau of Economic Research.


 [4] Autor, David H. and David Dorn (2013), The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the

    Polarization of the US Labor Market, American Economic Review, 103(5): 1553-1597.


 [5] Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney (2008), Trends in US

    Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists, The Review of Economics and Statistics,

    90(2): 300323.


 [6] Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003), The Skill Content of

    Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration, The Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 118(4): 1279-1333.


 [7] Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis, and Richard Freeman (2016), It's Where

    You Work: Increases in the Dispersion of Earnings across Establishments and Individ-

    uals in the United States. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(2): S67- S97.


 [8] Beaudry, Paul , David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand (2016), The Great Reversal

    in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks, Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1 Part

    2): S199S247.


                                              27
 [9] Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen (2007), Measuring and Explaining Manage-

    ment Practices across Firms and Countries, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):

    13511408.


[10] Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg (2014), People Skills and the

    Labor-Market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups, Industrial and Labor Relations

    Review, 67(2): 287-334.


[11] Brynjolfsson, E. and McAfee, A. (2014) The second machine age: Work, progress and

    prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies, W. W. Norton & Company, New York,

    NY.


[12] Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline (2013), Workplace Heterogeneity and

    the Rise of West German Wage Inequality, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):

    9671015.


[13] Carnevale, Anthony P., Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov, (2014), Under-

    standing Online Jobs Data: A Technical Report, Washington D.C.: Georgetown Uni-

    versity Center on Education and the Workforce.


[14] Deming, David J. (2015), The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Mar-

    ket, NBER Working Paper #21473.


[15] Diamond, Rebecca (2016), The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers'

    Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000, American Economic Review, 106(3):

    479-524.


[16] Firpo, S., N. Fortin, T. Lemieux (2009), Unconditional Quantile Regressions, Econo-

    metrica, 77(May): 953-973.


[17] Gathmann, Christina and Uta Schonberg (2010), How General is Human Capital? A

    Task-Based Approach, Journal of Labor Economics, 28(1): 1-49.


[18] Gibbons, Robert and Rebecca Henderson (2012), What Do Managers Do? Handbook

    of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press.


[19] Glaeser, Edward and Joshua D. Gottlieb (2009), The Wealth of Cities: Agglomera-

    tion Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States, Journal of Economic

    Literature.


[20] Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2014), Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-

    Biased Technological Change and Oshoring, The American Economic Review 104(8):

    2509-2526.




                                           28
[21] Heckman, J. J. and T. Klautz (2012), Hard Evidence on Soft Skills, Labour Economics,

    19(4), 451-464.


[22] Hershbein, Brad and Lisa B. Kahn (2016), Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased

    Technological Change, NBER Working Paper #22762.


[23] Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw and Giovanna Prennushi (1997), The Eects of Hu-

    man Resource Management Practices on Productivity, American Economic Review

    87(3): 291-313.


[24] Kuhn, Peter, and Kailing Shen. (2013), Gender Discrimination in Job Ads: Evidence

    from China, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1): 287336.


[25] Lu, Qian (2015), The End of Polarization? Technological Change and Employment in

    the U.S. Labor Market, mimeo.


[26] Marinescu, Ioana (2017), The General Equilibrium Eects of Unemployment Insurance:

    Evidence from a Large Online Job Board, Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.


[27] Marinescu, Ioana and Ronald Woltho (2016), Opening the Black Box of the Matching

    Function: the Power of Words, mimeo.


[28] Moretti, Enrico (2013), Real Wage Inequality, American Economic Journal: Applied

    Economics, 5(1).


[29] Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson (2008), Human Capital Specicity:        Evidence

    from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984-2000,

    Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 387420.


[30] Sasser Modestino, Alicia, Daniel Shoag and Joshua Ballance (2016), Upskilling: Do

    Employers Demand Greater Skill When Workers Are Plentiful? mimeo.


[31] Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter,

    Firming Up Inequality, NBER working paper #21199.


[32] Speer, Jamin (2016), Pre-Market Skills, Occupational Choice, and Career Progression,

    Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.


[33] Weinberger, C. J. (2014), The Increasing Complementarity between Cognitive and

    Social Skills, Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(4): 849-861.




                                            29
                                                                                         Table A1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                   Panel A: Full Sample                                Panel B: Firm Sample                          Panel C: Compustat‐Matched
                                                                        Mean         St Dev      Min    Max                   Mean       St Dev     Min     Max                    Mean St Dev       Min     Max
     Share of Ads with Skill Requirement:
                                                   Cognitive               0.370        0.170             0           1        0.418         0.203             0           1 0.487               0.173        0               1
                                                     Social                0.363        0.120             0           1        0.422         0.201             0           1 0.501               0.172        0               1
                                         Cognitve and Social               0.206        0.099             0           1        0.249         0.162             0           1 0.311               0.152        0               1
                                                  Character                0.299        0.123             0           1        0.344         0.188             0           1 0.411               0.154        0               1
                                                     Writing               0.200        0.095             0           1        0.229         0.154             0           1 0.258               0.132        0             0.99
                                           Customer Service                0.197        0.142             0           1        0.236         0.180             0           1 0.260               0.154        0               1
                                        Project Management                 0.117        0.122             0           1        0.130         0.106             0           1 0.162               0.094        0             0.81
                                        People Management                  0.151        0.095             0           1        0.184         0.125             0           1 0.212               0.110        0             0.92
                                                   Financial               0.157        0.192             0           1        0.165         0.141             0           1 0.196               0.120        0             0.99
                                         Computer (general)                0.288        0.135             0           1        0.316         0.185             0           1 0.370               0.155        0               1
                                          Software (specific)              0.319        0.279             0           1        0.316         0.244             0           1 0.354               0.205        0               1




30
                                                  Education                0.588        0.161             0           1        0.659         0.218             0           1 0.721               0.168        0               1
                                                 Experience                0.578        0.131             0           1        0.623         0.201             0           1 0.671               0.170        0               1
     Years School, conditional                                             15.74         1.35            12          21        15.66          0.92            12          21 15.59                0.75       12            19.22
     Years Experience, conditional                                          4.10         1.31          0.08          15         4.14          1.49          0.08          15 4.57                 1.39      0.31           10.80
     MSA‐Occ median wage                                                   41.97        15.60          8.15      135.00        42.21          7.26         11.96      107.95 43.74                6.17     17.71           77.06
     Publicly Traded                                                                                                           0.303         0.459             0           1 1.000               0.000     1.000           1.000
     Revenue per Worker ($ millions)                                                                                           0.473         3.329         0.000        562 0.473                3.329     0.000            562
                                                                                              NA
     # Occupations Posted in                                                                                                   98.22         59.45             1        246 133.95               50.08        2             228
     # MSAs Posted in                                                                                                         106.19        101.75             1        370 172.82              104.13        1             354
     # MSA‐Occ cells                                                                     56,611                                                55,241                                                45,154
     # Ads per MSA‐Occ cell (unweighted)                                  793         4911      1              351149          467          2862      1             177690          173          1063         1            59501
     # Firm cells                                                                                                                              85,695                                                 3,622
     # Ads per Firm cell (unweighted)                                                                                          301          246       1             254518          2138         8519         5           162640
     # Ads, total                                                                        44,891,978                                          25,803,549                                             7,743,967
     Notes: Panel A includes professional BG ads from 2010‐2015. Panel B restricted to ads with non‐missing firms that post at least 10 ads in the sample as a whole and ads in at least 2 MSAs and 2 occupations. Panel C restricts
     to firms that can be matched to Compustat. Summary statistics are weighted by number of ads, unless otherwise noted. Skill requirements come from BG data; see table 1 for description. Median wage (from the OES) and
     Revenue per Worker (from Compustat) are the average from 2010‐2015 in the MSA‐occupation or firm cell, respectively.
                                                                    Table A2: Skill Requirements for Selected Occupations
                                                                                                               Job Skills
                 Occupation (SOC, 6 digit)
                                                                   Cognitive Social Character Writing Cust Serv Proj Mgmt Ppl Mgmt Financial Computer Software
     Accountants and Auditors                                        0.46     0.33    0.35     0.22     0.08        0.07    0.15     0.84      0.44     0.31
     Computer Programmers                                            0.42     0.33    0.21     0.21     0.13        0.12    0.11     0.05      0.27     0.82
     Computer User Support Specialists                               0.37     0.38    0.31     0.20     0.33        0.07    0.09     0.04      0.57     0.45
     Computer and Info. Systems Analysts                             0.47     0.48    0.42     0.23     0.20        0.34    0.35     0.27      0.30     0.56
     Financial Analysts                                              0.88     0.45    0.44     0.22     0.09        0.09    0.08     0.84      0.58     0.37




31
     Managers, Financial                                             0.51     0.42    0.39     0.21     0.23        0.10    0.32     0.66      0.35     0.21
     Managers, General Operations                                    0.40     0.43    0.42     0.21     0.21        0.12    0.38     0.32      0.30     0.13
     Managers, Sales                                                 0.33     0.49    0.39     0.19     0.70        0.07    0.25     0.18      0.30     0.11
     Lawyers                                                         0.31     0.29    0.21     0.25     0.07        0.04    0.09     0.12      0.12     0.05
     Loan Officers                                                   0.32     0.42    0.36     0.30     0.41        0.01    0.10     0.28      0.38     0.06
     Management Analysts                                             0.83     0.47    0.41     0.30     0.14        0.27    0.16     0.24      0.38     0.40
     Registered Nurses                                               0.19     0.25    0.15     0.07     0.38        0.00    0.11     0.02      0.11     0.03
     Overall Professional Occupation Average                         0.37     0.36    0.30     0.20     0.20        0.12    0.15     0.16      0.29     0.32
     Notes: Postings‐weighted averages based on our full sample of Burning Glass professional ads. See table 1 for job skills definitions.
                  Table A3: Average Wages and Skill Requirements  Firm Sample

                                   Dependent variable: Log(mean wages) in MSA‐Occupations
                                                 (1)                (2)    (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Cognitive                                   0.123***   ‐0.299***  0.164***          0.150*** 0.0471*** 0.0286***
                                            (0.00886)   (0.0155)  (0.00749)          (0.0125)  (0.00704)  (0.00994)
Social                                      0.300***  ‐0.0788*** 0.144***           0.132*** 0.0333***     0.0167*
                                             (0.0127)   (0.0170)  (0.00995)          (0.0135)  (0.00749)  (0.00980)
Both required                                          0.945***                       0.0288             0.0402***
                                                        (0.0286)                     (0.0220)              (0.0153)
Years of Education                          0.125***    0.123*** 0.0580***         0.0580*** 0.00486*** 0.00490***
                                           (0.000795) (0.000790) (0.000840)        (0.000841) (0.000836) (0.000836)
Years Experience                            0.165***    0.167*** 0.0620***         0.0620*** 0.0208*** 0.0208***
                                            (0.00114)  (0.00113)  (0.00120)         (0.00120) (0.000957) (0.000957)
Base controls                                                         x                  x
Detailed Controls                                                                                  X           X
F-stat (cog and social)                        450.8             669.5     418.2       279.4     41.01       29.63
F-stat (all 10 skills)                         2073              2218      406.8       369.9     30.45       28.31
MSA-Occ Cells                                 55,241            55,241    55,241      55,241     55,241     55,241
R-squared                                      0.696             0.701     0.856       0.856     0.943       0.943
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: See tables 1 and 3. Observations are from the firm sample.




                                                                    32
