                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  OFFSHORE PROFIT SHIFTING AND DOMESTIC PRODUCTIVITY MEASUREMENT

                                        Fatih Guvenen
                                    Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr.
                                       Dylan G. Rassier
                                         Kim J. Ruhl

                                      Working Paper 23324
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23324


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2017, Revised October 2019




We thank Jennifer K. Bruner and Alberto G. Ramon for their assistance with the statistical
analysis. For comments and suggestions, we thank Pol Antras, Nick Bloom, Carol Corrado,
Arnaud Costinot, Jason Furman, John Fernald, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Mitchell Petersen and
especially our formal discussants Molly Saunders-Scott and Dan Sichel. The statistical analysis of
firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies and companies engaged in international
transactions was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce,
under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in this
paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Department of
Commerce, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Fatih Guvenen, Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Offshore Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement
Fatih Guvenen, Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 23324
April 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. E01,E24,F23,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

Beginning in 2004, official statistics display a slowdown in U.S. productivity growth. We show
how offshore profit shifting by U.S. multinational enterprises affects GDP and, thus, productivity
measurement. Profit shifting increased in the mid- 1990s, resulting in lower measured
productivity growth. We construct value added adjusted for profit shifting. The adjustments raise
aggregate productivity growth rates by 0.09 percent annually for 1994–2004, 0.24 percent
annually for 2004–2008, and lower annual aggregate productivity growth rates by 0.09 percent
after 2008. The adjustments are large in R&D-intensive industries, where value added increases
by as much as 8 percent in the mid-2000s.

Fatih Guvenen                                   Dylan G. Rassier
Department of Economics                         Bureau of Economic Analysis
University of Minnesota                         4600 Silver Hill Road
4-101 Hanson Hall                               Washington, DC 20233
1925 Fourth Street South                        dylan.rassier@bea.gov
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER                                        Kim J. Ruhl
fatihguvenen@gmail.com                          Department of Economics
                                                University of Wisconsin-Madison
Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr.                        7444 Social Science Building
Bureau of Economic Analysis                     1180 Observatory Drive
4600 Silver Hill Road                           Madison, WI 53706
Washington, DC 20233                            and NBER
raymond.mataloni@bea.gov                        ruhl2@wisc.edu
1       Introduction
Economists have long understood the pivotal role of productivity growth as the engine
of long-run economic growth. A wide range of economic policy questions hinge on the
forecasts of future productivity growth, making the future path of productivity a crucial
input into policy analysis. Thus, it is not surprising that the news of a significant slowdown
in U.S. productivity growth (as measured in official statistics) that started around 2004
generated widespread concern about the growth prospects of the U.S. economy. Perhaps
more surprisingly, this slowdown took place primarily in sectors that either produce or
use information technology (IT) services intensively. This finding has raised skepticism
among some economists, who point to the major innovative products and technologies
introduced in the last decades and conjecture that the slowdown might be the result—at
least partially—of the way output is measured in official economic statistics.1 Several
recent papers have focused on official price indexes as a source of the productivity slowdown
measured in official statistics. While the jury is still out, these studies generally find price-
related measurement to have modest effects on productivity growth.2
    In this paper, we study another potential source of the productivity slowdown, one
often acknowledged but not investigated thoroughly in the existing literature: the offshore
profit shifting by domestic and foreign multinational enterprises (MNEs) operating in the
United States. Offshore profit shifting (for brevity, “profit shifting”) occurs when an MNE
structures itself so that profit that would have accrued in the United States accrues instead
in its foreign affiliate. These shifted profits are recorded in the primary income account
as a return on U.S. assets held abroad, which does not affect U.S. GDP.3 Using firm-level
data, we show that profit shifting has reduced U.S. GDP as measured in official statistics.
Further, as profit shifting has increased significantly in the last two decades, the reduction
accelerated, giving the impression of a larger slowdown in the GDP growth rate and,
consequently, the aggregate productivity growth rate. To explain the contribution of profit
shifting to the productivity slowdown and why it has worsened over time, we begin with
two important facts.
    1
      Some important examples include the widespread availability of broadband Internet; the rise of in-
novative business models and products in companies such as Apple, Google, Facebook, Amazon, Uber,
and Airbnb; and new products and technologies such as smartphones, electric cars, cloud computing, and
software-as-a-service.
    2
      Aeppel (2015), Alloway (2015), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011), Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel (2015),
Feldstein (2015), Hatzius and Dawsey (2015), Mokyr (2014), and Smith (2015) have explored the role of
measurement in accounting for the dynamics of productivity. Syverson (2016) and Byrne, Fernald, and
Reinsdorf (2016) argue that measurement is unlikely to explain most of the productivity slowdown.
    3
      This is the appropriate accounting under the international statistical guidelines that the Bureau of
Economic Analysis follows.

                                                    1
     First, the total economic activity generated by U.S. MNEs is very large and has grown
significantly in the past 20 years. The total global value added of U.S. MNEs was $4.66
trillion in 2012, making them equivalent to the fourth-largest economy in the world, tied
with Japan and trailing only the United States, the European Union, and China. In the
same year, their domestic value added was $3.25 trillion, accounting for 26.9 percent of
U.S. business-sector value added. Furthermore, in the last 20 years, U.S. MNEs have
substantially increased their global operations: earnings on U.S. direct investment abroad
(USDIA) averaged 12.4 percent of corporate profits from 1973 to 1993 but grew to 28.1
percent ($450 billion) of corporate profits in 2012.
    Second, MNEs own significant stocks of intangible capital (e.g., intellectual property,
brands, blueprints) and have a presence in countries that vary widely in corporate tax rates.
These characteristics allow MNEs to legally take advantage of differences in national tax
regimes to shift profits from high-tax jurisdictions—such as the United States—to low-
tax jurisdictions, such as Bermuda. Increasingly common profit-shifting practices include
transfer pricing and complex global structuring related to intangible capital, in which an
MNE effectively underprices intangible capital when “sold” from one of its entities in a high-
tax jurisdiction to another of its entities in a low-tax jurisdiction or engages in a series of
transactions among subsidiaries that are strategically located in order to reduce the MNE’s
effective global tax rate.4 For U.S. MNEs, these strategies allow them to book earnings in
low-tax foreign affiliates in ways that are disproportionate to the economic activity carried
out in those affiliates.5 These tax strategies have generated discussion among both the
compilers and users of official statistics regarding the treatment of transactions within
MNEs and their effect on national statistics.6
   The effects of profit shifting on value added can be illustrated through a concrete
example. Consider the iPhone, which is developed and designed in California but assembled
by an unrelated company in China, with components manufactured in various (mostly
   4
      Another common strategy is to have subsidiaries in high-tax jurisdictions borrow funds from the
subsidiaries in low-tax ones, thereby reducing the profits in the former and raising them in the latter.
    5
      See Grubert and Mutti (1991) and the subsequent literature.
    6
      See, for example, Lipsey (2009; 2010), Rassier (2017), United Nations, Eurostat, and Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development (2011), United Nations (2015), and the proceed-
ings of a March 2018 meeting of the NBER Conference on Research in Income and Wealth (confer-
ence.nber.org/confer/2018/CRIWs18/summary.html). Although the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines
call for an “arm’s-length principle,” which requires firms to apply market prices to related-party transac-
tions, this is difficult to do in practice because many intrafirm transactions do not have market values.
For example, how should Apple value the intellectual property, marketing, and brand associated with the
iPhone, when these intangible assets are developed in the United States but used in foreign subsidiaries?
These intangibles are not traded in organized markets, so it is very difficult to judge whether the assigned
values are correct.

                                                     2
Asian) countries. Taking some hypothetical ballpark figures, suppose the bill of materials
and labor costs of assembly amount to $250 per iPhone and the average selling price is
$750, for a gross profit of $500 per phone. For simplicity, assume that there are no further
costs of retailing and that all iPhones are sold to customers outside of the United States.
    Two important questions arise from this simple scenario: First, defining GDP as total
domestic value added, how much should each iPhone contribute to U.S. GDP? Second,
given the profit-shifting practices described above, how much of each iPhone’s gross profit
is actually included in U.S. GDP?
    To answer the first question, note that the $250 paid to contract manufacturers and
suppliers in Asia is not part of U.S. GDP, whereas how much of the $500 gross profit
should be attributed to U.S. GDP depends on where that value is created. If consumers
are willing to pay a $500 premium over the production cost for an iPhone, it is because they
value the design, software, brand name, and customer service embedded in the product.
If we assume these intangibles were developed by managers, engineers, and designers at
Apple headquarters in California (Apple, U.S.), then the entire $500 should be included in
U.S. GDP. In the national accounts, the $500 would be a net export under charges for the
use of intellectual property in expenditure-based GDP, matched by an increase in Apple’s
earnings in income-based GDP. To the extent that some intangible assets were created
outside of the United States, only the appropriate share of the gross profit and related net
export would accrue to the United States.
    As to the second question, the gross profit actually included in U.S. GDP may be
very small. Suppose that Apple generates intangible assets in the United States and
legally transfers them to a foreign affiliate (e.g., one in Ireland). Payments for the use of
intellectual property will accrue in Ireland rather than in the United States, which means
that the returns to Apple U.S.’s intangible assets are attributed to an Apple affiliate outside
the United States and not included in U.S. GDP. In this case, the returns are captured in
“income on USDIA,” which is included in U.S. gross national product,

            GN Pt = GDPt + income on USDIAt − income on FDIUSt + / − · · ·                      (1)

Thus, relative to the conceptual measure, U.S. net exports and GDP are understated and
earnings on USDIA are overstated.7
     Profit shifting results in retained profits and other assets accumulating in foreign af-
filiates, particularly in affiliates located in low-tax jurisdictions (Foley, Hartzell, Titman,
   7
     Income on FDIUS is income earned on foreign direct investment in the United States, the foreign
counterpart to income on U.S. direct investment abroad.

                                                 3
                    Table I – Assets in U.S.-owned foreign affiliates, 2012

                                    Ratio of U.S.-owned foreign affiliate total assets to
                                   PPE             Compensation                 Employment
                                                                                (mil. USD)
      World                        16.8                  39.0                         1.8
      Canada                        6.4                  21.2                         1.2
      Ireland                     20.0                 142.7                         10.9
      Luxembourg               1,109.6               1,380.0                        121.6
      Netherlands                 97.7                 115.3                          8.7
      Switzerland                 59.9                  60.0                          7.7
      Barbados                    41.8               1,444.7                         43.3
      Bermuda                    130.8               1,475.5                        155.8
      U.K.I., Caribbean          101.2               3,330.2                        199.8
      Hong Kong                    40.3                  39.3                         2.7
      Singapore                    18.6                  50.3                         3.1
     Notes: Total assets are the sum of all financial (e.g., cash, receivables) and non-financial (e.g.,
     property, plant, and equipment, inventories) assets on a historic cost basis—that is, amounts
     reported on firms’ financial statements under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles
     (GAAP). United Kingdom Islands (U.K.I.), Caribbean, consist of the British Virgin Islands,
     Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos Islands.


and Twitec, 2007). To illustrate the prevalence of this situation, Table I reports, by host
country, the total assets (cash, receivables, plant, property, equipment [PPE], etc.) owned
by the foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs relative to several production-related measures. The
ratio of total assets to physical capital (plant, property, and equipment) for U.S.-owned
foreign affiliates in Canada is 6.4, whereas this ratio averages almost 300 for European
tax havens, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Switzerland, and more than 90
for Barbados, Bermuda, and the U.K. Caribbean Islands. Measuring assets relative to
employment (number of employees) or compensation yields similar patterns.8
   The goal of this paper is to provide an alternative measure of U.S. domestic productivity
growth by adjusting for the effects of MNE profit shifting on value added. For this purpose,
we use confidential MNE survey data, collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)


    8
      These cross-border strategies can wreak havoc on the official statistics of even relatively large
economies like Ireland and the Netherlands. As one example, annual Irish GDP growth in 2015 was
26 percent, compared to a consensus forecast by economists of 7.8 percent. This large discrepancy was al-
most entirely due to the unexpected movement of legal ownership of MNE assets to the country (Eurostat,
2016).

                                                     4
for the period 1982–2014.9 The survey data cover the worldwide operations of U.S. MNEs
and contain, among other key measures, information on their employment, sales, and R&D
expenditures. We also use annual data for transactions in income on direct investment
published by BEA in the International Transactions Accounts (ITAs), also available for
1982–2014.
     Profit shifting distorts the relationship between the location of economic activity and
the location of reported profit. To realign reported profit and economic activity, we use
the firm-level data to reattribute earnings on USDIA among a U.S. parent and its foreign
affiliates, based on factors that reflect economic activity, under a method of formulary ap-
portionment. Under this method, the total worldwide earnings of an MNE are attributed to
locations based on apportionment factors that aim to capture the true location of economic
activity. As apportionment factors, we use, in each geographical location, a combination
of (i) labor compensation and (ii) sales to unaffiliated parties, as they are likely to be good
proxies for the actual economic activity taking place in each location. It should be noted,
however, that formulary apportionment assumes away real factors that can create differ-
ences in the returns to productive factors in different locations. Primarily for this reason,
the results of formulary apportionment presented here should be interpreted as estimates
rather than exact measurements.
    Since the aggregate earnings of U.S. MNEs are disproportionately booked to low-tax
jurisdictions with little true economic activity, our adjustment reattributes their earnings
toward the United States and other higher-tax jurisdictions, thereby increasing measured
U.S. GDP and labor productivity. We use the results of formulary apportionment to
compute an adjusted measure of domestic business-sector value added and consequent
labor productivity growth for the United States, for 1973–2014.10
    For comparability with earlier work (Fernald, 2015), we use domestic business-sector
value added as our measure of output. From 1973 to 1999, our adjusted value added
series is never more than 0.6 percent larger than the official series. Starting in the late
1990s, profit shifting, and the resulting adjustments, grow rapidly. By 2012, our adjusted
value added series is 2.5 percent larger than its official counterpart. The adjustments raise
aggregate productivity growth rates by 0.09 percent annually from 1994 to 2004, by 0.24
percent annually from 2004 to 2008, and decrease aggregate productivity growth rates by
0.09 percent annually after 2008. The adjustments mitigate the slowdown found in official
    9
      The firm-level survey data, which by law are confidential, are collected for the purpose of producing
publicly available aggregate statistics on the activities of multinational enterprises.
   10
      Because the BEA surveys start in 1982, the analysis for the 1973–1981 period relies on some extrap-
olations discussed below.

                                                    5
statistics; however, because the post-2004 slowdown is quite large, and our adjustments
raise productivity growth not only after 2004 but also before it (although to a lesser extent),
our analysis does not eliminate the slowdown in aggregate productivity growth after 2004.
    That said, our adjustment to productivity growth is quite large in some important
industries. When we group industries by R&D intensity, the adjustments to the value
added of R&D-intensive industries are as large as 8 percent of the group’s value added in
some years (Figure 7a). Furthermore, these adjustments raise productivity growth rates
significantly during some periods: the annual growth rate of productivity from 2000 to 2008
increases by 0.53 percentage points in R&D-intensive industries after the adjustments.
    Finally, while our focus is on the profit shifting of U.S. MNEs, for some of the same
reasons, foreign MNEs are also likely to be shifting profits out of the United States, pushing
measured U.S. GDP further downward. The BEA surveys cover the U.S. affiliates of foreign
MNEs but unfortunately do not cover (most of) their foreign operations, including their
foreign parent operations. Without this latter piece of data, constructing apportionment
factors for foreign MNEs with the BEA survey data alone is not feasible. It is possible,
however, to combine data from commercial databases to make progress on this question,
and in Section 5 we construct a data set of the largest technology-intensive foreign MNEs
that have operations in the United States. Our results indicate a similar profit-shifting
behavior by these corporations, further biasing U.S. GDP and labor productivity measures.
In our admittedly incomplete analysis, we find the magnitudes of the biases for foreign
MNEs to be smaller than those for U.S. MNEs.

1.1    Related Literature
Most of the evidence of MNE profit shifting comes from cross-country regressions of MNE
profits (or income) on tax rates. Dharmapala (2014) provides a comprehensive survey.
These studies find a strong relationship between differential tax rates and income attribu-
tion. In contrast, we do not use tax rate data in our methodology, yet, consistent with
the previous literature, we find the largest effects of profit shifting in the well-known “tax
havens.” In Section 3.5, we estimate the semi-elasticity of profits to tax rates in ways
consistent with the literature and arrive at very similar results.
    Of the literature on profit shifting, Clausing (2016) is closest to our work. Using
estimates of the elasticity of MNE income to tax rates, she computes the cross-country
distribution of MNE income under the counterfactual that all countries tax profits at 30
percent. The difference between the counterfactual income levels and the observed income
levels is attributed to profit shifting. Her estimates using direct investment earnings data

                                              6
are conceptually the closest to ours. Quantitatively, our measurements are similar. For
2012, she finds profit shifting to be $258 billion, compared to our measured $280 billion.
Clausing (2016) uses her estimates to compute forgone tax revenues, while our focus is on
measurement in the real economy.
     Our focus is on the reduction in measured domestic productivity. In related work,
Maffini and Mokkas (2011) study the increase in measured affiliate productivity that is
the result of profit shifting. Using a panel of European manufacturing firms, the authors
regress affiliate total factor productivity on changes in statutory tax rates and find that
affiliates in lower-taxed countries are more productive. Their results are consistent with
our measurement of domestic aggregate productivity.
    The formulary apportionment approach we use to reattribute earnings within the MNE
has been primarily applied in multijurisdictional tax practice. The treatment of global
income under formulary apportionment is widely explored in multidisciplinary research,
and formulary apportionment has been proposed as an alternative to the complexity and
subjectivity of transfer pricing for the allocation of international tax obligations within
MNEs.11 From a tax policy perspective, a potential problem with formulary apportionment
is the endogenous response of firms to the formulary rules of the tax system (Gresik, 2001).
Formulary apportionment applied to economic accounting faces fewer challenges compared
to its use in international taxation because it is descriptive rather than fiscal.
    Our approach follows Rassier and Koncz-Bruner (2015), which proposes formulary ap-
portionment as an alternative method for attributing the profits component of income-
based value added to foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs. The formulary adjustment reduces
the effects created by excess profits attributed to tax haven countries, as presented in
Lipsey (2010). Rassier (2014) treats the reduction in earnings on USDIA under formulary
apportionment as an implied increase in U.S. GDP, which is a necessary counterpart to the
related increase in domestic income. The author, however, does not construct a time series
of adjusted domestic business-sector value added and does not consider the consequences
for productivity measures or the differential impacts on R&D- and IT-intensive industries.
   In Section 2, we present a simple model of an MNE to highlight the source of the
measured slowdown and discuss our empirical methodology. In Section 3 we report the
impact of our adjustments on aggregate productivity, and in Section 4, we show how our
adjustments matter more for R&D- and IT-intensive industries. Section 5 takes a first look
at measurement of the foreign MNEs operating in the United States, Section 6 considers
   11
      See, for example, Avi-Yonah (2010), Avi-Yonah and Benshalom (2011), Avi-Yonah and Clausing
(2007), Fuest, Hemmelgarn, and Ramb (2007), and Runkel and Schjelderup (2011).

                                               7
other measures that might be affected by profit shifting, and Section 7 concludes.


2     Conceptual Framework
In this section, we provide a conceptual framework to demonstrate how the ownership of
intangible assets—regardless of where they are used—affects the measurement of aggregate
output and productivity. Our data cover U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates, so our
focus here is on the measurement of U.S. aggregate output and productivity.
    The MNE consists of a parent (m) located in the United States and one wholly owned
foreign affiliate (a). The parent and affiliate produce nontraded final goods (y) using physi-
cal capital (k), skilled and unskilled labor (`s , `u ), and intangible capital (h).12 We assume
that physical capital and labor can be freely adjusted and are obtained from perfectly
competitive factor markets. Intangible capital is nonrivalrous but subject to ownership.
    The final-good production function for the parent is

                                     ym = f (zm , km , `sm , `um , h),                                 (2)

where z is total factor productivity. The final-good production function for the affiliate is

                                       ya = f (za , ka , `sa , `ua , h).                               (3)

We assume that both production functions are homogeneous of degree one. Note that
intangible capital does not have a subscript that denotes its physical location. This is
an advantageous characteristic of intangible capital: it can be used to produce in each
location, regardless of its location of ownership.

2.1     Accounting
We map the production framework specified above into the economic accounting framework
used by BEA, which is based on international statistical guidelines. To do so, we need to
assign economic ownership of the firm’s intangible capital. We assume that the MNE
assigns ownership share λ of the stock of intangible capital to the parent and 1 − λ to the
foreign affiliate. This decision does not affect production but determines the location in
which the returns to intangible capital are booked. The firm may assign ownership of its
intangible capital to the affiliate for several reasons, including provenance of the intangible
  12
     In the data, firms produce both goods and services. For simplicity, we refer to the output of firms as
goods.

                                                      8
capital, taxation, regulation, confidentiality, property rights protection, and exchange rate
management (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2008a). For our
purposes, we do not need to model the firm’s choice of λ.
   Given our assumptions, affiliate earnings are

  πa = pya − ws `sa − wu `ua − rk ka − rh (1 − λ)h − rh λh + rh (1 − λ)h = rh (1 − λ)h,   (4)

where p is the price of the final good, ws and wu are the wage rates, rk is the return
on physical capital, and rh is the return on intangible capital. We assume that factor
and goods prices are the same in the parent and affiliate. The term −rh (1 − λ)h is the
depreciation of affiliate intangible assets; the term −rh λh is the payment from the affiliate
to the parent for the use of λh; and the term rh (1 − λ)h is the payment from the parent to
the affiliate for the use of (1 − λ)h. The second equality in (4) follows from the assumption
that inputs are paid their marginal products and that the production function has constant
returns to scale.
   Parent earnings are

         πm = pym − ws `sm − wu `um − rk km − rh λh − rh (1 − λ)h + rh λh = rh λh,        (5)

where the term −rh λh is the depreciation of the parent intangible assets; the term −rh (1 −
λ)h is the payment from the parent to the affiliate for the use of (1 − λ)h; and the term
rh λh is the payment from the affiliate to the parent for the use of λh. Again, the second
equality in (5) follows from the assumption that inputs are paid their marginal products
and that the production function has constant returns to scale.

2.2    Accounting with Multinational Enterprises
How do the ownership shares of intangible capital affect aggregate output measures? In
the United States, expenditure-based GDP is

                              Y E = pym + rh λh − rh (1 − λ)h,                            (6)

where the last two terms are the exports and imports of intangible capital services. Income-
based GDP is

               Y I = ws `sm + wu `um + rk km + 2rh λh = pym − rh h + 2rh λh,              (7)




                                              9
where the second equality follows from pym = ws `sm + wu `um + rk km + rh h. The payment
from the affiliate to the parent (rh λh) is reported in the BEA surveys on transactions
in services as “payments by foreign affiliates to U.S. reporters [parents] for the use of
intellectual property.” In the aggregate accounting, these payments reduce earnings on
U.S. direct investment abroad. In our framework, earnings on USDIA is simply

                                Y USDIA = πa = rh (1 − λ)h.                              (8)

Note that rh (1−λ)h is counted as earnings on USDIA, whether or not the earnings are paid
as cash dividends to the parent. Earnings not paid as dividends are treated in economic
accounts as paid and immediately reinvested in the foreign affiliate. The earnings are not
included in GDP.
   Unadjusted aggregate labor productivity is

                                   YE   pym + 2rh λh − rh
                              A=      =                   ,                              (9)
                                   `m          `m
where `m = `sm + `um is total employment in the United States. Suppose that all of the
intangible capital was created in the United States. When the parent retains all of the
firm’s intangible capital (λ = 1), the entire return to intangible capital would be counted
in GDP. When λ < 1, some of the return to intangible capital gets attributed to earnings
on USDIA rather than GDP, and the productivity measure in (9) would be smaller. This
reduction grows larger as λ decreases or intangible capital becomes more important.

2.3    Formulary Apportionment Method
The simple framework presented in the previous section made it easy to see the source of
the measured slowdown. In this section, we present a practical solution: attribute MNE
earnings to the entities of the firm in a way that reflects the location of production. We
use a formulary apportionment approach for this attribution.
    Formulary apportionment begins by constructing, for each entity in the firm, an ap-
portionment weight, ωn , that reflects the entity’s share of the total apportionment factors.
We use sales to unaffiliated parties and labor compensation as our apportionment fac-
tors. The market presence of the entity is captured by the sales measure, and restricting
sales to unaffiliated parties mitigates problems with transfer pricing and global structur-
ing. Compensation reflects labor’s contribution to production in the entity. To account for
differences in labor quality across entities, we use compensation rather than employment.
Weighting the two factors equally, the apportionment weights in our framework are

                                             10
             1          ws `sn + wu `un          1    pyn
      ωn =     ×                                + ×                   n ∈ {a, m}.       (10)
             2 ws `sm + wu `um + ws `sa + wu `ua 2 pym + pya

We use these weights to allocate the MNE’s consolidated earnings across the entities,


                            πnω = ωn (πa + πm )     n ∈ {a, m},                         (11)

which yields πnω , the earnings attributed to entity n under formulary apportionment. The
formulary adjustment to each entity is simply

                                       n = πnω − πn .                                  (12)

The formulary adjustment reflects the additional earnings (which could be negative) due
to the entity. We use the formulary adjustment for the parent to adjust GDP,


                     Ye E = Y E + m = pym + rh λh − rh (1 − λ)h + m .                 (13)

The adjusted GDP in (13) is the numerator in adjusted aggregate labor productivity,

                            eE         h      h
                        e = Y = pym + r λh − r (1 − λ)h + m .
                        A                                                               (14)
                            `m              `m
   While standard in the multijurisdictional tax literature, the formulary adjustment will
not generally provide an exact measure of the counterfactual payment to the parent. The
accuracy of our adjustment depends upon the extent to which inputs are substitutable:
with fixed-proportions production functions, the adjustment exactly reattributes profits in
proportion to output. We experiment with different apportionment factors to generate a
range of adjustments.


3     Aggregate Productivity
We begin with an analysis of U.S. aggregate productivity. In Section 4, we study produc-
tivity in industries grouped by their R&D expenditure and their use and production of
information technology.

3.1    Data and Variable Construction
We construct unadjusted labor productivity for 1973–2014 using annual domestic business-
sector value added from the national income and product accounts (NIPAs) published by

                                             11
BEA and annual total hours worked from the Labor Productivity and Costs series published
by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). In Section 2, for clarity, we used GDP as
our measure of output. In our empirical implementation, we use the more appropriate
business-sector value added measure, which abstracts from the household, government,
and nonprofit sectors of the economy. In addition, we use the annual survey data collected
by BEA on U.S. MNEs to construct productivity measures adjusted for transactions in
earnings on USDIA based on the formulary framework outlined in Section 2.3.
    While the productivity series span 1973–2014, the survey-level data are only available
for 1982–2014. Furthermore, some requisite survey-level data on U.S. parents were not
collected for 1983–1988 and 1990–1993. However, aggregate statistics on transactions in
income (direct investment income and portfolio income) are available for all years. Thus, we
extrapolate backward the nominal adjustment prior to 1982 using the aggregate statistics
as an indicator. In addition, we linearly interpolate the nominal adjustment for 1983–1988
and 1990–1993.
    Before turning to our results, we briefly discuss the construction of our productivity
series. More details are available in the data appendix.

3.1.1   Unadjusted productivity measures
To construct unadjusted labor productivity, we follow Fernald (2015) and take the ge-
ometric average of the income-based and expenditure-based measures of business-sector
value added, which we deflate with an implicit price deflator derived from business-sector
value added. We divide our real value added measure by total hours worked to yield the
unadjusted labor productivity defined in (9).

3.1.2   Adjusted productivity measures
To construct adjusted labor productivity, we need the apportionment factors and profits
for each entity in each MNE. These data are collected in the BEA MNE surveys and
used to generate the formulary adjustment in (12). The survey data include financial and
operating activities based on income statement and balance sheet information reported
under U.S. GAAP for U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates. These surveys are required
to be completed for all U.S. parents, and surveys are required to be completed for all foreign
affiliates based on thresholds for assets, sales, and net income. These surveys report, for
each parent and affiliate, compensation and sales to unaffiliated parties, which we use to
construct the apportionment factors. The surveys are also the source of earnings reported
on U.S. parents and foreign affiliates, as well as the U.S. parent’s reported voting interest



                                             12
in a foreign affiliate.13

Apportionment factors
We use compensation of employees and sales to unaffiliated parties as apportionment fac-
tors to construct the apportionment weights in (10) for each MNE. Each apportionment
factor has advantages and disadvantages. Compensation reflects both the number of em-
ployees and their wages. If workers are paid their value marginal product, compensation
reflects variation in economic activity across industries and countries. As an apportionment
factor, compensation yields relatively more production attributable to high-margin indus-
tries and high-wage countries and relatively less production attributable to low-margin
industries and low-wage countries. In addition, compensation is based on market trans-
actions rather than financial accounting conventions, which may affect our other appor-
tionment factor, unaffiliated sales. Thus, apportionment weights constructed using only
compensation may provide the most objective measure of economic activity. Compensa-
tion, however, may not reflect the actual economic owner of intangible capital and may
not reflect the provision of services through means such as digital technology, which do not
require a physical presence.
    While unaffiliated sales may be affected by revenue recognition rules under financial
accounting conventions, an advantage of using sales as an apportionment factor is that
it reflects activity at a location regardless of physical presence, which may be a better
indicator of economic activity for some products.14 For example, unaffiliated sales may
reflect intangible capital actually employed by a foreign affiliate. In addition, sales is a
measure of local output that results from production, whereas compensation is a measure
of local inputs employed in production.

Economic profits
Our measure of profits reflects current production that is consistent with the after-tax
profits component of GDP calculated by the factor income approach. Profits of U.S.
   13
      Transactions in income on USDIA include earnings and net interest receivable. Earnings include a U.S.
parent’s share of its foreign affiliate’s net income less capital gains, less income from equity investments,
and plus depletion. Earnings are either distributed as dividends or reinvested as further direct investment.
Net interest is very small relative to earnings, so we do not include it in our adjustments.
   14
      The OECD’s work on base erosion and profit shifting recommends that the taxable presence of an
entity be determined primarily by the location of “significant people functions” in the case of nonfinancial
enterprises or by the location of “key entrepreneurial risk takers” in the case of financial enterprises. In the
case of electronic commerce, the commentary to the OECD model tax convention clarifies that computer
equipment at a location may constitute a taxable presence even if no personnel are required to operate
the equipment. However, the attribution of profits to the location would still depend on the performance
of “significant people functions,” which implies little or no profit would be attributed to the location
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2008b, paragraph 95).

                                                      13
parents are calculated as net income minus capital gains and losses, minus profits of their
foreign affiliates on which the U.S. parent has a claim, plus charges for depletion of natural
resources. Profits of foreign affiliates on which the U.S. parent has a claim—our measure of
foreign profits—are calculated as foreign affiliate net income minus capital gains and losses
plus charges for depletion of natural resources, the result of which is multiplied by the
parent’s direct voting interest in the foreign affiliate. In the data appendix (Figure A.1),
we report the adjustment using a measure of operating surplus. The two adjustments are
very similar.

Adjusted output
We compute the entity-level adjustments according to (12) and aggregate the parents’ ad-
justments for all U.S. MNEs. We add this aggregate adjustment to nominal expenditure-
based business-sector value added and to nominal income-based business-sector value
added. Let M be the set of all U.S. MNEs and Y VA be either income- or expenditure-based
nominal value added. Adjusted value added, Ye VA , is

                                                    X
                                   Ye VA = Y VA +         m .                           (15)
                                                    m∈M

As in the construction of unadjusted labor productivity, we take the geometric average
of the two adjusted value added series and deflate them using the implicit deflator for
business-sector value added. In the data appendix (Figure A.2), we show that our results
are robust to other price indexes. We divide our adjusted real value added measure by
total hours worked to yield the adjusted labor productivity defined in (14).

3.2    Results
Figure 1 presents the aggregate formulary adjustments as a share of business-sector value
added—the sum of the m from (15). Our baseline formulary adjustment, when the ap-
portionment weights in (10) are based on sales and employee compensation, is labeled
“weighted adjustment.” We also plot the formulary adjustment when either compensation
or sales is the only factor used to compute the apportionment weights. The adjustments
based on only compensation or sales are similar to each other and, thus, to the weighted
adjustment. We plot total income on USDIA for reference.
    From 1973 to 2000, the adjustments grow, but very slowly, and never exceed 0.6 percent
of value added in any year. This picture changes quickly in the early 2000s as income on
USDIA surges, and the weighted formulary adjustments grow to about 2.5 percent of
value added. The cumulative increase in U.S. GDP from the adjustment is substantial.

                                             14
                                                                        Figure 1 – Aggregate formulary adjustments
                                                   (a) As share of business-sector value added                                                        (b) Inflation-adjusted level
                                                 4.5                                                                                        450
                                                                                     USDIA Income                                                                              USDIA Income
                                                 4.0                                                                                        400
share of business sector value added (percent)




                                                 3.5                                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                                                                       Compensation




                                                                                                             billion USD (2009 base year)
                                                 3.0                                                                                        300
                                                                                            Compensation
                                                 2.5                                                                                        250
                                                                        Weighted                                                                                  Weighted                    Sales
                                                 2.0                    Adjustment                  Sales                                   200                   Adjustment
                                                 1.5                                                                                        150

                                                 1.0                                                                                        100

                                                 0.5                                                                                         50

                                                 0.0                                                                                         0
                                                  1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                          1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015




   From 2004 to 2014, the weighted formulary adjustment adds $2.98 trillion to GDP, the
   compensation-based adjustment adds $3.16 trillion, and the sales-based adjustment adds
   $2.79 trillion.
       Next we turn to labor productivity. Figure 2a shows the cumulative growth in labor
   productivity for the entire period (1973–2014), normalizing 1973 to zero. Unless otherwise
   noted, in this paper we compute growth rates using (natural) log changes. That is, the
   growth in variable X between years t and t + k is computed as s = log(Xt+1 ) − log(Xt ),
   and we refer to 100 × s as “s log percent” for ease of interpretation (and drop the log
   designation—s percent—when it does not cause confusion). So, for example, the cumula-
   tive growth rate in unadjusted labor productivity (solid black line) from 1973 to 2014 is
   79 (log) percent, which translates to a 120 percentage points increase.
       Overall, the unadjusted labor productivity series we plot here is consistent with Fernald
   (2015), except for 2012–2014, where we have incorporated revised NIPA data. The unad-
   justed labor productivity growth rate over the entire period averages 1.9 percent per year.
   This period is often broken into three subperiods that displayed distinct growth patterns:
   1973–1994, 1994–2004, and 2004–2014. The unadjusted labor productivity growth rate av-
   eraged 1.5 percent per year from 1973 to 1994, 3.0 percent per year from 1994 to 2004, and
   reverted back to a lower growth rate of 1.4 percent per year in the last period (2004–2014).
   We report cumulative and average annual productivity growth rates in Table II.
      In Figure 2a, we plot the cumulative growth of labor productivity unadjusted and
   adjusted by the weighted formulary adjustment shown in Figure 1, and in Figure 3, we
   plot the difference between the two series. By the end of the period, labor productivity is

                                                                                                            15
                                    Figure 2 – Aggregate cumulative labor productivity growth
                                        (a) 1973–2014                                                                      (b) 1994–2014
                        80                                   Adjusted                          50
                                                                                                                                                     Adjusted
                        70
                                                                 Unadjusted                    40
                        60                                                                                                                               Unadjusted

                        50
                                                                                               30
          log percent




                                                                                 log percent
                        40

                        30                                                                     20

                        20
                                                                                               10
                        10

                         0
                                                                                                  0
                        1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                      1995       2000         2005            2010           2015



Figure 3 – Increase in aggregate cumulative labor productivity due to formulary adjust-
ment
                                      (a) 1994–2014                                                                              (b) 2004–2014
              2.0                                                                                            1.0


                                                                                                             0.8
              1.5

                                                                                                             0.6
log percent




                                                                                               log percent




              1.0
                                                                                                             0.4

              0.5                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                                             0.0
              0.0
                             1995    2000      2005       2010            2015                                     2004   2006      2008      2010         2012       2014




higher in the adjusted series. Adjusted cumulative labor productivity growth for 1973–2014
is 1.8 log percent higher than the unadjusted cumulative labor productivity growth.
    From Figure 2a, it is clear that the formulary adjustment does not affect aggregate
productivity in a substantial way until the 1990s, with most of the adjustment occurring
after 2000. In Figure 2b, we plot aggregate cumulative productivity growth since 1994 to
highlight the period of increased productivity growth (1994–2004) and the productivity
growth slowdown (2004–2014). From 1994 to 2014, the formulary adjustment adds 1.5 log
percent to cumulative labor productivity growth. The adjustment increases the produc-
tivity growth rate during the period of increased productivity growth, but the adjustment

                                                                                 16
                Table II – Labor productivity growth rates (log percent)

                       Cumulative growth rate          Average annual growth rate
                       Unadjusted      Adjusted       Unadjusted        Adjusted
         1973–2014         76.7          78.5             1.87             1.92
         1973–1994         32.2          32.5             1.53             1.55
         1994–2014         44.5          46.0             2.23             2.30
         1994–2004         30.2          31.1             3.02             3.11
         2004–2014         14.4          14.8             1.44             1.48


has its largest effects during the productivity growth slowdown. In some years, this effect
is dramatic. For example, from 2006 to 2008 adjusted productivity grew by 1.6 percent,
while unadjusted productivity grew only by 0.8 percent.

3.3    The Dynamics of Aggregate Profit Shifting
In this section, we examine the factors that shaped the evolution of the aggregate adjust-
ment, and in particular its rapid growth from the mid-1990s to late 2000s and its tapering
off thereafter.

I. Tax laws and regulations
The rapid rise in profit shifting in the 1990s spurred enormous research interest in academics
(e.g., tax scholars in accounting, economics, and law) as well as in government agencies
(e.g., the Department of the Treasury and Congress). The voluminous body of research
resulting from this effort strongly points to three major changes in tax regulations as
important drivers of the rise in profit shifting in the 1990s as well as its tapering off in the
last decade. Here, we briefly summarize the most relevant parts of these tax regulations
and provide a more extensive discussion of each in Appendix C.
    The rise in profit shifting seems to have been driven by two major changes in tax
regulation in the 1990s. The first one is the 1995 revision of IRS regulations on cost sharing
agreements (CSAs). In a CSA, one geographic unit of an MNE—typically a foreign affiliate
in a tax haven country—shares the cost of developing a new technology with its U.S. parent
and, in return, is granted rights to royalties on a portion of the sales of products or services
using that technology. The 1995 change made it much easier for MNEs to use CSAs to
transfer their intellectual property at advantageous prices to their foreign affiliates, which
then collect the royalties and profits accruing to those intellectual properties.
   A second important change happened in 1997 when the IRS introduced what would
become known as the “check-the-box” regulation, which aimed to simplify how U.S. corpo-

                                                17
rations classified their various subsidiaries. Check-the-box allowed a U.S. MNE to disregard
a foreign affiliate by “checking the box” on Form 8832. When a disregarded entity receives
a payment from another entity in the enterprise, this transaction is not considered tax-
able by the IRS, as the payment is viewed as occurring within a consolidated entity. This
change made it easier for U.S. MNEs to set up chains of foreign affiliates whose payments
to each other were not taxed by the IRS. This arrangement made profit shifting an even
more effective tax reduction strategy because now a U.S. MNE could also shift its profits
from its foreign subsidiaries in higher-tax jurisdictions to the one(s) in tax havens, without
making those transfers a taxable event from the perspective of the IRS.
    The pivotal role played by CSAs and check-the-box regulation for driving profit shifting
was well understood by tax authorities, tax scholars, and MNEs.15 Starting in the mid-
2000s, the IRS increased its efforts to reduce the tax base erosion caused by profit shifting
and tightened the rules governing CSAs, issuing Temporary Regulations in 2008 and Final
Regulations in 2011. In testimony to the U.S. Senate in 2013, Harvard law professor
Stephen Shay described the pre-2011 regulations as“much more relaxed”than the post-2011
regulations (Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, 2013). This
comment suggests that the combined IRS guidance on “buy-in payments” and “platform
contributions” gradually made it much more difficult for MNEs to use CSAs to transfer
intangible assets. The timing of these tighter new rules (as well as stricter enforcement)
lines up very well with the tapering off and subsequent decline in profit shifting—and hence
in our adjustments—shown in Figures 1 to 3.16

II. Exchange rates
The data reported by MNEs to BEA are denominated in U.S. dollars. If foreign affiliates
keep their books in a currency other than the dollar, the data are converted at the nominal
exchange rate. In Figure 4a, we plot the trade-weighted exchange value of the U.S. dollar.
In Figure 4b, we plot the cumulative growth of our baseline aggregate adjustment (solid
black line) along with an alternative version where the nominal exchange rate is held fixed


   15
      For example, in a 2007 report to the U.S. Congress, the Treasury Department wrote that “[t]he
Treasury Department believes that CSAs under the current regulations pose significant risk of income
shifting from non-arm’s length transfer pricing (U.S. Department of the Treasury 2007).” For detailed
summaries of how these regulations have affected profit shifting, see Sullivan and Cromwell, LLP (2011)
and Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs (2013).
   16
      Sullivan and Cromwell, LLP (2011) discuss various pieces of evidence on how profit shifting and
transfer pricing became a key focus for the IRS, especially after the mid-2000s. They also mention the
creation of a new director-level position as evidence of a “heightened focus on transfer pricing issues” within
the IRS.

                                                      18
                                                 Figure 4 – Exchange rate effects
(a) Trade-weighted exchange value of the U.S. dollar                                                (b) Aggregate adjustment
                   140                                                                30

                   130                                                                                                               baseline
                                                                                      25

                   120
                                                                                      20
index 1973 = 100




                   110




                                                                         1973 = 1.0
                                                                                      15                                                   without
                   100                                                                                                                     exchange rate
                                                                                      10
                    90

                    80                                                                 5

                    70                                                                 0
                     1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000     2005     2010   2015




at its base value in 1973 (dashed blue line).17
    Comparing the two series, we see that the appreciation in the U.S. dollar in the early
1980s and late 1990s depressed the baseline adjustment—the dashed line is slightly above
the solid line. The strong depreciation during 1985–1995 and during the 2000s boosted the
baseline adjustment relative to what it would have been without exchange rate effects.18
Aggregating over the entire period, exchange rate movements contributed about 24 percent
of the cumulative aggregate adjustment (the ratio in Figure 4b of the 25-fold increase under
the baseline case to the 20-fold increase with fixed exchange rates). This suggests that the
weaker dollar in the last 15 years has made U.S. MNEs’ foreign earnings and sales more
valuable in dollar terms, and shifting these profits abroad led to a larger slowdown in
measured productivity growth.

III. Petroleum
As we discuss in more detail in Sections 3.6 and 4, the oil and gas industry accounts for
a large share of our adjustments to U.S. GDP. Given the large swings in oil prices during
our sample period, we examine how they have contributed to variation in our adjustments
over time.
                   Companies in the petroleum industry often face resource taxes and royalties (in addition
   17
      Specifically, letting Xt be the aggregate adjustment in dollars and et be the trade-weighted U.S. dollar
exchange rate, the aggregate adjustment fixing the exchange rate is simply XtF = Xt /et , with e1973 = 1.
   18
      A caveat to keep in mind is that we are holding the USDIA values denominated in foreign currency
unchanged from the baseline as we counterfactually fix the exchange rates. Depending on what drives the
exchange rate fluctuations in the first place, this assumption may not hold.

                                                                    19
                                                                             Figure 5 – The petroleum industry
                                                         (a) The aggregate adjustment                                        (b) The price of West Texas Intermediate Crude
                                                 3.0                                                                                  100

                                                                                 Adjustment
share of business sector value added (percent)




                                                 2.5                             all industries
                                                                                                                                       80

                                                 2.0




                                                                                                                 dollars per barrel
                                                                                                                                       60
                                                 1.5
                                                                                             Adjustment                                40
                                                 1.0                                         ex petroleum

                                                                                                                                       20
                                                 0.5

                                                 0.0                                                                                   0
                                                  1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                    1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015




to corporate income taxes) that create strong incentives to manage tax liabilities. Perhaps
in response to these incentives, the structure of firms in the petroleum industry lends
itself to an array of profit shifting strategies. Exploration and production affiliates may be
thinly capitalized, and transportation, insurance, hedging operations, and intercompany
loans create transfer pricing opportunities. A U.S. multinational petroleum company,
for example, agreed in 2017 to pay 340 million AUD in extra taxes to the Australian
government in regard to intercompany loans that were made at above-market rates (Smyth,
2017).
    In Figure 5a, we plot the aggregate adjustment that excludes the petroleum sector
(dashed red line) against the baseline adjustment (solid blue line) reproduced from Figure 1.
Notice that, up until 2008, excluding the petroleum sector yields slower growth in the
adjustment, which is especially evident during the 2004–2008 period. The adjustment
after 2008 is flat or declining regardless of whether we exclude petroleum. The right panel
(Figure 5b) plots the price of crude oil per barrel during the same time period, which was
relatively stable around $25 from about 1985 to 1999 but had a very strong run-up from
2000 to 2008, during which time it quadrupled to $100 per barrel. This rise in oil prices,
coupled with the relatively inelastic demand for oil, boosted both domestic and foreign
income earned by MNEs in this sector relative to the rest of the U.S. economy. If we
assume that the propensity of U.S. MNEs in this sector to shift profits was unchanged, the
sector’s contribution to the low measured growth of U.S. GDP and productivity increased
along with the rise in oil prices in the last decade.
                                                  In Table III, we report cumulative labor productivity growth for the petroleum industry

                                                                                                            20
              Table III – Cumulative labor productivity growth (log changes)

                             Petroleum industry                 Non-petroleum industries
                           Unadjusted        Adjusted          Unadjusted          Adjusted
          1973–2014           329.0            342.8                66.6              68.1
          1973–1994           247.2            251.8                29.4              29.7
          1994–2014            81.8             91.0                37.1              38.4
          1994–2004           112.1            120.3                26.4              27.2
          2004–2014           –30.3            –29.3                10.7              11.2


and the non-petroleum industries. The non-petroleum industries behave much like the ag-
gregate: from 1973 to 2014, the adjustment adds 1.6 percentage points to non-petroleum
productivity growth compared to 1.8 percentage points for aggregate productivity (Ta-
ble II). While the petroleum industry has a modest effect on aggregate productivity, the
adjustment to productivity in the petroleum industry is considerable: the adjustment adds
9.2 percentage points to productivity in the petroleum industry during 1994–2014.

3.4     Adjustments for Other Countries
Our adjustments are reattributions of earnings among the parent and foreign affiliates of
each U.S. MNE. As evident in Figure 1, in 2012, 63 percent of earnings on USDIA are
reattributed to the United States.19 From which countries did this income originate? Al-
most 92 percent of the reattribution to the United States is concentrated in ten countries,
and the largest reattributions were away from countries that are considered to be low-tax
destinations for MNE profit shifting (Table IV and Figure 6). Consistent with the popular-
ity of the “double Irish with a Dutch sandwich” tax reduction strategy (Sanchirico, 2015),
the Netherlands is the largest source (27.8 percent) and Ireland is the third-largest source
(10.5 percent) of income reattributed to the United States. The top ten also includes tax
havens Bermuda, Luxembourg, Singapore, Switzerland, and the U.K. Caribbean Islands.20
  19
      One might note that this share is identical to the share of total FDI earnings that were reinvested in
2012 ($284 b./$449 b. = 63%). We do not mean to suggest by our estimates that all reinvested earnings
on U.S. direct investment abroad are associated with profit shifting. Although the equality of these two
shares is notable, there are undoubtedly times when profits temporarily held abroad for tax reasons must
be remitted to the parent, such as in cases of domestic liquidity needs. We are grateful to Aneta Markowska
of Cornerstone Macro LLC for bringing this comparison to our attention.
   20
      The adjustments may be larger than GDP due to national accounting practices in some host countries
that exclude the income from certain foreign-owned companies from GDP. Bermuda, for example, does
not include exempted companies—companies that are located in Bermuda but do not do business in
Bermuda—in its national accounting statistics. Lipsey (2009) provides a sense of scale: in 1999, the
foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs in Bermuda reported sales of services to parties outside of Bermuda of
$13,908 million; however, total service exports as reported in Bermudian official statistics are only $1,163

                                                    21
   Figure 6 – Geographical reattribution of earnings of U.S. MNEs, 2012 (bil. USD)

                                                       United Kingdom: –$15.7
       Canada: –$13.7                                           Ireland: –$29.5




                                                         Luxembourg: –$23.6
                                                         Netherlands: –$77.9
                                                          Switzerland: –$13.6
             United States: +$280.1


                                           Bermuda: –$32.4



Singapore: –$19.0
                                      U.K.I. Caribbean: –$22.0


Notes: The United Kingdom Islands (U.K.I.), Caribbean, are made up of the British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos Islands.


   Canada and the United Kingdom are also in the top ten sources of reattributed income;
however, these countries are major hosts of U.S.-owned affiliate employment. In 2012,
Canada accounted for 8.4 percent of all employment in the foreign affiliates of U.S. parents,
and the United Kingdom accounted for 10.3 percent.
   The negative adjustments for some countries do not necessarily imply that the GDP of
those countries is overstated. Some of the larger countries are home to indigenous MNEs,
and reattribution of those companies’ global profits may very well raise the GDP of those
countries.
    Our adjustments are positive for some countries (besides the United States) as well,
although the increases are small. The adjustments, in fact, are too small to be reported
given the confidentiality of the BEA survey data. The ten countries with the largest
positive reattribution of income on USDIA are, in order from highest to lowest: Japan,
France, Italy, Russia, Argentina, Greece, Turkey, Libya, Germany, and Kenya. Among this
set of countries, Japan, France, Italy, Greece, and Germany have tax rates that generally
exceed the OECD average. Overall, the reattribution pattern supports the concern that
profit shifting affects measurement as a result of income on USDIA being shifted to affiliates
in countries with relatively low tax rates.
million.

                                                  22
                      Table IV – Adjustments in other countries, 2012

         Country                                    Adjustment                 Adjustment
                                                  (share of total)           (share of GDP)
         Decrease in GDP                                1.00
           Netherlands                                  0.28                      0.10
           Bermuda                                      0.12                      5.91
           Ireland                                      0.11                      0.14
           Luxembourg                                   0.08                      0.43
           U.K.I., Caribbean                            0.08                      4.76
           Singapore                                    0.07                      0.07
           United Kingdom                               0.06                      0.01
           Canada                                       0.05                      0.01
           Switzerland                                  0.05                      0.02
           Remaining 176 countries                      0.12

      Notes: The adjustment to U.S. GDP in 2012 is an increase of $280.1 billion. This table reports
      the offsetting adjustments (decreases in GDP) to the top 9 counterpart countries by size of
      adjustment. The United Kingdom Islands (U.K.I.), Caribbean, include the British Virgin
      Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos Islands. They are members of
      CARICOM, which publishes a comprehensive set of national accounts data.




3.5    Relationship to Tax Rates
Our formulary apportionment method does not use tax rate differences across countries;
our method relies only on measures of economic activity. It is evident, however, that our
measures of shifted profit are correlated with tax rate differentials. Much of the literature
on profit shifting has looked for evidence of tax-motivated profit shifting by running cross-
country regressions of the form

                              log(πi ) = β0 + β1 τi + β2 `i + β3 ki + ui ,                             (16)

where πi is a measure of reported affiliate profit in country i, τi is a measure of the effective
tax rate in country i, `i is a measure of labor used by affiliates in country i, ki is a measure
of the physical capital stock used by affiliates in country i, and ui is a classical error term.
This particular specification is from Hines and Rice (1994), which is estimated using data
on the foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals for 1982, drawn from the same data that we
use.
   In column 1 of Table V, we report an estimate of (16) using the 1982 data. We find
a coefficient (a semi-elasticity) of –3.96 compared to –2.83 in Hines and Rice (1994). The

                                                   23
different values reflect differences in our measure of profits and a slightly different sample
of countries. In their model, the theoretical relationship between profits and taxes is

                                    log(πi ) = log(ρi ) + c1 τi + c2 ,                              (17)

where πi is the reported affiliate profit, ρi is the profit derived from real economic activity,
and c1 and c2 are constants. In the model, ρi is derived from capital and labor, which
leads to the `i and ki terms in (16). In contrast, we have directly computed ρi , so our
theoretically consistent version of (16) is

                                 log(πi ) − log(ρi ) = β0 + β1 τi + ui ,                            (18)

the estimates of which we report in the second column of Table V. We find a semi-elasticity
with respect to tax rates of –4.89. We view the similarity of our tax semi-elasticity—derived
using no data on tax rates—to that from specifications that explicitly model profit shifting
as a function of the tax rates to be an important consistency check on our results.
    Since we have computed ρi directly, we can further study the relationship between tax
rates and profit derived from real economic activity. In column 3 in Table V, we regress ρi
on tax rates and measures of labor and capital inputs. Once we have removed the shifted
profit from the reported profit, the tax rate is no longer significant. Our methodology
appears to have removed the tax-motivated profit from the reported profit.

3.6     Industry Composition
How is our adjustment distributed across industries? In the next section, we group indus-
tries according to some relevant characteristics and analyze their productivity growth. In
this section, we discuss the general composition of the adjustment. In Table VI, we report
the adjustments by two-digit NAICS industry of the U.S. parent in 2012.21 We report an
industry’s adjustment as its share of the total adjustment and as its share of the industry’s
unadjusted value added. The industrial composition of the adjustment is consistent with
the idea that firms use intangible assets to shift profits to low-tax jurisdictions.
   Industry group 32—a subset of manufacturing—makes up 42 percent of the total adjust-
ment. This industry is dominated by pharmaceuticals (a part of chemicals) and petroleum,
which we have discussed above. (To avoid disclosure of confidential data, we cannot re-
port the exact adjustments for these industries.) The pharmaceutical industry’s profits
   21
      The industry of the affiliate closest to the parent is often NAICS 55—holding companies—which is
not very informative about the industrial composition of the sub-affiliates held by the affiliate holding
company.

                                                   24
                            Table V – Shifted profits and tax rates

                                      (1)                     (2)                   (3)
                               log(unadj. profit)      log( unadj  profit
                                                             adj. profit
                                                                          )   log(adj. profit)
 Tax rate                            –3.96                  –4.89                  0.03
                                     (0.49)                 (0.71)                (0.38)
 Labor compensation                   0.40                                         0.90
                                     (0.12)                                       (0.09)
 Physical capital                     0.49                                         0.02
                                     (0.11)                                       (0.08)
 Constant                             1.68                   2.41                  -0.61
                                     (0.36)                 (0.27)                (0.27)
 Adj. R-squared                       0.94                    0.46                 0.97
 Observations                          56                      56                   56

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses.


are largely derived from its intellectual property, which provides ample opportunities for
profit shifting. A major U.S. pharmaceutical company, for example, has licensed the man-
ufacturing rights to some best-selling drugs to its Irish subsidiary (Bergin and Drawbaugh,
2015). Industries 51 and 54—which include software publishing, data processing and host-
ing, and computer system design—make up 12 percent of the aggregate adjustment. As
in the pharmaceutical industry, the “information” industry derives much of its profit from
intangible assets and low marginal production costs.
   Industry group 52 is responsible for 14 percent of the total adjustment. The foreign
operations of the insurance industry, for example, are concentrated in Bermuda—a country
whose corporate tax rate is zero (Lipsey, 2010).
   The industries that are not significant contributors to the aggregate adjustment tend
to be those in which it is difficult to uncouple the physical location of production from
the point of sale. These industries include construction, transportation, education, health
care, and other services.




                                                  25
                     Table VI – Adjustment by industry of U.S. parent

                                                                   Adjustment (percent)
 Key industries                                              Share of                 Share of
                                                         total adjustment         ind. value added
 32   Petroleum, chemicals, plastics, wood, paper               42.04                    15.99
 52   Finance, insurance                                        14.32                     3.51
 33   Computers, electrical equip., motor vehicles              11.95                     3.38
 51   Publishing, information, data processing                   7.14                     2.71
 54   Legal, computer sys. design, scientific R&D                5.34                     1.33
 31   Food, textiles, apparel                                    4.91                     5.37
 21   Mining                                                     4.16                     2.83
 44   Retail trade                                               2.81                     0.84
 42   Wholesale trade                                            2.33                     0.68
 55   Management of companies and enterprises                    1.75                     1.61
 53   Real estate and leasing                                    1.00                     0.48
 22   Utilities                                                  0.72                     0.47
 48   Transportation and warehousing                             0.61                     0.37
Notes: The adjustment in construction, agriculture, education, health care, arts and entertainment, and
others that are not listed here are very small and hence omitted.



4      Productivity in R&D- and IT-intensive Industries
Attributing the return to intangible capital correctly is likely to make a bigger difference
in industries in which intangible capital is more important. To investigate this hypothesis,
we construct adjusted productivity measures for industries grouped by their R&D and IT
intensities.
    We use data on value added by industry from the U.S. Industry Economic Accounts
(IEAs) published by BEA and hours worked by industry from the Labor Productivity and
Costs database published by BLS. As before, we use the BEA survey of MNEs to con-
struct value added adjusted for transactions in earnings on USDIA based on the formulary
framework outlined in Section 2.3.
    We use the survey data to calculate R&D and IT intensity at the enterprise level —the
U.S. parent and all of its foreign affiliates. We calculate R&D intensity by dividing
enterprise-level R&D expenditures, aggregated across all available years, by enterprise-
level sales to unaffiliated parties, aggregated across all available years. We consider an
enterprise to be R&D intensive if its R&D intensity is at or above the 75th percentile. In
most cases, R&D-intensive enterprises include U.S. parents and foreign affiliates classified

                                                  26
into industries that are considered to be R&D intensive as defined in Moylan and Robbins
(2007).
    We calculate IT intensity separately for IT usage and IT production. We first catego-
rize industries as IT using, as defined in Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012), or as IT
producing, as defined in Fernald (2015). We consider an enterprise to be IT-using intensive
if the share of its total unaffiliated sales generated by entities classified into IT-using in-
dustries is greater than 50 percent. We consider an enterprise to be IT-producing intensive
if the share of its total unaffiliated sales generated by entities classified into IT-producing
industries is greater than 50 percent.
    A complete list of industry groups is reported in appendix Table B.1. Note that a
number of industries are included in more than one group. Information industries (NAICS
51) are included in both IT-using and IT-producing groups, and computer and electronic
product manufacturing industries (NAICS 334) and computer systems design industries
(NAICS 5415) are grouped with both IT-producing industries and R&D-intensive indus-
tries. Likewise, transportation and equipment manufacturing industries (NAICS 336) and
scientific research and development industries (NAICS 5417) are grouped with both IT-
using industries and R&D-intensive industries. IT-producing and R&D-intensive industries
overlap the most: IT-producing industries are almost a subset of R&D-intensive industries.
In contrast, IT-using industries include a number of industries that are not included in ei-
ther the IT-producing industries or the R&D-intensive industries, including industries such
as wholesale trade (NAICS 42) and retail trade (NAICS 44–45).

4.1    Unadjusted Productivity Measures
The value added by industry data published in the IEAs include nominal and real measures
as well as the related price indexes (base year 2009). We group industries according to
their R&D or IT intensities and compute each group’s real value added using the relevant
Törnqvist price index. We divide the group’s real value added by the group’s hours worked
to yield unadjusted labor productivity.

4.2    Adjusted Productivity Measures
We adjust nominal value added for industries grouped by R&D intensity and IT intensity.
To compute, for example, adjusted value added for the R&D-intensive industries, we begin
with the MNEs that are identified as R&D intensive. For each of these enterprises, we use
the survey data collected by BEA to compute the apportionment weights as in (10) and
the formulary adjustments as in (12).


                                              27
    We sum the formulary adjustments and add them to the nominal value added of the
R&D-intensive industries. If I RD is the set of R&D-intensive industries and M RD is the set
of R&D-intensive enterprises, then the adjusted nominal value added of the R&D-intensive
industries is
                                         X         X
                                Ye RD =       Yi +       m ,                          (19)
                                       i∈I RD        m∈M RD

where Yi is nominal value added in industry i and m is the formulary adjustment of
enterprise m defined in (12). We deflate nominal adjusted value added by a Törnqvist
index of the price indexes from the industries in I RD . We divide the industry group’s real
value added by the group’s hours worked to yield adjusted labor productivity.
   Proceeding in this way, we compute adjusted labor productivity for R&D-intensive
industries, non-R&D-intensive industries, IT-using industries, non-IT-using industries, IT-
producing industries, and non-IT-producing industries.

4.3    R&D-Intensive Industries
In Figure 7a, we plot, as a share of unadjusted value added, the formulary adjustment for
R&D-intensive and non-R&D-intensive industries. The formulary adjustments for R&D-
intensive industries grow rapidly during the 1990s and early 2000s before flattening out
post-2008. The formulary adjustments for R&D-intensive enterprises as a share of value
added are substantially larger than those for non-R&D-intensive enterprises, with the ad-
justment for R&D-intensive enterprises peaking in 2008 at 8 percent of nominal value
added.
    The impact of our adjustments on productivity growth by R&D intensity is evident
in Figure 8, in which we plot cumulative labor productivity growth. From 1973 to 2014,
productivity growth in the R&D-intensive industries is about three times that in the non-
R&D-intensive industries. From 1994 to 2014, adjusting for offshore profit shifting in
the R&D-intensive industries adds 4.4 log points to cumulative growth, but only a little
less than 1 log point in non-R&D-intensive industries. As we observed in the aggregate
data, the largest effects on productivity growth occurred in the 2000s. The annual growth
rate from 2000 to 2008 is 0.53 log points higher in the R&D-intensive industries after the
adjustments (Table VII).

4.4    IT-Producing Industries
In Figure 9a, we plot the formulary adjustments as a share of value added for those in-
dustries that produce IT and those industries that do not. While quantitatively smaller,
the adjustment for IT-producing industries is similar to that in R&D-intensive industries.

                                                28
Figure 7 – Formulary Adjustment and Cumulative Labor Productivity Growth, by R&D
Intensity, 1994–2014
                                                               (a) Formulary Adjustment                                                   (b) Levels: Adjusted vs. Unadjusted
                                                    8                                                                               120
share of group's unadjusted value added (percent)




                                                    7                                                                                                             Adjusted, R&D intensive
                                                                                                                                    100
                                                    6                     R&D intensive
                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                                                                                          Unadjusted,
                                                    5                                                                                                                     R&D intensive




                                                                                                                      log percent
                                                                                                                                     60
                                                    4
                                                                                                                                     40
                                                    3                                                                                                         Adjusted, non-R&D intensive
                                                    2                                      non-R&D intensive                         20
                                                                                                                                                           Unadjusted, non-R&D intensive
                                                    1                                                                                 0
                                                    0                                                                                     1995      2000      2005            2010          2015
                                                        1995       2000             2005         2010          2015




The adjustments grow strongly during the 2000s. The IT-producing industries are al-
most all R&D-intensive industries, so this is not surprising. From 1994 to 2014, adjusting
for offshore profit shifting adds 4.3 log points to cumulative labor productivity growth in
IT-producing industries (Figure 9b, Table VII). Our adjustments add 1.7 log points to
cumulative labor productivity growth in the industries that do not produce IT.

4.5                                                      IT-Using Industries
When we classify industries by their use of IT, we find that the formulary adjustments
in industries that use IT intensively are smaller than, but quantitatively similar to, those
in the industries that do not use IT intensively (Figure 9c, Table VII). Offshore profit
shifting is often achieved through the location of intangible assets; if industries that use IT
intensively—which include wholesale and retail trade—also have fewer intangible assets,
we would expect to see a smaller adjustment in these industries.
    In Figure 9d, we plot the cumulative labor productivity growth in the industries grouped
by IT usage. Since 1994, adjusting productivity for offshore profit shifting adds about 1.4
log points to productivity in the industries that use IT intensively and 1.5 log points to
industries that do not use IT intensively.




                                                                                                                 29
Figure 8 – Cumulative Labor Productivity Growth, by R&D Intensity, 1973–2014

                   160

                   140                          Adjusted, R&D intensive
                                                                          Unadjusted,
                   120                                                    R&D intensive

                   100
     log percent




                    80
                                                                      Adjusted,
                    60                                                non-R&D intensive

                    40                                                Unadjusted,
                                                                      non-R&D intensive
                    20

                     0
                         1975   1980   1985   1990     1995   2000    2005   2010    2015




                                                  30
Table VII – Cumulative Labor Productivity Growth, by R&D and IT Intensity,
1994–2014

                                 1994–2014   1994–2004 2004–2014
             R&D intensive
               Adjusted            98.9        72.3       26.5
               Unadjusted          94.5        68.9       25.6
             Non-R&D intensive
               Adjusted            28.5        20.8       7.7
               Unadjusted          27.6        20.3       7.3
             IT producing
               Adjusted            146.0       93.7       52.4
               Unadjusted          142.3       92.0       50.4
             Non-IT producing
               Adjusted            26.8        20.5       6.3
               Unadjusted          25.5        19.6       6.0
             IT using
               Adjusted            73.9        51.0       22.9
               Unadjusted          72.5        50.6       21.9
             Non-IT using
               Adjusted            29.0        22.5       6.6
               Unadjusted          27.5        21.2       6.3




                                      31
                                                                     Figure 9 – Industries by IT producing and using intensity
                                                          (a) Formulary adjustments, IT producing                                               (b) Productivity growth, IT producing
                                                    4.5                                                                                   160
                                                                                                                                                                    Adjusted, IT producing
share of group's unadjusted value added (percent)




                                                    4.0                                                                                   140
                                                    3.5                                                                                   120                                       Unadjusted,
                                                                            IT producing                                                                                            IT producing
                                                    3.0                                                                                   100



                                                                                                                            log percent
                                                    2.5                                                                                    80
                                                    2.0                                                                                    60
                                                                                                  non-IT producing
                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                           40                       Adjusted, non-IT producing
                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                    Unadjusted, non-IT producing
                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                    0.0                                                                                          1995      2000     2005             2010          2015
                                                            1995     2000           2005               2010          2015

                                                           (c) Formulary adjustment, by IT using                                                (d) Productivity growth, by IT using
                                                    3.5                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                                                                              Adjusted, IT using
share of group's unadjusted value added (percent)




                                                                                                                                           70
                                                    3.0
                                                                                                                                           60                                       Unadjusted,
                                                    2.5                      non-IT using                                                                                           IT using
                                                                                                                                           50
                                                    2.0
                                                                                                                            log percent




                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                    Adjusted, non-IT using
                                                    1.5                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                    1.0                                                                                                             Unadjusted, non-IT using
                                                                                            IT using                                       10
                                                    0.5                                                                                     0

                                                    0.0                                                                                    10
                                                            1995     2000           2005               2010          2015                        1995      2000     2005             2010          2015




                                                                                                                       32
5     Foreign MNEs in the United States
Although the primary focus of this paper is the apportionment of the worldwide profits
of U.S.-owned MNEs, profit shifting by foreign-owned MNEs that operate affiliates in the
United States can also affect measures of U.S. production and labor productivity. If foreign-
owned MNEs shift profit out of the United States, this will reduce U.S. GDP and income
on FDIUS. The relationship between GDP, income on USDIA, and income on FDIUS can
be seen in (1).
    Ideally, we could apply the formulary apportionment method used for U.S.-owned
MNEs to foreign-owned MNEs operating in the United States and arrive at a measure of
the profit shifting by foreign MNEs. Data availability, however, poses difficulties. Whereas
the BEA direct investment surveys cover the worldwide operations of U.S.-owned MNEs,
BEA does not have legal authority to collect data on the worldwide operations of foreign-
owned MNEs that own U.S. affiliates. Creating a data set comparable to the one we use to
study U.S. MNEs requires combining BEA data on the U.S. operations of foreign MNEs
with data on the foreign MNEs’ worldwide operations from a commercial data set such
as Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis. A particularly challenging aspect of this work is creating a
match between companies in the two data sets. A common numeric identifier does not
exist in the two data sets, so the linking must be done by name matching, which, because
of inconsistencies and ambiguities in company names, is imperfect and time consuming.
    Nevertheless, to give a sense of the potential significance of profit shifting by foreign-
owned U.S. businesses, we develop a partial link between the BEA and Orbis data sets
for 2008, 2012, and 2015. Given our finding that R&D-intensive firms are most affected
by profit shifting, we construct a data set of large technology-intensive foreign-owned U.S.
businesses containing the data needed to conduct an apportionment exercise. These busi-
nesses account for about 40 percent of R&D spending by foreign-owned U.S. businesses
and about 13 percent of employment in all foreign-owned U.S. businesses. The scope of
our data set is summarized in Table VIII.
    In the data set we have been able to construct, we find evidence that foreign-owned
MNEs operating in the United States are shifting profits out of the United States. This
is evident in Figure 10a. On the vertical axis, we plot the reported U.S. share of world-
wide profits for each foreign-owned MNE in our sample. On the horizontal axis, we plot
the apportionment weight, (10), for the U.S. operations of each foreign-owned MNE.22
In our methodology, if there was no profit shifting, the two measures would fall on the
  22
     We use employee compensation and net plant, property, and equipment—equally weighted—as ap-
portionment factors.

                                              33
                                  Table VIII – Profit shifting

                                          FDIUS                                          USDIA
         Number of          Share of              Share of          Est. shifted       Est. shifted
           firms          R&D spending           employment         profit (bil.)      profit (bil.)
 2008        137                 0.45                 0.13               2.1               282.9
 2012        136                 0.43                 0.13              12.3               280.1
 2015        127                 0.32                 0.11               3.5                —
Notes: The column labeled “Share of R&D spending” is the share of R&D spending by foreign-owned
U.S. businesses, and the column labeled “Share of employment” is the share of total U.S. employment in
foreign-owned U.S. businesses.


45-degree line. In 2012 and 2008 (not reported), we find the U.S. share of profits is sig-
nificantly below the 45-degree line—particularly for MNEs with operations concentrated
in the United States. The locally weighted scatterplot (Lowess smoothed values) suggests
that, for foreign-owned businesses with less than 20 percent of their worldwide production
attributed to their U.S. operations, their U.S. profits are roughly proportional to their
attributed U.S. production. However, the U.S. profits of foreign-owned businesses with
20 percent or more of their worldwide production attributed to the United States are
significantly understated relative to their attributed production in the United States.
    Altogether, if the profits of these foreign-owned businesses were reattributed according
to the weighted apportionment factors, their U.S. profits would have been $12.3 billion
higher in 2012 and $2.1 billion higher in 2008. It is difficult to judge the magnitude of
these figures given the size of our data set, but it does suggest that foreign-owned MNEs
are shifting profit out of the United States.
    In the 2015 data, we find less evidence of foreign-MNEs shifting profit out of the United
States (Figure 10b). In this case, the firms in our sample have U.S. profit shares that are
roughly proportional to their attributed production shares. This result is consistent with
the increased efforts by revenue authorities in the United States to deter profit shifting,
but given the incomplete nature of our data, it is difficult to know the extent to which
this reflects a reduction in profit shifting by foreign MNEs or an implication of our sample.
Despite the tighter relationship between U.S. profit shares and U.S. apportionment weights,
our reapportionment adds about $3.5 billion to U.S. GDP in 2015.
   Overall, our analysis, incomplete as it is, suggests that profits of foreign-owned MNEs
are being shifted out of the United States. This implies that our findings from the U.S.
MNE data (Section 3) are the lower bounds of the measured slowdown of U.S. productivity
growth caused by offshore profit shifting.

                                                 34
                                                    Figure 10 – Foreign-owned MNEs operating in the United States
                                                              (a) 2012                                                                                                      (b) 2015

                                     0.7                                                                                                         0.7

                                     0.6                                   45-degree line                                                        0.6                                     45-degree line
    U.S. share of worldwide profit




                                                                                                                U.S. share of worldwide profit
                                     0.5                                                                                                         0.5

                                     0.4                                        OLS fitted value                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OLS fitted value
                                     0.3                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                         Lowess smoothed value
                                     0.2                                       Lowess smoothed value                                             0.2

                                     0.1                                                                                                         0.1

                                     0.0                                                                                                         0.0
                                       0.0    0.1     0.2        0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6       0.7                                         0.0      0.1     0.2        0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6       0.7
                                                            U.S. apportionment weight                                                                                     U.S. apportionment weight



                                                                                   Figure 11 – Trade balances
                                                    (a) Total trade balance                                                                              (b) Goods and services trade balances
                                     0.02                                                                                                        0.04

                                     0.01
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                                     0.00
                                                                                            adjusted                                             0.00
                                     0.01
share of gdp




                                                                                                             share of gdp




                                     0.02                                                                                                        0.02

                                     0.03
                                                                                                                                                 0.04
                                     0.04                                                                                                                    goods unadjusted
                                                                                                                                                 0.06        goods adjusted
                                     0.05                                    unadjusted                                                                      services, unadjusted
                                                                                                                                                             services, adjusted
                                     0.06                                                                                                        0.08
                                        1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                           1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015




6                                           Implications for Other Measurements
We have focused on the effects of profit shifting on U.S. productivity measurement, but the
adjustments we have computed will affect other measures as well. Here, we briefly discuss
some of these other measurements, which present interesting avenues for future research.

6.1                                          External Balances
In Section 2.2, we assumed that the income we reattribute to the United States is matched
with a flow of exports from the United States to the rest of the world. In the aggregate,

                                                                                                             35
the effect of our adjustment on the U.S. trade balance relative to GDP can be seen in
Figure 11a. The implied increase in exports makes the trade balance less negative. The
effect of the adjustment (the gap between the solid and dashed lines in Figure 11a) is very
small in the 1970s and stays small in the 1980s and 1990s (less than 0.5 percent of GDP),
but then grows rapidly after the turn of the 21st century. In 2014, the unadjusted trade
balance is –2.9 percent of GDP, and the adjusted trade balance is –1.3 percent of GDP.
    Our assumption is that the reattributed income is the result of intangible assets created
in the United States, so the exports would be classified as “charges for the use of intellectual
property” and counted as a service export from the United States. In Figure 11b, we plot
the trade balance for goods and services separately. Our adjustment does not change
the goods trade balance, so the only differences between the adjusted and unadjusted
goods trade-balance-to-GDP ratios are from changes to GDP in the adjusted measure.
Our adjustment makes the services trade balance more positive, and, as before, the effect
grows over time and especially rapidly in the 2000s. In 2014, the unadjusted services trade
balance is 1.5 percent of GDP, and the adjusted services trade balance is 3.1 percent of
GDP.
    These large effects of our adjustment on the trade balance raise a natural question:
What is the effect on the current account? As is evident from equation (1), our adjustment
decreases income on USDIA and increases exports of services by the same amount, leaving
the current account unchanged. One assumption behind this exact offsetting result that
leaves the current account intact is the treatment of interest payments between the parent
and affiliates, which are assumed to be unaffected by the adjustment in this calculation.
Bruner, Rassier, and Ruhl (2018) consider additional adjustments for these payments and
find a small, negative adjustment to the current account.23

6.2     Labor’s Share of Aggregate Income
A well-established empirical regularity during much of the 20th century is the lack of a time
trend in labor’s share of aggregate income. This relationship appeared so robust that it
became one of Kaldor’s balanced growth facts and a key feature that macroeconomic models
aimed to match. A number of recent studies, however, find that the labor share has been
declining in recent decades—especially since the early 2000s (Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson,
and Van Reenen, 2017; Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin, 2013; Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014).
The decline in the labor share has led to a surge in interest in the measurement of the
   23
      Bruner, Rassier, and Ruhl (2018) examine the effects of profit shifting on other parts of the U.S.
national accounts and balance of payments accounts. Their analysis is limited to a single year however,
whereas here we examine the entire path of adjustments going back to 1978.

                                                  36
                                          Figure 12 – Labor share in the United States
                                   0.76

                                                         unadjusted
                                   0.74

                                   0.72
                 share of income


                                   0.70
                                                        adjusted
                                   0.68

                                   0.66

                                   0.64
                                      1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


labor (and capital) share. Our adjustment to GDP has implications for this measurement
issue as well. It is worth noting that the income we reattribute to the United States is part
of domestic capital income (corporate profits), which has the effect of reducing the labor
share and raising the capital share.
    To quantify the magnitude of this effect, in Figure 12, we plot the unadjusted net
labor share of income for corporate business: employee compensation divided by net value
added.24 We also plot the adjusted net labor share: employee compensation divided by
the sum of net value added and our aggregate adjustment. As can be anticipated from
our previous findings, the adjustment grows over time and accelerates in the 2000s. The
unadjusted net labor share fell from 0.753 in 2001 to 0.662 in 2014, for a decline of 9.1
percentage points, whereas the adjusted labor share fell from 0.743 to 0.643 during the same
time, for a decline of 10.0 percentage points. Our adjustment also changes the shorter-run
dynamics of the labor share. For example, in 2008, the unadjusted series increases sharply,
suggesting that the preceding dip in 2006 was cyclical. The adjusted labor share tells
a different story: while there is an upward movement in 2008, the adjusted labor share
displays a strong downward trend.



   24
      This is one of the measures used by Bridgman (2017), who also demonstrates that the treatment of
depreciation and taxes affects the measured labor share. Our adjustment yields similar results regardless
of the measure considered.

                                                                   37
6.3     Other Measures
Our reattribution of income also implies that the return on U.S. foreign direct investment
abroad is lower than current measures suggest and—to the extent that foreign MNEs are
shifting profits out of the United States—the return on direct investment in the United
States is greater than current measures suggest.
    Lastly, a line of research has taken up the decline in the share of C corporations in total
net business income (Cooper, McClelland, Pearce, Prisinzano, Sullivan, Yagan, Zidar, and
Zwick, 2016; DeBacker and Prisinzano, 2015). To the extent that profit shifting is occurring
largely in C corporations, our adjustment may offset some of the decline in the prevalence
of C corporations.


7     Concluding Remarks
Using firm-level data on U.S. MNEs, we find increasing profit shifting activity by U.S.
MNEs, leading to low measured growth in GDP. Our adjustments mitigate the productiv-
ity slowdown reflected in official statistics. The adjustments raise aggregate productivity
growth rates by 0.09 percent annually from 1994 to 2004, by 0.24 percent annually from
2004 to 2008, and decrease productivity growth rates by 0.09 percent annually after 2008.25
While the effects on the measured slowdown seem to have subsided after 2008, the chal-
lenge itself still persists: from 2008 to 2014, official domestic business-sector value added in
the United States was, on average, more than 2 percent—about $260 billion—lower than
our adjusted measure. The measured slowdown is most pronounced in industries that are
R&D intensive or that produce information technology—the very industries that have been
singled out for being the most responsible for the aggregate productivity slowdown.
    The upward adjustments to U.S. value added imply downward adjustments to value
added in some other countries. For small countries with very low tax rates, such as Bermuda
and U.K.I., Caribbean, the adjustment is four to five times their annual GDP. Even for
some relatively large economies, such as Ireland and the Netherlands, the adjustments are
as large as 9–13 percent of their annual GDP.
    We also examine the other international component of the measured slowdown: profit
shifting by the U.S. subsidiaries of foreign MNEs. The data used to analyze these companies
are not as complete as the BEA survey data that we use for U.S. MNEs, so we are not
able to provide a definitive assessment. That said, our preliminary findings—especially
Figure 10—suggest a similar pattern. Further work on this topic is warranted.
   25
      It is not clear whether the apparent plateauing in profit shifting activity is related to corporate
inversions, which cause some firms to exit the BEA survey sample used in this paper.

                                                   38
References
Aeppel, T. (2015): “Silicon valley doesn’t believe U.S. productivity is down,” Wall Street
     Journal, July 17.
Alloway, T. (2015): “Goldman: how Grand Theft Auto explains one of the biggest
     mysteries of the U.S. economy,” Bloomberg Business, May 26.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017): “The
     fall of the labor share and the rise of superstar firms,” mimeo.
Avi-Yonah, R. S. (2010): “Between formulary apportionment and the OECD guidelines:
     a proposal for reconciliation,” World Tax Journal, 2(1), 3–18.
Avi-Yonah, R. S., and I. Benshalom (2011): “Formulary apportionment — myths
     and prospects,” World Tax Journal, 3(3), 371–399.
Avi-Yonah, R. S., and K. A. Clausing (2007): “Reforming corporate taxation in a
     global economy: a proposal to adopt formulary apportionment,” Hamilton Project
     Discussion Paper 2007-08, Brookings Institution.
Bergin, T., and K. Drawbaugh (2015): “How Pfizer has shifted U.S. profits overseas
     for years,” Reuters, November 16.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2012): “Americans do IT better: U.S.
     multinationals and the productivity miracle,” American Economic Review, 102(1),
     167–201.
Bose, A. K. (2002): “The effectiveness of using cost sharing arrangements as a mechanism
     to avoid intercompany transfer pricing issues with respect to intellectual property,”
     Virginia Tax Review, 21(4), 553–649.
Bridgman, B. (2017): “Is labor’s loss capital’s gain? Gross versus net labor shares,”
     Macroeconomic Dynamics, pp. 1–18.
Bruner, J., D. G. Rassier, and K. J. Ruhl (2018): “Multinational profit shifting and
     measures throughout economic accounts,” mimeo.
Brynjolfsson, E., and A. McAfee (2011): Race against the Machine: How the Digital
     Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Trans-
     forming Employment and the Economy. Digital Frontier Press.
Byrne, D. M., J. G. Fernald, and M. B. Reinsdorf (2016): “Does the United
     States have a productivity slowdown or a measurement problem?,” Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, Spring, 109–157.
Byrne, D. M., S. D. Oliner, and D. E. Sichel (2015): “How fast are semiconductor
     prices falling?,” NBER Working Paper 21074, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Clausing, K. A. (2016): “The effect of profit shifting on the corporate tax base in the


                                           39
     United States and beyond,” National Tax Journal, 69(4), 905–934.
Cooper, M., J. McClelland, J. Pearce, R. Prisinzano, J. Sullivan, D. Yagan,
     O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2016): “Business in the united states: who owns it and
     how much tax do they pay?,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 30(1), 91–128.
DeBacker, J. M., and R. Prisinzano (2015): “The rise of partnerships,” Tax Notes,
     147(13), 1563–1575.
Dharmapala, D. (2014): “What do we know about base erosion and profit shifting? A
     review of the empirical literature,” Fiscal Studies, 35(4), 421–448.
Elsby, M. W. L., B. Hobijn, and A. Sahin (2013): “The decline of the U.S. labor
     share,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 1–63.
Eurostat (2016): “Irish GDP revision,” cso.ie/en/media/csoie/newsevents/
     documents/EurostatIrishGDPcommunication.pdf.
Feldstein, M. (2015): “The U.S. underestimates growth,” Wall Street Journal, May 18.
Fernald, J. G. (2015): “Productivity and potential output before, during, and after the
     Great Recession,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, ed. by J. A. Parker, and
     M. Woodford, vol. 29, pp. 1–51. University of Chicago Press.
Foley, C. F., J. C. Hartzell, S. Titman, and G. Twitec (2007): “Why do firms
     hold so much cash? A tax based explanation,” Journal of Financial Economics,
     86(3), 579–607.
Fuest, C., T. Hemmelgarn, and F. Ramb (2007): “How would the introduction of an
     E.U.-wide formula apportionment affect the distribution and size of the corporate tax
     base? An analysis based on German multinationals,” International Tax and Public
     Finance, 14(5), 605–626.
Gresik, T. A. (2001): “The taxing task of taxing transnationals,” Journal of Economic
     Literature, 39(3), 800–838.
Grubert, H., and J. Mutti (1991): “Taxes, tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational
     corporate decision making,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 73(2), 285–293.
Hatzius, J., and K. Dawsey (2015): “Doing the sums on productivity paradox v2.0,”
     Goldman Sachs U.S. Economics Analyst, 15(30).
Hines, Jr, J. R., and E. M. Rice (1994): “Fiscal paradise: foreign tax havens and
     American business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1), 149–182.
Hymer, S. H. (1976): The International Operations of National Firms: A Study of Direct
     Foreign Investment. M.I.T. Press.
Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2014): “The global decline of the labor share,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.
Lev, B., and F. Gu (2016): The End of Accounting and the Path Forward for Investors


                                           40
     and Managers. John Wiley & Sons.
Lipsey, R. E. (2009): “Measuring international trade in services,” in International Trade
     in Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization, ed. by M. Reinsdorf, and M. J.
     Slaughter, pp. 27–74. University of Chicago Press.
         (2010): “Measuring the location of production in a world of intangible productive
     assets, FDI, and intrafirm trade,” Review of Income and Wealth, 56(1), S99–S110.
Maffini, G., and S. Mokkas (2011): “Profit shifting and measured productivity of
     multinational firms,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 73(1), 1–20.
Mokyr, J. (2014): “Secular stagnation? Not in your life,” in Secular Stagnation: Facts,
     Causes and Cures, ed. by C. Teulings, and R. Baldwin. CEPR Press.
Moylan, C. E., and C. A. Robbins (2007): “Research and Development Satellite
     Account Update,” Survey of Current Business, 87(10), 49–64.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2008a): OECD
     Benchmark Definition of Foreign Direct Investment. Organisation for Economic Co-
     operation and Development.
         (2008b): Report on the Attribution of Profits to Permanent Establishments. Or-
     ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Rassier, D. G. (2014): “Formulary measures for the U.S. current account: accounting
     for transactions attributable to special purpose entities of multinational enterprises,”
     Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 39(4), 257–281.
          (2017): “Improving the SNA treatment of multinational enterprises,” Review of
     Income and Wealth, pp. S287–S320.
Rassier, D. G., and J. Koncz-Bruner (2015): “A formulary approach for attributing
     measured production to foreign affiliates of U.S. parents,” in Measuring Globalization:
     Better Trade Statistics for Better Policy, ed. by S. N. Houseman, and M. J. Mandel,
     pp. 229–262. W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Runkel, M., and G. Schjelderup (2011): “The choice of apportionment factors under
     formula apportionment,” International Economic Review, 52(3), 913–934.
Sanchirico, C. W. (2015): “As American as Apple Inc.: international tax and ownership
     nationality,” Tax Law Review, 68(2), 207–274.
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs (2013):
     “Offshore Profit Shifting and the U.S. Tax Code: Hearings before the Committee
     on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, 113th Cong.,” Testimony of Stephen
     Shay, September 20.
Smith, N. (2015): “The Internet’s hidden wealth,” Bloomberg View, June 6.
Smyth, J. (2017): “Chevron settles landmark Australia case on transfer pricing,” Financial


                                             41
     Times, August 18.
Sullivan and Cromwell, LLP (2011): “Transfer pricing developments – cost sharing
     arrangements,” December 28.
Syverson, C. (2016): “Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the U.S. pro-
     ductivity slowdown,” NBER Working Paper 21974, National Bureau of Economic
     Research.
United Nations (2015): Guide to Measuring Global Production. United Nations.
United Nations, Eurostat, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation
     and Development (2011): The Impact of Globalization on National Accounts.
     United Nations.
U.S. Department of the Treasury (2007): “Report to the Congress on Earnings
     Stripping, Transfer Pricing, and US Income Tax Treaties,” November.




                                       42
A     Data appendix

A.1     Data and variable construction details
Data sources and productivity series
We construct annual and cumulative series of labor productivity growth for 1973–2014.
We use annual domestic business sector data published by the U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) and by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to construct unadjusted
series. The BEA data include aggregate value added in the national income and product
accounts (NIPAs) and value added by industry in the Industry Economic Accounts (IEAs)
for the entire period 1973–2014. The BLS data include, from the Labor Productivity and
Costs (LPC) database, aggregate number of hours worked for 1973–2014 and number of
hours worked by industry for 1987–2014. We also use annual data for transactions in
income on direct investment published by BEA in the International Transactions Accounts
(ITAs), which are available for 1982–2014. In addition, we use annual survey-level data
collected by BEA on MNEs for 1982–2014 to construct an adjustment series based on
the formulary framework outlined in Section 2.3. We construct aggregate adjusted and
unadjusted productivity growth series that are consistent with Fernald (2015), and we also
construct adjusted and unadjusted productivity growth series grouped by R&D-intensive
industries and IT-intensive industries in order to more clearly observe the effects of our
adjustments for transactions in direct investment income attributable to intangible capital.
    The NIPA data and the IEA data are current as of the annual revision of the NIPAs
released on July 30, 2015. The LPC data we use were released on June 4, 2015. The ITA
data are current as of the annual revision of the ITAs released on June 18, 2015. The MNE
survey data we use include surveys conducted for 1982, 1989, and 1994–2014.
   The NIPA data and the IEA data that we use include real and nominal measures. We
use real measures to construct growth rates for the unadjusted series, and we use nominal
measures deflated to real measures to construct growth rates for the adjusted series. Real
measures from both the NIPAs and the IEAs are based on a chained Fisher formula with a
base year of 2009. We deflate nominal measures using either an actual or implicit deflator in
cases of business-sector aggregates or industry groups for which actual or implicit deflators
are available. In cases of industry groups for which actual or implicit deflators are not
published, we calculate growth rates using a Törnqvist formula.
    While the productivity series span 1973–2014, the survey-level data are only available
for 1982–2014. Furthermore, some requisite survey-level data on U.S. parents were not

                                             43
collected for 1983–1988 and 1990–1993. However, aggregate statistics on transactions in
income (i.e., direct investment income and portfolio income) are available for all years.
Thus, we extrapolate backward the nominal adjustment prior to 1982 using the aggregate
statistics as an indicator. In addition, we linearly interpolate the nominal adjustment for
1983–1988 and 1990–1993.
Aggregate unadjusted series with business-sector data
Aggregate business-sector value added published in the NIPAs includes nominal value
added published in NIPA table 1.3.5 and real value added published in NIPA table 1.3.6,
which yield an implicit deflator for business-sector value added. We derive an implied
aggregate nominal income-based measure of business-sector value added by subtracting
nominal expenditure-based value added for the non-business sector published in NIPA ta-
ble 1.3.5 from aggregate nominal income-based GDP published in NIPA table 1.10. We
deflate the implied aggregate nominal income-based measure using the implicit deflator
for business-sector value added. Thus, aggregate business-sector value added includes a
real expenditure-based measure and a real income-based measure from which we generate
separate growth rates and then average across the expenditure- and income-based mea-
sures. We then subtract the growth in the number of hours worked from the growth
in value added to construct annual and cumulative unadjusted series of aggregate labor
productivity growth.
Aggregate adjusted series with business-sector data
We apply survey-level data collected by BEA on MNEs to (12). The survey-level data
include financial and operating activities based on income statement information and bal-
ance sheet information reported for U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates on U.S. direct
investment abroad (USDIA). Depending on the year, the data are reported on either the
Annual Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (form BE-11) or the Benchmark Survey
of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (form BE-10).
    The survey-level data provide a source for apportionment factors on U.S. parents and
foreign affiliates. The apportionment factors include compensation and unaffiliated sales.
In addition, the survey-level data provide a source for earnings reported on U.S. parents
and foreign affiliates and provide a source for the U.S. parent’s reported voting interest in
a foreign affiliate. We infer a parent’s share of a foreign affiliate’s earnings under separate
accounting by multiplying earnings reported for the foreign affiliate by the U.S. parent’s
reported voting interest.
   We generate an adjustment for aggregate nominal expenditure-based business-sector
value added and for our implied aggregate nominal income-based business-sector value

                                              44
added by aggregating the survey-level adjustments obtained from (12). We then deflate
the adjusted nominal measures using the implicit deflator for business-sector value added
and construct annual and cumulative adjusted series of aggregate labor productivity growth
by averaging across the adjusted expenditure- and income-based measures and then sub-
tracting the same growth in the number of hours worked that we used in the unadjusted
aggregate series.
R&D intensity and IT intensity
The survey-level data allow us to calculate R&D intensity and IT intensity at the firm level
(i.e., U.S. parents and foreign affiliates for a given U.S. MNE). We calculate R&D intensity
by dividing firm-level R&D expenditures aggregated across all available years by firm-
level unaffiliated sales aggregated across all available years. We consider R&D-intensive
firms and industries to be those with R&D intensity at or above the 75th percentile. We
calculate IT intensity separately based on IT usage and IT production. IT-using firms are
determined by the proportion of unaffiliated sales generated by entities within a firm that
are classified to industries characterized as IT using in Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen
(2012). IT-producing firms are determined by the proportion of unaffiliated sales generated
by entities within a firm that are classified to industries characterized as IT producing in
Fernald (2015). In each case, IT-using firms and IT-producing firms include firms with
an unaffiliated sales proportion greater than 50 percent. Using the survey-level data, we
apply adjustments for R&D-intensive firms and IT-intensive firms to the industry-level
data to construct the adjusted labor productivity growth series for comparison with the
unadjusted series.
Unadjusted series
Value added by industry published in the IEAs includes nominal and real measures as well
as the related chained Fisher price indexes. We generate the growth in unadjusted real
value added separately for industries grouped by R&D intensity and IT intensity using
the Törnqvist formula. We also generate the growth in the number of hours worked for
each group of industries. We then subtract the growth in the number of hours worked
from the Törnqvist growth in unadjusted real value added to construct separate annual
and cumulative unadjusted series of labor productivity growth for R&D industries, non-
R&D industries, IT-using industries, non-IT-using industries, IT-producing industries, and
non-IT-producing industries.
Adjusted series
We adjust nominal value added for industries grouped by R&D intensity and IT intensity.
We generate separate adjustments for R&D-intensive industries and IT-intensive industries

                                            45
by first applying the survey-level data collected by BEA on MNEs to (12) and then aggre-
gating the survey-level adjustments for R&D-intensive firms, IT-using firms, IT-producing
firms, and the respective residual firms. We then generate the growth in adjusted nominal
value added for each group of industries, and we also generate the growth in prices for each
group using the Törnqvist formula. We subtract the growth in prices from the growth in
adjusted nominal value added to derive the growth in adjusted real value added. Finally, we
subtract the same growth in number of hours worked that we used in the unadjusted series
from the growth in adjusted real value added to construct separate annual and cumulative
adjusted series of labor productivity growth for R&D industries, non-R&D industries, IT-
using industries, non-IT-using industries, IT-producing industries, and non-IT-producing
industries.

A.2     Price index adjustments
In our analysis above, we deflate the sum of nominal value added and the nominal ad-
justment by the value added price deflator. If the industrial composition of the nominal
adjustment varied significantly from the composition of value added, the value added price
deflator may not be appropriate. To address this concern, we construct a Törnqvist price
index using the domestic value added data and a Törnqvist price index using the sum
of domestic value added and our adjustment. We report the difference between the two
indexes in Figure A.2.
    The two price indexes are very similar. In absolute value, the two indexes do not differ
by more than five basis points. While the industrial composition of the adjustment is
different from the composition of aggregate value added, the difference does not change
the industry weights in the price index enough to have an appreciable impact.




                                            46
      Figure A.1 – Aggregate adjustment under alternative profit definition

                                    300

                                    250
     billion USD (2009 base year)



                                    200

                                    150

                                                                Earning type
                                    100                         profit measure


                                     50                                     Value-added type
                                                                            profit measure
                                     0
                                     1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

Figure A.2 – Deflator for value added minus the deflator for adjusted value added

                                     3

                                     2

                                     1

                                     0
     basis points




                                     1

                                     2

                                     3

                                     4

                                     5
                                    1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                                                           47
B      Figures and tables

                                 Table B.1 – Industry groupings

               NAICS Codes Description
 R&D Intensive 325         Chemical Manufacturing
               334         Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
               336         Transportation and Equipment Manufacturing
               511         Publishers
               5415        Computer Systems Design
               5417        Scientific R&D Services

 IT Producing        334                Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
                     51                 Information
                     5415               Computer Systems Design

 IT Using            315                Apparel Manufacturing
                     333                Machinery Manufacturing
                     335                Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component Man.
                     336                Transportation and Equipment Manufacturing
                     337                Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
                     339                Miscellaneous Manufacturing
                     42                 Wholesale Trade
                     44-45              Retail Trade
                     51                 Information
                     532                Rental and Leasing Services
                     5417               Scientific R&D Services
Notes: The IT-producing classification is from Fernald (2015). The IT-using classification is from Bloom,
Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012). The R&D classification is from Moylan and Robbins (2007). ISIC or SIC
codes have been converted to the NAICS-based ISI classification used by BEA in its surveys of MNEs.




                                                   48
Figure B.1 – Industry group shares of total gross output
                                                                       (a) By R&D intensity
                                                          1.0




            share of total business-sector gross output
                                                          0.8                            non-R&D intensive


                                                          0.6


                                                          0.4


                                                          0.2                              R&D intensive


                                                          0.0
                                                            1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                     (b) By IT-using intensity
                                                          1.0
            share of total business-sector gross output




                                                          0.8
                                                                                         non-IT using

                                                          0.6


                                                          0.4

                                                                                           IT using
                                                          0.2


                                                          0.0
                                                            1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                   (c) By IT-producing intensity
                                                    1.0
     share of total business-sector gross output




                                                                                         non-IT producing
                                                    0.8


                                                    0.6


                                                    0.4


                                                    0.2
                                                                                          IT producing

                                                    0.0
                                                      1970           1980      1990     2000             2010

                                                                                49
Figure B.2 – Industry group shares of total value added
                                                                      (a) By R&D intensity
                                                         1.0




            share of total business-sector value added
                                                         0.8                             non-R&D intensive


                                                         0.6


                                                         0.4


                                                         0.2                              R&D intensive


                                                         0.0
                                                           1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                    (b) By IT-using intensity
                                                         1.0
            share of total business-sector value added




                                                         0.8
                                                                                         non-IT using
                                                         0.6


                                                         0.4
                                                                                          IT using
                                                         0.2


                                                         0.0
                                                           1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                  (c) By IT-producing intensity
                                                   1.0
     share of total business-sector value added




                                                                                        non-IT producing
                                                   0.8


                                                   0.6


                                                   0.4


                                                   0.2
                                                                                         IT producing

                                                   0.0
                                                     1970           1980      1990      2000            2010

                                                                               50
Figure B.3 – Industry group shares of total hours worked
                                                                       (a) By R&D intensity
                                                          1.0




            share of total business-sector hours worked
                                                                                          non-R&D intensive
                                                          0.8


                                                          0.6


                                                          0.4


                                                          0.2
                                                                                           R&D intensive
                                                          0.0
                                                            1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                     (b) By IT-using intensity
                                                          1.0
            share of total business-sector hours worked




                                                          0.8                             non-IT using


                                                          0.6


                                                          0.4

                                                                                           IT using
                                                          0.2


                                                          0.0
                                                            1970     1980      1990      2000            2010


                                                                   (c) By IT-producing intensity
                                                    1.0
     share of total business-sector hours worked




                                                                                         non-IT producing
                                                    0.8


                                                    0.6


                                                    0.4


                                                    0.2
                                                                                          IT producing

                                                    0.0
                                                      1970           1980      1990      2000            2010

                                                                                51
C     Profit shifting strategies of MNEs
Intangible assets have long been a defining feature of multinational enterprises (MNEs).
Hymer (1976, pp. 42–43) is widely acknowledged as the first scholar to recognize that
domestic firms venture abroad to exploit their proprietary intangible assets (such as patents
and brand recognition) and that it is the market power from those assets that allows these
firms to overcome the liability of foreignness and to operate abroad successfully. What
is unique about the last few decades is that the importance of intangible assets in firms’
balance sheets has been growing at an accelerating rate. Data in Lev and Gu (2016, p.
82) show that the contribution of investment in intangible assets to production grew at
roughly a 1.1 percent annual rate in 1977–1994 compared with a 1.4 percent annual rate in
1994–2011. This rise in the importance of intangible assets has created an extra incentive
for U.S. MNEs to shift the ownership of their intangible assets to foreign affiliates in tax
haven countries to reduce their global tax liability.
    U.S. tax laws regarding the intrafirm transfer of intangible assets are long-standing,
but the codification and enforcement of those laws have become a major focus of both
the IRS and the corporate sector in the last few decades. Current guidelines covering the
intrafirm transfer of intangible assets are covered by Section 482 of the U.S. tax code. Bose
(2002) notes that these guidelines have existed in some form ever since the creation of the
IRS in 1917 but that, in the last few decades, firms have tried to develop tax strategies
that exploit ambiguities in those guidelines and the IRS has, in turn, tried to tighten its
guidelines to eliminate ambiguity. The original guiding principle for U.S. tax treatment
of the transfer of intangible assets came out of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. That Act
amended Section 482 to require that when intangible assets are transferred between units
of an MNE, the receiving unit must pay a price to the providing unit that is commensurate
with the expected income from that asset.

C.1     Cost sharing agreements
Firms can structure an intrafirm transfer of intangible assets in different ways, but one
of the most common legal structures is a cost sharing agreement (CSA). In a CSA, one
geographic unit of an MNE—typically a foreign affiliate in a tax haven country—shares the
cost of developing a new technology with its U.S. parent and, in return, is granted rights to
royalties on a portion of the sales of products or services using that technology. Under IRS
guidelines, the foreign affiliate cannot be granted royalties on sales in the United States,
so the affiliate is typically granted rights to royalties on sales in the rest of the world.
    IRS guidelines on CSAs have been updated several times since the 1986 Act. In 1995,

                                             52
the idea of a “buy-in payment” was introduced to account for the value of preexisting
technology that could be embedded in a new technology governed by a CSA. In 2005, the
idea of a “platform contribution” was introduced to account for the value of other U.S.
headquarters services that could be embedded in a product or service whose technology
was governed by a CSA. These contributions could include services such as “resources, ca-
pabilities, or rights, such as expertise in decision-making concerning research and product
development, manufacturing or marketing intangibles or services, and management over-
sight and direction.” The IRS codified the 2005 guidance on CSAs in its 2008 Temporary
Regulations and its 2011 Final Regulations. In testimony to the Senate in 2013, Harvard
law professor Stephen Shay described the pre-2011 regulations as “much more relaxed” than
the post-2011 regulations (Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Af-
fairs, 2013). This comment suggests that the combined IRS guidance on “buy-in payments”
and “platform contributions” gradually made it much more difficult for MNEs to use CSAs
to transfer intangible assets over the 2005–2011 period.

C.2     Deferral and hybrid entities
Prior to the December 2017 tax reform, U.S.-based businesses were subject to a world-
wide tax system rather than a territorial tax system so that their worldwide profits were
essentially taxed at the U.S. statutory rate. On the face of it, this principle would seem
to eliminate the advantage of moving intangible assets (and their associated income) to
tax havens. However, there were exceptions to the general principle. One exception was
that foreign-sourced income was generally not taxed until it was repatriated to the United
States, as long as it was actively invested abroad. One way for MNEs to indefinitely defer
U.S. taxation was to declare foreign earnings as “permanently reinvested” abroad.
    The difference between the pre-reform 35 percent corporate statutory federal income
tax rate in the United States and the 12.5 percent rate in Ireland, for example, should have
been incentive enough for U.S. MNEs to seek to shift profits offshore, but there could be
even further inducements, such as hybrid entities. A hybrid entity is a unit of an MNE that
is recognized by the tax authority of its home or host country but not recognized by the
tax authority of the other country. Through the creation of complex holding structures,
MNEs have, at times, been able to exploit differences in the pre-reform tax rules to create
foreign entities that were essentially stateless and therefore free from tax. One of these
structures, spanning an ownership chain that crosses the United States, Bermuda, Ireland,
and the Netherlands, is known as the “double Irish with a Dutch sandwich” strategy. In
October of 2014, however, Ireland changed its tax laws to eliminate this loophole.


                                            53
