                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CONCEPTS AND MEASURES OF FEDERAL
                           DEFICITS AND DEBT AND THEIR
                           IMPACT ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITY




                                Michael J. Boskin




                             Working Paper No. 2332




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




This paper draws heavily on the material developed for my project on more com-
prehensive and comprehensible federal government financial statements. I am
grateful to John M. Roberts and Brad Barham for their valuable research assistance,
to participants at the lEA Conference for valuable coments and suggestions,
and to the Stanford University Center for Economic Policy Research for financial
support of this research. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2332
                                                August 1987


            Concepts and Measures of Federal Deficits and Debt
                   and Their Impact on Economic Activity


                                 ABSTRACT



     This paper introduces extensions of the National Income Accounts to
include a consistent treatment of consumer durables and government capital
in the measurement of consumption and income, and explicitly tests
alternative propositions concerning the effects of government financial
policy on real economic activity.
     The paper discusses adjustments to various measures of the budget
deficit, national debt, or government "net worth". These include separating
government tangible investment from consumption, accounting for government
financial assets, inflation adjustments, etc.           -

     The most important results estimate consumption functions in which
government consumption is subtracted from income. I take this to be more in
the spirit of the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis, asking: Given the level
of government consumption, would a shift from tax to debt finance alter
consumption? The various measures of the deficit produce virtually
identical results in their impact on consumption: a tax cut holding
government consumption constant, unambiguously increases consumption
substantially, about 40 cents on the dollar.
     Estimating separate coefficients on private wealth, net of government
bonds and on private holdings of government bonds, yields a coefficient on
government bonds virtually identical to that of regular private wealth,
rather than zero as would be the case under Ricardian equivalence. The
estimates of the net impact of Social Security wealth are consistent with
recent research suggesting that the propensity to consume out of Social
Security wealth is about half that of regular private wealth. The estimated
impact of changes in net government explicit assets - - the value of
government tangible capital over and above regular debt - - again is quite
similar to the propensity to consume out of private wealth. This would
suggest that government tangible assets substitute for private saving.
     Reduced form estimates are presented on the impact of federal deficits
on the composition of GNP. Various specifications lead to the conclusion
that a $1 increase in the deficit, controlling for the level of economic
activity, appear to be associated with about a 30 cent increase in private
saving, about a 35 cent decrease in domestic investment and about a 25 cent
decrease in net foreign investment.
     Thus, the results reported in the paper, using alternative concepts and
measures of deficits and debt tend to confirm the proposition that
government deficits affect real economic activity.

                                            Michael J. Boskin
                                            NBER
                                            204 Junipero Serra Blvd.
                                            Stanford, CA 94305

                                            (415) 326—5682
1.   Introduction

     The relationship between budget deficits or public debt and real

economic activity has sparked a tremendous debate. For example, various

strands of thought argue that deficits are 1) inflationary, 2) expan-

sionary, 3) alter the composition of output away from investment and net

exports, or 4) do not matter. The mechanisms by which these effects

occur are also widely debated.

     The purpose of this paper is two-fold. First, drawing on a major

research project that I have been engaged in for the last few years, on a

more comprehensive and comprehensible set of accounts for the federal

government of the United States, I wish to highlight movements in various

components of spending, deficits, and debt, including items which are

excluded in the traditional figures. I will also discuss how various major

excluded items may affect real economic activity, evaluating the evidence

(where it exists), and discussing the avenues by which real activity may be

affected. In fact, it is likely that examining deficits or debt, as

traditionally measured,1 can be quite misleading, whether or not one views

the private sector as seeing through "the government veil".

     Second, we will present some new evidence on the likely impact of

deficits and debt, and alternative measures of them, on real economic

activity, primarily consumption and the composition of output.

     Toward this end, Section 2 will present a cursory review of the




1. An exciting recent development is the attempt by various government
agencies to provide more comprehensive data than that traditionally
used.




                                      1
discussion of the economic effects of deficits and debt. It is not meant to

be exhaustive, but merely illustrative of the theoretical and empirical

research in recent years on the subject. We find Barro's Ricardian

equivalence conjecture, while an important caveat to the traditional

treatment, to rest on several assumptions which are likely to be violated in

the real world, e.g., non-distortionary taxation and equal rates of discount

in the private and public sectors. Further, a recent careful test by Boskin

and Kotlikoff strongly rejects an implication of the debt neutrality

hypothesis, namely that the age distribution of resources does not affect

aggregate consumption.

     However, most studies (with a few important exceptions) focus on

officially reported nominal budget deficits. These would closely resemble

the difference between real accrued government spending and real accrued

government revenue only by accident. Various adjustments, ranging from

correction for the endogeneity of income and the inflation erosion of the

real value of the previously issued national debt, to inclusion of a

substantial number of excluded items in the official accounts, to

distinguishing between government investment and government consumption, are

likely to lead to major problems in interpretating the effects of deficits.

For example, Japan has had substantial budget deficits as a fraction of CNP

for the last few years, but the fact is that the Japanese government is

really a large net saver, i.e., government consumption in Japan is

substantially less than revenues because the Japanese government is a large

net investor. Thus, the conceptual experiments one has in mind in

discussing the likely effects of deficits or debt on the level or

composition of real economic activity must be carefully specified. Further,

we have virtually no evidence on whether changes in the various components

which comprise a sensibly measured deficit symmetrically affect consumption,



                                      2
investment or net exports.

     Section 3 discusses the major adjustments that one might make. We

remain agnostic as to whether there is a "correct" budget deficit, or a

"correct" national debt, or a ttcorrect government net worth". The nature of

the budget deficit, debt or net worth measure one wishes to use depends

heavily upon the types of questions that one may wish to ask, one's view of

the nature of the economy under study, and on empirical information

concerning the likely differential impacts of various components in a fully

adjusted deficit or debt or net worth figure. This section highlights the

difference between government consumption and investment, and therefore, the

relationship between deficits and government saving or dissaving. High

employment or income endogeneity adjusted measures of the deficit (as

stressed by De Leeuw and Holloway (1983)), inflation adjustment (as stressed

so forcefully by Eisner and Pieper (1984) and Miller (1984)), Social

Security unfunded liabilities (as stressed by Feldstein (1974) and others),

government lending and guarantees (stressed by Boskin, et al (1984)), land

and mineral rights (as developed by Boskin, et al, (1985)), federal, and

state and local, government investment in tangible capital (stressed by

Boskin, Robinson, and Roberts (1986) and Eisner and Pieper (1984)), are also

discussed. The vastly different measures of deficits, debt, and the

debt/GNP ratio or deficit/GNP ratio, often changing signs as well as varying

amounts, under alternative concepts are discussed. Specific examples are

presented from the United States.

     Section 4 presents some preliminary empirical results on the effects of

deficits, debt, and their components on real economic activity. We conclude

that government financial policy may well affect real economic activity in

various ways.




                                     3
     Finally, we conclude the discussion with an agenda for future research.




2.   A Cursory Literature Review

A.   Measurement and Analysis of Deficits and the National Debt

     Before discussing the potential economic effects of deficits and the

national debt, it is important to realize that measuring, let alone

forecasting, deficits and debt in the U.S. is not an easy task. For

example, large numbers of items are excluded by law from the federal budget,

various other federal government accounting procedures are not consistent

with the general notion of accrual accounting, separate capital and current

services accounting, and adjusting from par to market valuations.2 Thus,

for example, when we had a large defense build-down under President Carter,

it was partially disguised by the fact that new investment in military

hardware was falling short of the depreciation and obsolescence of the

exisiting capital stock. Or, note that in 1980 the $59 billion nominal

federal government deficit was offset by a still larger decline in the

inflation-adjusted value of the previously issued national debt held by the

public! Further, it is often the case that the combined state and local

government sector of the United States runs a substantial surplus. We

discuss some recent attempts to measure these effects in Section 3.

     Further, deficits do not measure government dissaving. Goverment

saving, Sg is the difference between tax (or other) revenue, T, and

government consumption, C. Thus,



2. See Michael J. Boskin, "Federal Government Deficits: Some Myths and
Realities," American Economic Review, May 1982, and his forthcoming The
Real Federal Budget, Harvard University Press.




                                     4
(1) S
        g
            —   T-C.g
     If government consumption (including consumption of government fixed

capital and durables) falls short of total government spending by a

sufficient amount, government saving could be positive despite a deficit,

e.g., there could be substantial net government investment.

     Indeed, in the world's second largest economy, Japan, which is also the

largest supplier of capital to the world capital market, the government

sector has been a large net saver despite large deficits for many years.

Table 1 presents national saving, private saving, government saving,

investment and deficits for the U.S. and Japan annually for 1970-84. These

data are adjusted to include purchases of consumer durables and government

capital as saving and the rental flow from these items as consumption and

income. Even the U.S. occasionally has had a substantial level of

government saving despite a large combined federal and state and local

government deficit. What should we make of this? Clearly, the economic

impact of the current deficit depends heavily upon the nature of the

substitutability or complementarity of private and public consumption and

investment. Without a full specification of these factors, the impact of

the deficit may range from increasing to decreasing private consumption,

saving or investment.




3. These issues are recognized by researchers with mutually exclusive views
on the impact of deficits and debt. See Barro (1985) and Feldstein
(1982), as important examples.




                                      5
A Simple Analysis

      Ultimately, at full employment, large deficits, net of the interest

component (the so-called primary deficit) run continuously for a very long

period must be inflationary. To see this, the following equations indicate

where the ratio of privately held national debt is headed given large
                                                                                p
deficits as a share of GNP (net of the interest component) and real interest

rate and growth rate scenarios.

      Let D represent the debt/GNP ratio, d the deficit (net of interest)/GNP

ratio, r the real interest rate, g growth of real GNP. Then, by definition



(2)           =
                  dt +   (r   -
                                  g)dt

for a fiscal program with constant d, and constant r and g, D will evolve

toward an equilibrium D (if g > r) of



           De =          d
(3)
                    g-r

The ratio of the federal government debt to GNP evolves through time

depending upon this primary deficit and the relation between the real rate

of interest and the growth rate. For example, if we start out with a

positive national debt, and the real interest paid on the national debt

exceeds the growth rate, then the interest payments will grow more rapidly

than the CNP, and if nothing else has changed, eventually the interest

payments will consume all of the budget, then all of GNP, then all of

national wealth in an explosive pattern. In the more usual case of the

growth rate exceeding the rate of interest the ratio of debt to GNP will

evolve according to the equation above.

      Table 2 presents some estimates of two recent major fiscal episodes in



                                         6
the United States. First, we see the substantial increase in the

equilibrium debt/GNP ratio toward which we were headed if fiscal policy had

not been changed, in the 1975-79 period, a period generally regarded as the

beginning of the increase of the ratio of debt to GNP after the substantial

postwar decline in this ratio. The second, and more important for our

purposes, is where we were headed in the early Reagan Administration years.

We can see that under the 1983-4 projections, the ratio of debt to CNP was

heading toward an equilibrium which is many times, not only current GNP, but

the ratio of the entire value of the capital stock of the United States to

GNP. This latter number is around 3, so it is clear that either the private

sector would have to increase its wealth/income ratio by an enormous

increase in saving, or the rest of the world will have to buy up Treasury

bills, or if neither of these alternatives is available and current fiscal

policies persist for the indefinite future, the Federal Reserve will have to

buy up the bonds as the lender of last resort, thereby eventually inflating

the economy. Can we reasonably expect foreigners to continue to finance our

deficits ad infinitum? It would be imprudent to operate on the assumption

that this was possible, let alone desirable. Eventually, foreign firms and

individuals will have a progressively higher fraction of their wealth in

dollar-denominated assets, which will mean that further increases in dollar-

denominated assets will be even riskier for them. Thus, we can expect the

flow of foreign capital into the United States, ceteris paribus, to slow

down and real interest rates to rise. Nor Is such a huge increase in our

saving rate as to increase the capital/output ratio by such a large amount

likely. In short, the recent fiscal policy was eventually either

inflationary or unsustainable. Fortunately, in the last two budget cycles,

substantial reductions have occurred in (primarily military) spending




                                      7
growth, and it is likely that the danger of an explosion in the debt/GNP
                 4
ratio is over.

     Deficits or government debt may affect the real economy at less

pernicious levels than just mentioned. While virtually all economists agree

that an increase in government spending - -   at   least if it is unanticipated -

- may affect real output and its composition,5 the effects of a tax cut

given government spending are more controversial. Certainly, the dampening

effects of monetary feedbacks through higher real interest rates, reduced

real money balances and changes in portfolio composition and also currency

appreciation and net exports are by now well recognized (see Feldstein

(1982, 1986), for example). However, recently, several economists have

revived the notion that debt and taxes are equivalent and that government

deficits therefore have no effect in aggregate demand. The argument is by

now so well known that I will merely summarize it here. Each extra dollar

of national debt must eventually be repaid or serviced by interest payments

with a present value of a dollar. Thus, there is no change in the present

value of tax liabilities and private net wealth, so real decisions are

unaffected.

     Public debt policy, or intergenerational transfers towards older

generations, can be and has been conducted in quite subtle ways. The

unfunded financing of the U.S. Social Security System is by now a well

understood, if nonetheless quite subtle, debt policy (Feldstein (1974)).



4. This simple analysis is in the spirit of the more detailed models
presented in Buiter (1983) and Sargent and Wallace (1981).

5. See Barro (1985) and Brunner (1985). Barro focuses on temporary
increases in government spending above trend or permanent levels,
increasing interest rates and signalling the private sector to consume
less and produce more.




                                      8
Less well understood debt policies are changes in the tax structure that

shift the burden of taxation from older to younger age groups (Summers

(1981), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (l983a)) and changes in tax provisions that

raise market values of financial assets and, thereby, transfer resources to

older age groups who are the primary owners of such assets (Feldstein

(1977), Summers (1987)). An example of the former type of policy is

switching from income taxation to wage taxation. An example of the latter

policy is reducing investment incentives (Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983b)).

Since investment incentives in the U.S. are effectively provided only to new

investment, old capital, capital that has been fully or partially written

off, sells at a discount reflecting the differential tax treatment. A

reduction in investment incentives means a smaller discount and a capital

gain to owners of old capital. Younger and future generations are worse off

as a result of such policies because they must now pay higher prices to

acquire claims to the economy's capital stock.

     In addition to these more subtle mechanisms of transferring to older

generations, governments can engage in debt policies by reducing taxes

levied on current generations and raising taxes levied on future

generations. Intergenerational redistribution of this variety may eventuate

in larger officially reported deficits. An example in which even this more

obvious form of redistribution does not necessarily alter official

calculations is when such tax cuts and tax increases are coincident,

respectively, with equivalent reductions and increases in the level of

government consumption.

     The fact that very significant intergenerational redistribution can be

run without its ever showing up on government books suggest that officially

reported deficits are at best a very poor indicator of underlying public




                                      9
debt policies.6 This proposition notwithstanding, there has been an

enormous public interest, especially in recent years, in officially reported

deficits. Curiously, public attention has focused only on a subset of

official liabilities of the federal government and has essentially ignored

both the official assets of the federal government and the the official

assets and liabilities of state and local governments. As discussed by

Boskin (1982, 1987), Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987), Eisner and Pieper

(1984), and the 1982 Economic Report of the President, the market value of

the U.S. federal government's official assets may currently equal if not

exceed the market value of its official liabilities.

     In light of the very significant if not overwhelming difficulties of

gauging the extent of true debt policies from official reports, it seems

safer to assess debt policy by asking the following question: were the

lifetime budget constraints of older generations expanded significantly as a

consequence of government policy at the expense of contracted budget

constraints for young and future generations? One might point, in this

context, to the enormous expansion of the social security system which

greatly increased the budget opportunities of the elderly. The problem,

however, with considering any one component of government policy is that it



6. Boskin (1982), and Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985) provide extensive discussions
of the failure of officially recorded debt to measure underlying
redistribution to older generations. One might argue that zero
intergenerational transfers is an objective benchmark. There are at least
two problems with such a benchmark. First, distinguishing negative
intergenerational transfers from taxes required to finance government
consumption is inherently somewhat arbitrary. Second, past
intergenerational transfers imply (require) offsetting current or future
intergeneration transfers. Hence, taking zero intergenerational transfers
as the benchmark requires considering a world in which intergenerational
transfers in the past had always been zero.




                                      10
may have been instituted to offset some other component; i.e., the postwar

redistribution through social security to the elderly may simply represent

the government's way of compensating the elderly for higher income taxes

over their lifetimes or for their contribution to the nation during World

War II. Just as there is no single correct way to measure official

deficits, there is no single correct way of posing counterfactuals about

observed government transfer policies. To put this point differently,

intergenerational redistribution must always be assessed relative to some

benchmark, and the choice of a benchmark seems inherently subjective. The

implication of this point is that any calculation of the magnitude of

intergenerational transfers will be somewhat arbitrary.

     It is instructive to examine the likely effects of federal government

deficits on the composition of GNP by examining the actual correlation

between changes in the deficit and various components of CNP.

     Since the federal government deficit is just the difference between

federal government spending and taxes, it must equal the sum of private

saving, and the state and local surplus, less domestic investment and net

foreign investment. Simply put, if the level of GNP is held constant (the

deficit may affect the level of CNP but we are concerned here with its

composition) increases in the deficits must crowd out something. Will they

lead to increased private saving or decreased domestic investment? Less net

foreign investment (i.e., more foreign capital inflows)? A provocative, but

preliminary, analysis by Summers (1986) suggests that budget deficits call

forth increased private saving of about 30 cents per dollar of deficit.

This results from a combination of extra saving for future tax liabilities

resulting from the deficits, the sensitivity of savings to higher real

interest rates caused by deficits, and/or the crowding out of consumer




                                     11
durable expenditures due to higher interest rates. In addition, he

estimates that deficits crowd out net exports by attracting foreign capital,

in this case, about 25 cents on the dollar. He also estimates about a 5

cent increase per dollar of deficit in state and local surpluses, and a 40

cents per dollar decrease in net investment. Further, of course, the net

business investment must be separated from residential investment which is

crowded out at about 20 cents on the dollar. These estimates are highly

preliminary and subject to many statistical problems.7

       The two leading theories of private saving behavior are the pure life

cycle theory of Modigliani/Brumberg/Ando (1954 and 1963) and the

intergenerational altruism model of Barro (1974). In the former, government

debt decreases private saving and in the latter it has no effect.

       Various studies have attempted to demonstrate that life cycle behavior

can explain several important phenomena concerning aggregate wealth

accumulation in the United States (see Tobin (1967)). More recently, there

has been an attack on the pure life cycle model (no bequest, average

propensity to consume over the lifetime of one) by a variety of authors.

For example, Kotlikoff and Sununers (1981) conclude that life cycle saving

can account for only about 20 percent of the aggregate wealth in the United

States. Unfortunately, a mathematical error in their derivation of the

formulae is part of the explanation for their result, and corrected, the

numbers would be about 50 percent. This is still a telling indictment of

the extreme version of the life cycle hypothesis.

       There have also been a number of studies attempting to examine the



7. Tanzi (1983) presents evidence of the effects of U.S. fiscal deficits on
interest rates which would support this effect on the composition of
GNP.




                                        12
extent of dissaving after retirement. For example, Michael Darby (1978)

demonstrated, using longitudinal household data, that there was surprisingly

little dissaving post-retirement, and concluded these results were

incompatible with the pure life cycle hypothesis. Mirer (1979), David and

Menchik (1980), and King and Dicks-Mireaux (1982) also find either no

dissaving or too little dissaving after retirement to be consistent with the

pure life cycle model.

     In recent work, Bernheim (1984) and Diamond and Hausman (1984), using

panel data, do observe dissaving after retirement. In an important study

just completed, Hurd (1986) makes several methodological and data

improvments (e.g., a ten-year longitudinal panel study rather than a cross-

section or shorter panel), and his conclusion is that the dis saving pattern

of the elderly is quite consistent with the pure life-cycle model. Further,

tests for a bequest motive show no evidence of one.

     Rejection of the pure form of the life cycle model should not be taken

to mean that there is no consumption smoothing over the life cycle, or that

the propensity to consume is independent of age. It is the rejection of the

assumption that the average propensity to consume over the lifetime is one,

and that there is no bequest motive (even accounting for the fact that an

uncertain date of death may require very slow dissaving in the absence of

actuarially fair annuities).

     A variety of studies presume the pure form of the life cycle theory in

analyses of public policy. We shall comment on several below, but it is

important to point out that one of the major conclusions from the pure life

cycle model is that public debt - -   explicit   or implicit - -   crowds   out

private saving, and ultimately, therefore, capital formation. In an

alternative model proposed by Barro (1974), extending work of Baily (1961),




                                         13
and dating all the way back to Ricardo, a Say's law of public finance is

developed in which increases in the supply of public debt call forth an

increased demand for it.8 The argument is simply that in a world where

there are intergenerational altruism and operative bequest motives - -    as
well as many other assumptions such as lump sum finance, etc. - -   the   private

sector can undo the government's attempt to redistribute resources across

generations. The assumptions for this result to hold are quite

restrictive.9 The two least resonable assumptions required for the results

to hold are non-distortionary taxation and equal discounting of public and

private decision makers. The latter stems from the linking of all

generations due to children's utility appearing as an argument in the

parent's utility function. Thus, private decision makers act as if they are

an infinitely lived dynasty, ignoring the mortality probabilities which

would normally be added to subjective discount rates.

     Many studies have tried to analyse the effect of some measure of

deficits or public debt on consumption (e.g., Koremendi (1983), Feldstein

(1982), Barth, et.al., (1984) and the studies cited therein) or of unfunded

liabilities in Social Security on the consumption/saving choice (see

Feldstein (1974), Barro (1978), Feldstein and Pellechio (1979) among many).

The conclusions are somewhat mixed. I believe that an accurate summary of

the econometric literature is that Feldstein's original dollar for dollar

estimate of the substitution of unfunded Social Security liabilities or

public debt for private saving has been revised to 25 to 50 cents on the




8. Also see Kochin (1974) and Tanner (1979).

9. An excellent discussion of these points may be found in the paper by J.
Stiglitz in this volume.




                                      14
dollar and that the statistical evidence concerning the effects of deficits

is mixed, but on balance suggests that (correctly measured) deficits do

matter.

     Since concepts such as deficits, public debt and unfunded Social

Security liabilities are subject to vagaries of accounting procedures, more

direct tests of the intergenerational altruism model are possible. To see

this, note that in the intergenerational altruism model       aggregate

consumption depends only on aggregate resources, not on their age

distribution. This forms the basis for the test developed by Boskin and

Kotlikoff (1985). We develop a finite approximation to the

intergenerational optimization problem for Barro-type behavior under

earnings and rate of return uncertainty, and demographic change, for the

U.S. economy, and test whether, given the level of consumption predicted by

this model, variables measuring the age distribution of resources influence

actual consumption. Data on the age distribution of resources is obtained

from the annual Current Population Surveys. The results, presented in a

variety of forms using various measures of the age distribution of

resources, reject the hypothesis that aggregate consumption is independent

of the age distribution of resources. They therefore cast considerable

doubt on the pure intergenerational altruism model and on the contention

that government debt policy --   explicit   or implicit -- does not affect the

consumption/saving choice.

     Thus, neither the pure life cycle model nor the pure intergenerational

altruism model seems sufficient to explain aggregate saving behavior or the

effects of policy on saving. Undoubtedly, different people in the economy

could be described in their saving behavior by different models, including a

Keynesian liquidity constraint consumption/saving model, and the convex

combination that results in aggregate saving is some complicated combination



                                       15
of these models.

     I do believe that it is important to realize, however, that there are

substantial differences in the propensity to consume by age, some lifetime

smoothing, and substantial bequests in aggregate capital formation. Thus,

elements of both the bequest model and the original pure life cycle model

are important in explaining saving behavior, despite the fact that each of

the models in its most pure form is rejected in the data.

     Finally, the results of Eisner and Pieper (1984) and Feldstein (1982)

suggest that deficits, particularly when adjusted for measurement problems

such as those due to inflation, lead to an increase in aggregate demand and

real GNP. While I have mentioned above several caveats to this story

limiting the likely size of the impact of a pro-deficit tax cut on real CNP,

it is important to point out that some fiscal stimulus still remains after

one has made all these adjustments. Further, it should be realized that the

debt neutrality hypothesis assumes a given level of government spending. An

increase in government expenditures is likely to raise total aggregate

demand somewhat, (the extent depending upon the nature of monetary policy)

and therefore can affect interest rates as well.

      In summary, it should not be surprising that there are many avenues by

which deficits, government spending, and various forms of taxes can affect

interest rates and the composition of CNP, as well as the level and growth

rate of nominal GNP and its division into real and inflation components.

However, the alleged "bang-for-the-buck" in fiscal stimulus is undoubtedly

much less than had been supposed by the closed economy Keynesian finetuners

who dominated economic policymaking in the l960s and l970s.




                                      16
3.   The Potential Significance of Various Adlustments to Measures of
Federal and State and Local Government Deficits, Debt, and/or Net Worth

     As discussed above, the impact of government budget deficits or debt

may well depend on the nature of the spending programs (e.g., whether they

are consumption or investment), revenues (especially the effective marginal

tax rates on various factors of supply and commodity demands), and on items

traditionally not measured in U.S. government budgets, especially the

federal budget. To repeat, few would argue with the proposition that

changes in the real value of government purchases of goods and services may

affect economic activity, especially if they are unanticipated. Even those

working in the rational expectations tradition believe that a temporary

increase in government spending above its expected or trend value will lead

to a rise in interest rates, a postponement of consumption, and increased

short-run supply. It is often the case that government investment is

financed by borrowing, especially at the state and local level in the United

States. However, the Ricardian equivalence theorem is most readily seen as

applying to changes in the mix of tax and debt finance, given a certain

level of government consumption, rather than government spending. This is

because for a given level of government spending, changes in the mix between

consumption and investment may send very different signals to the private

sector concerning future income and tax liabilities. For example, a

temporary public sector investment boom (such as the building of the

interstate highway system in the United States) may signal increased

productivity and a subsequent decline, ceteris paribus, in future taxes

below what they otherwise would have been, if the investment is not financed

completely by borrowing. Further, it is now widely recognized that

government consumption may either be a substitute or a complement to private

consumption, and through this mechanism may alter private consumption and



                                      17
saving (e.g., see for example Feldstein (1982), Barro (1985)).

     The purpose of this section is to discuss recent attempts to measure

various components of a more complete balance sheet for the federal

government, and various attempts to provide better measures of deficits,

debt, assets, investment, and consumption. The various attempts discussed

here are only a subset of those that have been made. This is partly because

some of the papers I will mention draw on the careful data work of others.

To economize on space, I will not go into detail on the latter, but these

authors do not get the credit they deserve for attempting to rework the

basic data more carefully)0

     This section is divided into four parts. First, we discuss various

issues in measuring government assets. Second, we discuss various

attempts to get more comprehensive or economically meaningful measures

of government deficits, debt, and net debt, and the potential problems as

well as advantages thereof. Third, we discuss and present evidence on a net

worth concept for the government sector. It is unclear whether those who

have attempted to generate greater information on goverment assets and

liabilities really believe that a net worth variable is the appropriate one

(whether adjusted for inflation or cyclical conditions) to enter as a

measure of the government's economic impact. Eisner and Pieper (1984) tend

to hint at this, but it is my opinion that such estimates are useful

primarily to provide measures of national wealth and to place concern about

government liabilities in better perspective.

     Finally, the last subsection discusses reasons why addition across



10. See the references in Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987), and Eisner and
Pieper (1984) for examples.




                                      18
various types of spending, revenues, assets, or liabilities, may be

inappropriate. Not only are different components subject to wide variations

in their reliability, but fully rational forward looking behavior would

account for the differential riskiness of the various components with regard

to expected future government consumption, impact on private productivity,

and likely future tax liabilities in assessing real private permanent net-

of-tax income. Nor is it correct that one should discount the various

components by different risk-adjusted rates. This is correct only in cases

where the differential risk involves mortality probabilities. Instead, a

risk charge (or bonus if the riskiness is negatively correlated with other

components of income) should be applied to the various components in each

period before discounting. Perhaps this is harping since the degree of

rationality and foresight involved is even less obviously reasonable than

that attributable to the basic Ricardian equivalence proposition.

     A.   Government Assets

     Various recent studies have attempted to document the quantitative

importance of government assets (e.g., Hulten (1982); Boskin, Robinson, and

Roberts (1985); Eisner and Pieper (1984); Boskin, Robinson, Kumar and

O'Reilly (1985); Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987)). Federal, and state and

local, governments in the United States own   substantial   amounts of land,

mineral rights, buildings, inventories, equipment, gold, and other financial

assets. The Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Division's National Balance

Sheets for the United States estimate various components (Federal Reserve

(1985)). The U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis

publishes detailed estimates of federal, state and local government capital

stocks, investment, and depreciation (BEA (1984)). These data form the

starting point for many attempts to expand upon or improve, these data.




                                      19
There are problems with these initial attempts to measure government assets,

but they represent an important and under utilized resource, and attempts to

improve upon them should not lose sight of this fact. For example, the FED

records the value of bonds (whether assets or liabilities) at par; the BEA

uses depreciation methods which would only approximate economic depreciation

by accident, etc. Whether using the FED or BEA numbers or attempts to

improve upon them (such as in Boskin, Robinson, and Huber (1987)), the

conclusion seems to be that, until recently, federal government assets

substantially exceeded regular federal government liabilities (additional

federal government liabilities will be discussed below). Table 3 provides

some data from my work in this regard. It compares federal, state and local

government tangible capital with their outstanding debt. The development of

these estimates of federal, state and local net investment and net capital

differ from the BEA estimates and attempts to incorporate improved measures

of economic depreciation based on estimates of used asset prices. They are

far from definitive, but in general, they exceed the BEA estimates by about

20%. Figure 1 portrays pictorially that despite the recent explosion in

federal government official debt, federal and state and local tangible

capital apparently exceeds the corresponding official obligations by a

substantial amount.

     There are additional problems in measuring assets. Loans made by the

government to the private sector are carried on the books as assets. But a

very poor treatment of the market value of such loans is included. In fact,

the budgetary process makes no attempt to reserve for bad loans, and hence,

grossly overstates the market value of federal government accummulated loans

(to be disussed further below).

     One of the most important assets held by the federal government is the

substantial amount of land and mineral rights. In a recent paper (Boskin,



                                      20
Robinson, Kumar and O'Reilly (1985)), I estimated the market value of the

federal government's oil and natural gas rights to exceed $500 billion as of

1981. Of course, the federal government debt held by the public has doubled

since then, and oil and gas prices have plummetted. Still, the value of

these resources are substantial. Table 4 highlights that in several recent

years the change in the value of oil and gas rights held by the federal

government exceeded the nominal deficit.11

     Federal government assets or changes in their value may affect the

real economy in a variety of ways. A large increase in the value of

mineral rights, for example, may imply substantial increases in future

revenue from royalties and bonuses. This may signal either an increase in

government investment or consumption, or a tax decrease is in the offing.

National wealth will have increased. It is unlikely, of course, that

private consumers will respond instantaneously to changes in these values

and in corresponding forecasts of expected future changes in fiscal

variables. But eventually, there will be potential substantial changes in

taxes due to swings in the value in mineral rights affecting private

decision making. We are unused to thinking of this on the national level

in the United States despite the fact that income from mineral rights is

the second largest revenue source (after taxes) for the federal government.

But the states of Alaska and Texas have had their state fiscal policies

dominated by oil and gas revenues. Of course, there are several nations

whose fiscal policy is primarily driven by oil revenues.



11. The basic estimates in Boskin, Robinson, O'Reilly and Kumar (1985) are
derived from a model of expected present value of bonuses and royalty
payments on economically recoverable reserves as estimated by the U.S.
Geological Service, both on and off shore. See the paper for details.




                                     21
    B.          Debt and Deficits

    A variety of adjustments should be made in examining debt and deficits,

depending upon the use one wishes to make of these figures. Attempts to

measure national wealth or the sectoral balance sheets for the federal

government certainly should include an inflation and par to market

adjustment of outstanding liabilities (Eisner and Pieper (1984), Miller

(1984)). While a standardized employment, high employment, or mid-expansion

path adjusted deficit may be used to correct for the endogeneity of

spending, and especially revenue, due to cyclical conditions (as discussed

in Dc Leeuw and Holloway (1983)), the construction of such a series is

subject to substantial disagreement concerning the appropriate employment

benchmark. There can be no doubt that correcting for income endogeneity is

potentially important, but the recent upward revision of the high employment

rate to 6% from slightly over 5% suggests that even the government

statisticians disagree on the exact formulation of the high employment
           12
concept.

     The use of an inflation-adjusted deficit either by itself or in

conjunction with a cyclically adjusted deficit to measure the short-run

impact of fiscal policy on the real economy has been proposed and

implemented, for example, by Eisner and Pieper (1984). While the inflation-

adjusted measures appear to provide a better explanation than the nominal




12. Other problems with this concept exist. For example, the change in
unemployment contemplated may bring with it a host of other changes
(e.g., in inflation) that may affect the size of the deficit.




                                      22
figures, inflation-adjusted deficits - -   the   deficit less the decline in the

real value of the previously issued national debt held by the public - -

presumes that consumers are rational and foresightful enough to calculate

this decline in the real value of their wealth and respond to it in exactly

the same way as other components of wealth changes. The effect of the

decline in the real value of the previously issued debt on the real economy

depends heavily upon the extent to which investors realize this decline and

adjust to it completely by restoring their real portfolio positions (for

mixed reactions to this proposition, see Cagan (1983)). I present some

evidence on this issue below.

     There are a variety of other items excluded from the official deficit

and debt figures. For example, the federal government guarantees a

substantial amount of lending and is subject to future payment to cover

default. In either a market clearing or credit rationing regime (a la

Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)), the likely effect of federal loans and

guarantees on real investment depends upon the elasticity of the supply of

funds into the system, the marginal source of finance, the nature and number

of loan programs, etc., (Gale (1986)). Table 5b presents some recent data on

loans and loan guarantees outstanding and new commitments thereof. In

previous work (Eoskin, Barham, Ozler, and Cone (1987)), we estimated that

each dollar of new loan guarantee commitment carried with it an expected

present value of future expenditures of about 12 cents.

     Deposit insurance operates in a similar manner. While deposit

insurance provides various types of benefits, the institutional arrangements

in the United States generate a situation where banks have a put option on

the FDIC and excessive risk is probably incurred because of the lack of

risk-related premiums. A sensible forward looking budget document would

treat deposit insurance (and by analogy, other types of loan guarantees and



                                       23
lending programs) with a forward looking bad debt reserve reserve (see

Boskin, Barham, Ozler, and Cone (1987)).

     Perhaps the most important, if controversial, liabilities involve

future unfunded expected benefits in Social Security and related retirement

programs, such as civil service retirement, military retirement, state and

local government retirement, Medicare, etc. The excess of the present value

of expected benefits over the expected present value of tax revenue under

the Social Security Administration actuaries intermediate assumptions over

the next 75 years is presented in Table 5a, as augmented in Boskin (1986).

Clearly, these sums are enormous. Something will undoubtedly have to be

done about Social Security and Medicare. The 1983 Amendments to Social

Security were a major step in this regard reducing by almost two trillion

dollars the actuarial deficit in the retirement and disability part of the

program. Since then, the deficit has increased to about a quarter of its

previous level based on changes in assumptions and events. But there is a

much larger deficit in Medicare, amounting to several times the regular

national debt.   I know of no explicit tests of the likely impact of the

Medicare program on consumption and saving decisions, but there are

certainly a variety of ways in which it could affect those decisions.

Provision of such insurance may decrease the precautionary incentive to

save, and Medicare provides insurance against the most important risk faced

by the elderly --   ill-health   and substantial medical expenditures. In any

event, as discussed above, the empirical evidence of the effects of Social

Security on the consumption/saving choice is somewhat mixed, although I tend

to side with those that contend Social Security's unfunded obligations have

had about one-quarter to one-half dollar per dollar offset on private

saving. Consider the 1983 Social Security Amendments. These decreased the




                                         24
unfunded actuarial debt in Social Security retirement and disability program

by almost two trillion dollars. If it is true that Social Security wealth

offsets private saving, we should have seen a substantial plunge in

consumption and increase in saving pursuant to this enormous decline. But

it is perhaps reasonable to expect that it will take years for people to

understand fully that taxes will increase and benefits decrease via a

gradual increase in the age of eligibility for full retirement benefits.

Also, in the United States, we face the virtually unprecedented scenario of

the retirement and disability programs building up a trust fund from 1990 to

2020 which will approach the value of the regular national debt (see Boskin

(1986)). While this is currently forecast, I do not know of anyone who

really expects it to happen. It is likely that the Social Security

retirement surplus will be used to bail out Medicare, to raise benefits, or

to reduce taxes (see Boskin (1987) for a discussion of the potential impact

of these financing alternatives on national saving). Thus, the signals are

mixed, but the discreet change in the Social Security laws enacted in 1983

have far greater potential impact on the lifetime resources of persons below

the age of 45 than the much more hotly debated tax reforms currently under

consideration (see Boskin, Kotlikoff, Puffert and Shoven (1987)).

     C.   Net Worth

     Government net worth is a concept that has been used to parallel the

balance sheet for private companies. Certainly, the federal government

accounting procedures would be illegal if used in the private sector and

would produce some very strange results on private balance sheets and

profit/loss statements. But governments are not firms. They can print

money, borrow, and tax, in a manner that private firms cannot. While some

people would argue these privileges can be abused and at times they have

been, how does one value the right or option to exercise them? Further,



                                      25
while the goverplnent sector's net worth is a concept relevant to measures of

national wealth, particularly in modern times when the government sector is

a non-triviaifraction of the entire economy, it is unclear that any

addition of assets and subtraction of all liabilities to get a net worth

figure would leave one with a measure that has any significance for short or

long-term real economic activity.

     There are a variety of problems with the net worth figure as a measure

of the government's net economic impact or changes in net worth as a similar

measure. As noted above, different components of assets and liabilities may

affect the real economy differently. This may be because of differential

risks involved in future revenues or consumption resulting from assets,

payments resulting from liabilities, and the differential correlation of

these components with other components of income in the private sector; the

ability of the private sector to measure and analyze the fiscal signal that

is being sent by various changes in the asset or liability side or

correspondingly on the spending or revenue or borrowing side of the

government budget. In fact, if we want to take it to its logical

conclusion, rational consumers will be forming expectations not only on

their future incomes, but also of the entire stream of future government

consumption, investment, taxation, and borrowing. Changes in government

spending, taxes, transfers, borrowing, or the values of various assets and

liabilities may change that subjective distribution and that change may be

based on the entire previous history of these variables (contrary to some

recent specifications of consumption behavior). Thus, government net worth

estimates, despite their measurement problems, appear to be most valuable to

provide some indication of the relative importance of government debt and

improved measures of national wealth. They are unlikely to replace deficit,




                                      26
debt, and/or their composition, or changes therein as sensible measures of

fiscal impact.

     D.   Government Consumption and Investment

     Finally, it is important to distinguish between government consumption

and investment. Government consumption may substitute or complement private

consumption and therefore, a dollar increase in government consumption,

leading to a dollar increase in government deficit, may have opposite

effects on private consumption, private saving, and national saving,

depending upon the substitutability or complementarity of private

consumption and government consumption. Government investment may be

temporary, such as building an infrastructure (maintaining it should be much

less costly than building it in the first place), etc. This may signal a

decline in future taxes if the government investment is not fully debt

financed, or it may signal the early stages of an increased round of

expanded government consumption. We really have very little evidence upon

which to evaluate these matters, but the private sector's perception of them

can be important with regard to how changes in government spending - -

especially   unanticipated ones - -   affect   the real economy. Figure 2 presents

an interesting pictorial comparison of the recent history of the

relationship between government net investment and deficits in the United

States. As can be seen, the government sector in the United States is

sometimes a net saver when it is running deficits, since its net investment

exceeds the value of those deficits.

     With these provisos, and the cursory survey of recent attempts to

expand and improve measures of government financial statements and fiscal

impacts in mind, let us turn to some new evidence concerning the impact of

fiscal policy on the real economy.




                                          27
increased government spending on consumption since disposable income is

being held constant. Alternatively, a one dollar cut in taxes would have

several effects. It would increase the deficit by a dollar and directly

decrease consumer spending by 22 cents, but also raise disposable income

sufficiently to increase consumption by 75 cents, increase saving

substantially, and eventually increase consumption through the increased

wealth. Of particular interest is the fact that alternatIve measures of

the deficit, cyclically adjusted (equation 6), the real deficit, accounting

for the decline in the real value of the previously issued national debt

(equation 7) and the real cyclically adjusted deficit combining these two

effects (equation 8), produce coefficients which are extremely small and

statistically insignificant.

     However, equations 9) -   12),   probably the most important findings

presented here, come to quite different conclusions. Here, rather than

subtracting taxes from income as a measure of disposable income, we

subtract government consumption. This is much more in the spirit of the

Ricardian equivalence hypothesis and we are basically asking: given the

level of government consumption, what would a shift from tax to debt

finance (or vice versa) do to consumption? With these improved measures of

consumption and income, and the better specification of the income

variables given the Ricardian equivalence proposition, all four measures of

the deficit produced virtually identical results in their impact on

consumption. The tax cut, holding government consumption constant

unambiguously increases consumption substantially, about 30 to 40 cents on

the dollar. Each of the equations perform quite well by traditional

summary measures. The propensities to consume out of private wealth

increase to about 0.04, whereas the propensity to consume out of expanded

income less government consumption (a concept not usually mentioned nor



                                         30
directly comparable to that of disposable income) is about 0.5. The size,

statistical significance, and robustness to alternative specifications of

the deficits are a strong rejection of the proposition that government

financial policy is irrelevant.

     Table 8 presents alternative estimates of expanded fiscal impacts on

consumer expenditures. Equation 13) nets out government bonds from private

wealth, treating them in full accord with Ricardian equivalence as if they

are not a part of private wealth and estimates a separate coefficient on

government wealth holdings (note that since we keep a separate sectoral

account for the government, these are treated as liabilities, and therefore

their sign would be opposite to what one would normally expect). Once this

is done, the estimated coefficients on the regular private wealth term and

the government bond term are virtually identical, and while the former is

quite statistically significant, the latter is marginally so. Again, it

appears as if bonds are perceived as private wealth. The other features of

the equations remain quite robust, with a marginal propensity to consume of

about 0.7 out of short-run income and about .03 out of wealth.

     Equation 14) tries to estimate the impact of Social Security wealth.

Various authors have concluded that Social Security wealth offsets private

saving dollar for dollar and should be treated like other government

obligations. The results reported here with our augmented definitions of

income, including the substantial revisions in the Social Security wealth

series pursuant to the 1983 Amendments for the last couple of years in the

sample, still leave us with a propensity to consume out of Social Security

wealth of about 2 cents on the dollar, about half of that relative to

private wealth. Thus, this is consistent with the notion that there is some

offset to private saving caused by Social Security, but substantially less




                                      31
than dollar for dollar.

     Finally, equation 15) reports an expanded definition of government

capital. We examine the potential impact on private consumption of the

value of government tangible capital over government regular debt. The

propensity to consume out of what might be called net government explicit

assets is about 0.04, quite similar to the propensity to consume out of

private wealth found in other specifications, but slightly larger than the

propensity to consume out of private wealth in this specification. This

would suggest that government tangible assets, i.e., government saving, is a

substitute for private saving and allows individuals to expand their

consumption. The propensity to consume continues to hover around the 0.7
                                                 -

range.

     Table 9 reports results examining the effects of deficits, variously

defined, on the composition of CNP. From the national income identity,

changes in the federal deficit must show up as changes in net foreign

investment, domestic investment, private saving, or the state and local

surplus. These equations regress these variables as shares of GNP on a

constant, a measure of the federal deficit, and to control for the cycle,

current and lagged capacity utilization. The sample period is 1952-84, but

in equations 5) and 10), I estimate separate coefficients on the deficits

for the periods 1952-72 and 1973-84 to examine the impact of deficits on net

foreign investment in the flexible exchange rate period. Each of the

specifications suggests that deficits have powerful impacts on the

composition of GNP given the level of GNP. Each $1 increase in the federal

deficit appears to be associated with about a 30 cent increase in private

saving, about a 35 cent decrease in domestic investment, and about a 25 cent

decrease in net foreign investment. These results are similar to those

reported by Summers (1986).



                                     32
     While this is a reduced form of a larger structural model, and we

should not overstate the explanatory power of these results, they do suggest

that the debt versus tax finance decision, and/or government spending

decisions can substantially affect the composition of GNP.




5.   Conclusion

     Despite theoretical and empirical controversies and alternative

interpretation of historical episodes, the analysis and results reported

above tend to confirm that fiscal policy can affect real economic activity.

We discussed numerous avenues by which these effects occur, and that broad

aggregates, especially the officially reported nominal aggregates, may be

quite misleading in measuring either short-run fiscal stimulus or long-run

effects on the composition of output.

     The major contribution of the paper is to introduce extensions of the

national income accounts to include a consistent treatment of consumer

durables and government capital in the measure of consumption and income,

updating the data (relative to previous studies) by several years, a period

of substantial swings in the relevant variables, and explicitly testing

alternative propositions concerning the effects of government financial

policy on real economic activity. By far the most important conclusion is

that holding government consumption constant, deficits appear to increase

private consumption. Numerous explanations of this result are possible, and

I do not distinguish among them, e.g., liquidity constraints, myopia, fiscal

signals, etc. Further, the impact of increases in federal deficits on the

composition of GNP, given GNP, is a modest increase in private saving and a

substantial decrease in domestic investment and net foreign investment

(i.e., increase in net inflow of capital).



                                        33
    Much of the work alluded to or briefly summarized in this paper is

still in progress. Indeed, the substantial attention being placed on

improved measures of government fiscal activity attests to its potential

importance.




                                     34
                               References

Auerbach, A.J., and L.J. Kotlikoff, "National Savings, Economic Welfare,
and the Structure of Taxation," in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax
Policy Analysis, edited by M. Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, l983a, pp. 459-93.

__________________________________ "Investment Versus Saving
Incentives: The Biggest Bang for the Buck and the Potential for Self-
Financing Business Tax Cuts," The Economic Consequences of Government
Deficits, edited by L. H. Meyer, Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing,
1983b, pp. 121-54.

__________________________________ "An Examination of Empirical Tests
of Social Security and Savings," in Social Policy Evaluation: An
Economic Perspective, edited by E. Helpman, et. al., Academic Press,
l983c.

Bailey, M., National Income and the Price Level, McGraw Hill, New York,
1962.

Barro, R., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of Political
Economy, 1975.

_____________ The Impact of Social Security on Private Savings
Washington, American Enterprise Institute, 1978.

               "Output Effects of Government Purchases," Journal of
Political Economy, December 1981, 89, 1086-1121.

____________   "Government Spending, Interest rates, Prices and Budget
Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1730-1918," Rochester Center for
Economic Research Working Paper, No. 1.

Barro, R., and C. Sahasakul, "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate
from the Individual Income Tax," Journal of Business, vol. 56, no. 4,
1983, pp. 419-452.

Barth, James R., George Iden, and Frank S. Russek, "Do Federal Deficits
Really Matter," Contemporary Policy Issues Vol. III, Fall 1984-85, pp.
79-95.

Bernheim, D., "Dissaving After Retirement", National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 1409, July 1984.

Blinder, A., R.H. Gordon and D.E. Wise "Social Security, Bequests and
the Life Cycle Theory of Savings: Cross-Sectional Tests", National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No 619, 1980.

Blinder, A., and Robert M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?," Journal
of Public Economics, November 1973, 2, 319-37.

Boskin, M.J., "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of
Political Economy, April 1978, vol. 86, no. 2, Part 2, pp. 3-27.




                                     35
__________   ttFederal Government Deficits: Some Myths and Realities,"
American Economic Review, May 1982.


__________ Too Many Promises: The Uncertain Future of Social
Security, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1986.

__________ The Real Federal Budget, forthcoming, Harvard University
Press, 1987.

___________ "Future Social Security Financing Alternatives and National
Saving," NBER Working Paper No. 2256, 1987, forthcoming in S. Wachter, ed.,
Financing Retirement in the 21st Century, D.C. Heath & Co.

Boskin, M., Barham, B., Cone, K. and Ozler, S., "The Federal Budget and
Federal Insurance Programs," in M. Boskin, ed., Modern Developments in
Public Finance, Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Boskin, M., and M. Hurd, "The Effect of Social Security on Retirement in
the Early l970s," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1984.

Boskin, M., and L. Kotlikoff, "Public Dept and U.S. Saving: A New Test
of the Neutrality Hypothesis," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series,
Summer 1985.

Boskin, M., and L. Kotlikoff, D. Puffert and J. Shoven, "Social
Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations," National Tax
Journal, March 1987.

Boskin, M., and Roberts, J., "A Closer Look at Saving Rates in the U.S.
and Japan," AEI, 1986.

Boskin, M., and Robinson, M., "The Value of Federal Mineral Rights:
Correction and Update," forthcoming American Economic Review, 1987.

Boskin, M., Robinson, M., and Huber, A., "Government Saving, Capital
Formation and Wealth in the United States, 1947-1985," NBER Working Paper,
1987, forthcoming in R. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds., The Measurement of
Saving, Investment and Wealth, NBER and Univ. of Chicago Press.

Boskin, M., Robinson, M., and Roberts, J., "New Estimates of Federal
Government Tangible Capital and Net Investment," NBER Working Paper, No.
1774, 1985.

Boskin, M., Robinson, M., O'Reilly, T, and Kumar, P., "New Estimates of
the Value of Federal Mineral Rights and Land," AER, December 1985, Vol.
75.

Buiter, Willem H., "Measurement of the Public Sector Deficit and Its
Implications for Policy Evaluation and Design," IMF Staff Papers, June
1983, 30, 306-349.

Buiter, Willem H., and James Tobin, ""Debt Neutrality: A Brief Review
of Doctrine and Evidience," in Social Security versus Private Saving,
George M. von Furstenberg (ed.), Ballinger Publishing Co., 1980, 39-63.



                                     36
Brunner, K., "Fiscal Policy in Macro Theory: A Survey and Evaluation,tt A
conference on "the Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy Debate," October, 1984.

Cagan, P., "The Real Federal Deficit and Financial Markets," The
Economist, Nov. 1981.

Darby, M.R., The Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital
Stock, Washington, American Enterprise Institute, 1979.

David, M., and P. Menchik, "The Effect of Income Distribution and
Redistribution on Lifetime Saving and Bequests," University of Wisconsin
Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper No. 582, 1980.

DeLeeuw, Frank and Thomas M. Holloway, "The Measurement and Significance
of the Cyclically-Adjusted Federal Budget," Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking.

Diamand, P., and J. Hausman, "Individual Retirement and Savings
Behavior," Journal of Public Economics, 23, 81-114, 1984.

Eisner, R., How Real Is the Federal Deficit?, Free Press, 1986.

Eisner, R., and P.J. Pieper, "A New View of the Federal Debt and Budget
Deficits", American Economic Review, 74, pp.11-20 March 1984.

Feldstein, M., "Budget Deficits and the Dollar," NBER Working Paper,
1986.

Feldstein, M., "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand," Journal of
Monetary Economics, January 1982.

___________   "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate
Capital Accumulation, Journal of Political Economy, 905-26, 1974.

Feldstein, M., and A. Pellechio, "Social Security and Household Wealth
Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence", Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol 61, 361-68, 1979.

Gale, B., "Federal Lending Policy and the Credit Market," preliminary,
1986.

Howrey, E.P., and S.H. Hymans, "The Measurement and Determination of
Loanable-Funds Saving", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 1978.
Also in What Should Be Taxed: Income or Expenditure?, edited by J.A.
Pechman, Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1980.

Hurd, M., "Savings and Bequests," NBER Working Paper #1826, January
1986.

King, M.A., and L. Dicks-Mireaux, "Asset Holdings and the Life Cycle,"
Economic Journal, Vol. 92, No. 366, June 1982.

Kochin, L., "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers?" Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 1974.



                                     37
Kormendi, Roger C., "Government Debt, Government Spending, and Private
Sector Behavior," American Economic Review, December 1983, 73, 994-1010.

Kotlikoff, L.J., "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle
Accumulation," American Economic Review, June 1979, pp. 396-410.

Kotlikoff, L.J., and L. Summers, "The Role of Intergenerational
Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation", Journal of Political
Economy 89, No. 4, 706-32, August 1981.

Leeuw, F., and Holloway, T., "The Measurement and Significance of the
Cyclically Adjusted Federal Budget and Debt," Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, 1984.

Leimer, D., and S. Lesnoy, "Social Security and Private Saving: New Time
Series Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 1982.

Miller, M., "Inflation-Adjusting The Public Sector Financial Deficit,"
in J. Kay, ed., The 1982 Budget, London, 1982.

Mirer, T.W., "The Wealth-Age Relations Among the Aged", American
Economic Review, 69 June 1979.

Modigliani, F., and R. Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data", Post-Keynesian
Economics, edited by K.E. Kurihara, New Brunswick NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1954.

Modigliani, F., and Jappelli, T., "Fiscal Policy and Saving in Italy
Since 1860," the International Conference on "Private Saving and Public
Debt," in M. Boskin, J. Flemming and S. Gorini, eds., Private Saving and
Public Debt, Basil Blackwell, 1986.

Penner, R., "Forecasting Budget Totals: Why Can't We Get It Right?,"
AEI Economist, 1981.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist
Arithmentic," Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Fall 1981, 5, 1-17.

Stiglitz, J., "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Finance Policy,"
in K. Arrow and M. Boskin, eds., Economics of Public Debt, MacMillan for the
International Economics Association, 1988.

Summers, L.A., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth
Model" American Economic Review 71 September 1981.

Summers, L.A., "Issues in National Savings Policy," in G. Adams and S.
Wachter, eds., Saving and Capital Formation, D.C. Heath, Lexington, 1986.

____________   "The After Tax Return Does Affect Private Savings," American
Economics Association Meetings Papers and Proceedings, 1985.

____________   "The Asset Price Approach to the Analysis of Capital Income



                                      38
Taxation", in M. Boskin, ed., Modern Developments in Public Finance, Basil
Blackwell, 1987.

Tanner, J., "Fiscal Policy and Consumer Behavior," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 1979.

Tanzi, V., "Fiscal Deficits and Interest Rates in the United States: An
Empirical Analysis, 1960-84," Fiscal Department of Affairs, IMF, August
1985.

Tobin, J., "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth", Ten Essays in Honor
of Irving Fisher, edited by W. Feilner, New York John Wiley & Sons,
1967.




                                     39
                                 Table 1
       Japan and U.S., Public and Private Net Saving Rates
    Based on the net national savings concept, adjusted or
consumer durables, government investment, and appropriate rents
                     (column (6) of Table (2)

                                    Japan

             National     Pr jvate     Government Government
Year          Saving      Saving         Saving   Istment      Deficit

1970           31.45       22.91            8.54      8.17      -0.37
1971           29.   20    21.43            7.77      8.98       L21
1972           28. 54      21.65            6.89      9-57       2.69
1973           28.89       21.13            7-75      9.31       1.56
1974           26.68       19.   54         7.14      816        1.03
1975           22.83       19.26            3.57        83
                                                      7 -        4.25
1976           23.03       20.80            2.23      7.35       5. 12
1977           23 . 00     20.45            2 - 54    7.63       5.09
1978           23. 39      21.83            1.56      845        688
1979           22 .26      19. 55           2 . 71    8.46       5.74
1980           21 31       18.40            2.91      7 - 84     4.93
1981           21 . 39     18.04            3. 35     7 .66      4.31
1982           19. 90      16 .68           3.22      6 . 89     3.67
1983           18 . 84     16. 16           2.68      622        3.54
1984           19 . 89     17. 37           2.52      5.36       2.85
1970- 1979     25.93       20.86            5.07      8.39       3.32

                            United States
             National     Private      Government Government
Year          Saving      Saving         Saving   Investment   Deficit

1970            9.97        9.18            0.80      1.94       1.15
1971           11.12       11.25            -0.13     1.81       1.94
1972           12.30       10.82            L49       1.79       0.31
1973           14.39       12.12             2.27     1.63      -0.64
1974           10.73        9.42             1.30     1.67       0.36
1975            7.90       10.72            -2.81     1.67       4.48
1976            9.39       10.29            -0.90     1.11       1.01
1977           10.33       10.23             0.10     1.11       1.01
1978           11.72       10.27             1.44     1.40      -0.04
1979           11.15        9.17             1.98     1.34      -0.65
1980            7.58        7.60            -0.02     1.26       1.28
1981            8.57        8.66            -0.09     0.91       0.99
1982            4.80        7.79            -2.99     1.16       4.15
1983            5.65        8.93            -3.28     1.20       4.49
1984            8.37       10.94            -2.57     1.11       3.69

1970-1979      10.90       10.35            0.55      1.58       1.02

Source: M. Boskin and J. Roberts, "A Closer Look at Saving Rates
In the U.S. and Japan," AEI, 1986.
                            Table 2

                    Some U.S. Fiscal Episodes


                            1975—1979            1984—1989

 D                          23.4%          37%           37%
                                      CBO baseline Administration
 d, average                  3.7           1.8               1.4

 g. average                  3.5           3.8           4.0

 i (net of monetization)     6.0

 GNP deflator                7.2

 r                          —1.2           3.6               2.4

 g—r                         4.7           0.2               1.6

                             79%          900%               88%
De



Note: Dt declined steadily from World War II to 1974.

Source: M. Boskin, Conceptual and Measurement Issues in the
Antlysi of Deficits and Dobt, paper presented at the NBER
Taxation program meeting. Palo Alto, CA, March, 1983.
                                   Table 3

      Government Tangible Capital and Federal Debt Held by Public,
                    Selected Years, in $1982 billions


                            Tangible capital

   Year           Federal            State   and Local   Federal Debt
                               J


   1950           477.2                  482.4            1,018.7

   1960           662.9                  753.6              721.0

   1970           752.6                1,224.7              664.1

   1980           810.2                1,542.8              825.8

   1984           936.8                1,611.3            1,213.1

   1985           999.2                1,634.7            1,353.0



Source: Tangible capital: Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987).
         Debt: Economic Report of the President, selected years.
                                    Table 4

               Change in the Value of Federal Oil and Gas Rights
                        in billions of current dollars


      Year              Change in Value            Nominal Federal Deficit

       1974                 +43.7                            6.1

       1976                 +16.1                           53.2

       1978                 +11.8                           59.2

      1979                  +60.8                           40.2

      1980                 +131.5                           73.8

      1981                 +142.5                           78.9

      1982                  +27.9                          127.9

      1983                  -16.5                          207.8

      1984                  -12.3                          185.3

      1985                  -28.8                          212.3

      1986                 -156.7                          220.7


Sources: Boskin, Robinson, O'Reilly, Kuinar (1985); updated and
          corrected in Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987); Economic
          Report of the President (1987).
                                            Table 5

                        Some Contingent and Potential Liabilities of
                                  the Federal Government




   Social Security (OASDI)
       Projected Revenues, Benifits and Deficit as percent of taxable payroll



                                  25 year period                               75 year period
nor to 1983 amendments 1982—2006            2007—2031     2032—2056             1982—2056
          Income              12.01            12.40          12.40              12.27
          Outgo               11.35            14.08          16.79              14.07
          Surplus              0.66           —1.68           —4.39              —1.80


ost 1983 amendments          198 3—2 00 7   2008—20 32   20 3 3—2 05 7          1983—205 7
          Income              12. 50           12.95          13.15              12.94
          Outgo               10.66            12.64          15.23              13.35
          Surp lus             1.83             0.32          -2.08              —0.41

Ource: M. Boskin (1986)



  Loans and Guarantees (S billions)
                                                                                         Federal Sponsored
                            Direct Loans                  Loan Guarantees                 Enterprises
  year                  New          Total                New       Total                    Total
                     Commitments    Outstanding        Commitments Outstanding            Outstanding
   1966                  7            33                  24          99                      19
   1975                 29            74                 50              189                  85
   1983                 41           223                 97              364                 309

)urce: U.S. budgets Special Analysis F.
                                                    Table     6


                                           Private Consumption Functions

             L)ep
Eg'          Var.      Const.      YN      yN(—1)      Yt)         YI)(—l)    Yl.     YL(—I.   WPR)V(—1)     p    DW    SSR

              C         .572      .421     .137                                                  .040       .480 1.6   .237    .988
                       (.111)    (.044)   (.053)                                                (.008)     (.146)
                  *
2             C         .101                          .485         .281                         .0129       .320 1.9   .142    .996
                       (.065)                        (.066        (.054                        (.0060)     (.165)

            CNIPA       .183                          .597        .191                          .0202       .255 1.8   .206    .995
                       (.072)                        (.057)       (.067                        (.0067)     (.166)

4
                        .779                                                  .627     .057     .0383       .672 1.6   .182    .99)
                       (.092)                                                (.060)   (.070)   (.0074)     (.149)




    aC* Is adjusted consumption as described In the text. CNIPA is NIPA consumer expenditures. The income variables correspond
     to the consumption definition (adjusted    NIPA). The income variables refer to national (YN), disposable (YD) and labor (YL)
     Income ,respective)y.
                                                       Table    7


                                       Tests of the Effect of Deficits on Consumption,
                                        alternative definitions of deficits




                                                                        RDEFC    WPRIV(-1)            LM    SSM
             Const.     YD    lOt—I)     DEF       I)EFC       RL)EF                           p


                                                                                  .0132       .314    1.9   .141   .996
5             .691     .484  .283       —.219
             (073)    (.047)(.O55)      (.072)                                   (.0061)     (.169)

6                                                 —.010                           .0154       .242    1.9   .123   .994
              .831     .457   .286
             (.103)   (.058)(.067)                (.133)                         (.0066)     (.196)

7                                                              -.045              .0160       .215    1.9   .121   .995
              810      .456 .283
             (.093)   (.058)(.067)                             (.076)            (.0062)     (.197)

                                                                         .014     .0154       .240    1.9   .123   .994
              .816     .455 .288
             (.096)   (059) (.068)                                      (.102)   (.0063)     (.197)


                       YXC    YxC(-1)
                                                                                  .053        .964    1.7   .188   .859
9             2.27     Z9   —.023         .327
              (.44)   (.050) (.050)      (.089)                                  (.013)      (.033)

                                                                                  .046        .976    1.4   .162   .891
10            2.72    .402 .006                    .340
                                                  (.151)                         (.017)      (.029)
              (.597) (.051) (.069)

                                                                .403              .038        .859    1.8   .126   .969
11            1.73    .516 .089
                                                               (.089)            (.014)      (.092)
              (.296) (.049) (.065)

                                                                         .342     .046        .970    1.5   .151   .909
12            2.49    .403 .044
              (.550) (.049) (.070)                                      (.123)   (.016)      (.034)



N.B.   All                                                 YXG is income less government consumption. DEF Is the nominal
           equations use adjusted consumption and Income.
                                                 deficit, RDEF is the Inflation-adjusted deficit, and RDEFC Is the
       deficit, DEFC is the cyclically—adjusted
       inflation and cycllcal)y- adjusted deficit.




                                                                                                                           1
                                                                Table 8

                                                  Effects of augmented government and private
                                                             wealth on consumption




          CONST        Y        Y(-1)                                                                          Rho    DW    SSR    R2
                                         WPRIV(—1)         SSW(-1)        WT0T(.-1)   WGOV(-1)   NWGOV(-1)


          1.46       .443       .257                                   .027            .037                   .641    1.6   .431   .960
          (.43)     (.067)     (.071)                                 (.0077)         (.062)                 (.129)


          1.15       .572       .022       .036            .017                                               .592    1.5   .160   .988
          (.19)     (.059)     (.069)     (.0085)         (.0075)                                            (.142)


          .972       .438       .269                                   .016                       .046        .046    2.0   .104   .998
         (.103)     (.046)     (.048)                                 (.0031)                    (.021)      (.171)




13— National income —       government consumption.

14— Labor income.

15— Disposable income.
                                          Table 9

                  The Effects of Deficits on the Composition of GNP


Dependent
Variable             C       DFED,GNPa        CAPC      CAp(..1)C     DW        R2
                                                        '
1. I/GNP            0.067       -0.357         1.64         0.43      1.64       .85
                   (0.048)      (0.142)       (0.41)        (0.27)

2. NFI/GNP          0.049       -0.269        -0.88         0.392     1.63       .35
                   (0.033)      (0.010)       (0.29)        (0.210)

 3. SPG/GNP         0.137        0.310         0.359        -0.013    1.99       .78
                   (0.042)      (0.124)       (0.375)       (0.261)

4. SLDEF/GNP        0.016       -0.034         0.377        0.120     1.86       .30
                   (0.017)      (0.047)       (0.137)       (0.090)

5. NFI/CNPd        -0.045       -0.289         0.876        0.397     1.62       .35
                   (0.034)      (0.118)       (0.301)       (0.218)
                                -0.243
                                (0.115)

                             DFED1/GNPb
6. I/GNP            0.054       -0.376         1.76         -0.32     1.63       .85
                   (0.043)      (0.132)       (0.35)        (0.26)

7. NFI/GNP          0.031       -0.226        -0.74          0.45     1.56       .34
                   (0.031)      (0.088)       (0.27)        (0.21)

8. SPG/GNP          0.167        0.398        -0.01         -0.05     2.08       .75
                   (0.027)      (0.089)       (0.25)        (0.24)

 9. SLDEF/GNP       0.007        0.016        -0.33         0.17      2.08       .75
                   (0.014)      (0.054)       (0.12)        (0.09)

 10. NFI/CNPd       0.031       -0.257         0.74          0.46     1.56       .34
                   (0.031)      (0.116)       (0.28)        (0.22)
                     .
                                -0.215
                                (0.093)


Standard errors in parentheses. All equations estimated with first-order
serial correlation adjustment. Sample period is 1952-84 except equations
5 and 10 which are estimated for 1973-84.

aNil federal deficit
b1f1i adjusted federal deficit

CEstimated coefficients and standard errors should be multiplied by l0

dFirst set of coefficients and standard errors for 1952-72 period; second set
for 1973-84.
                                                           -c
                                                           '-I




     CE
     I-
                                                           U,

                                                           —


     C

     oco
      0
                                             •1

,
14

     EraQ.
.4ra 0
     or
     (Dra
         r
     Cx
     11W
                    U
     1-10           0                                      in
         o         là
                   CO
                                                           1.0



                    '6
                   là
                   — là
                      A
                   oC          C)


                   —          —
                   '6          '6
                   là         là
                    o          0
                              1-'
                   1-4                            :
                                                           '-4
                   I


         Cs,
         U,
         o
         0"
         '44
          0
           •   I         I          I
               I         I          I

         .44   5         U,             U,            U'
                         N          N   —
                                                                              It
                                                                              C.'
                                                                              '-I


                                                                                           4
                                                                              C.'
                                                                              N
                                                                              C"
                                                                              '-I



                                                                              It
                                                                              N
                                                                              a.'
                                                                              '-I
.rC
                              C.)
Z a—                          .-4
                              'I                                              a.'
                               0)
                                                                              '.0
                    iLl                                                       a.'
PA
r .—i
      a                                                                       '-I
—CE-

E-C=                                                                          It
                                                                              '.0
                                                                              a.'
                                                                              '-I
                                                                                     5.'
                                                                                     C
                                                                                     0)


                                                                              C.'
                                                                              Li,
                                                                               a.'


  C
—ai-
'-F—                                                                           It
                                                                               Ll
                                                                               a.'
                                                                               '-I



                                                                               a.'
                                                                               It
                                                                               a.'




                                                                               It
                                                                               It
   C,                                                                          a.'
   LI,
                                                                               '-I
   a.'
   '-4

    0                                                                          a.'
                                                                               m
                                                                               a.'
          S
          S   S           S
                          S
                                    S     sS   Li
                                                     S
                                                     S     S
                                                           U,
                                                                S   S
                                                                    U,
                                                                         S
                                                                         S
              LI)
              m           m
                                    LI)
                                    N     N    '-I   i-I                 rI
