                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CHINA'S GDP GROWTH MAY BE UNDERSTATED

                                          Hunter Clark
                                       Maxim Pinkovskiy
                                       Xavier Sala-i-Martin

                                       Working Paper 23323
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23323


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2017




We are very grateful to Michelle Jiang, Lauren Price and Rachel Schuh for superb research
assistance. This paper reflects solely the opinions of the authors and not necessarily of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Hunter Clark, Maxim Pinkovskiy, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's GDP Growth May be Understated
Hunter Clark, Maxim Pinkovskiy, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 23323
April 2017
JEL No. F0

                                         ABSTRACT

Concerns about the quality of China’s official GDP statistics have been a perennial question in
understanding its economic dynamics. We use data on satellite-recorded nighttime lights as an
independent benchmark for comparing various published indicators of the state of the Chinese
economy. Using the methodology of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a and b), we exploit
nighttime lights to compute the optimal weights for various Chinese economic indicators in a best
unbiased predictor of Chinese growth rates. Our computations of Chinese growth based on
optimal weightings of various combinations of economic indicators provide evidence against the
hypothesis that the Chinese economy contracted precipitously in late 2015, and are consistent
with the rate of Chinese growth being higher than is reported in the official statistics.


Hunter Clark                                    Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Department of Economics
33 Liberty St, New                              Columbia University
York, NY 10045, USA                             420 West 118th Street, 1005
Hunter.Clark@ny.frb.org                         New York, NY 10027
                                                and NBER
Maxim Pinkovskiy                                xs23@columbia.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
maxim.pinkovskiy@ny.frb.org
1      Introduction

We are interested in understanding recent growth rates in China and whether they coincide with the o¢ cially

published statistics. There is a large literature doubting the accuracy and veracity of o¢ cially published

Chinese GDP data, often claiming that o¢ cial growth rate considerably overstates actual growth. In a

seminal article, Rawski (2001) argues that the Chinese economy might have grown at 2% or less per year

during 1997-2001 instead of the 7.1% as o¢ cially claimed. Other researchers, in particular Adams and Chen

(1996), Maddison and Wu (2007) have shared this skepticism by comparing o¢ cial Chinese growth estimates

to growth rates of various inputs into production, such as energy, steel and cement. On the other hand, Holz

(2013) and Perkins and Rawski (2008)1 have claimed that the Chinese data are generally accurate. Recently,

Chinese statistics have been at the source of additional controversy following Wikileaks’publication of the

premier, Li Keqiang (then still a provincial governor), admitting to an American diplomat that he monitored

provincial economic activity by the simple arithmetic average of the growth rates of electricity production,

railroad freight and bank loans, and that the o¢ cial statistics were "man-made" and "for reference only."

The Economist has been reporting the Li Keqiang index to this day. However, all of the above proposals for

measuring the growth rates of the Chinese economy depend on assumptions about the relationships between

various macroeconomic proxies and economic activity, many of which are di¢ cult to evaluate.

     In this paper, we attempt to transcend the problem of understanding which theory is right by using

a variable that can act as an "impartial referee" for the macroeconomic proxies. Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-

Martin (2016a and b) show that if we can …nd a variable whose measurement errror is independent of the

measurement errors of the macroeconomic variables that forecasters typically aggregate to predict economic

activity, we can a) test the quality of these variables, and b) obtain the optimal weights on these variables in a

best unbiased linear predictor of unobserved true income. We argue that such a variable is satellite-recorded

nighttime lights (Elvidge et al. 1993, Henderson et al. 2012, Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2016a and b).

We believe that this is a reasonable assumption because errors in nighttime lights come from variation in

weather patterns as well as from variation in satellite quality over time. On the other hand, errors in GDP

and other o¢ cial series come from misreporting by individuals, …rms and other institutions, as well as from

methodological choices of statistical o¢ ces. Therefore, there is little reason to believe that these errors have

anything to do with each other.

     Under our crucial assumption and using data across Chinese provinces and over time for the period 2004-

2013, a regression of log nighttime lights on the macro proxies as well as on province and year …xed e¤ects

yields coe…cients on the proxies that are proportional to the proxies’optimal weights (see the mathematical
    1 This   is the same Rawski as Rawski (2001).




                                                        2
framework in Section 2.1). We …nd that the Li Keqiang variables are signi…cant predictors of nighttime

lights growth, but that they receive radically di¤erent weights. In particular, bank loans receive considerably

more that one-half of the total weight, while railroad freight receives much less than one-third. Electricity

production also typically receives a large and statistically sign…cant coe¢ cient, but it may be biased upward

if our core identi…cation assumption fails. Formally testing that the coe¢ cients on the three Li Keqiang

variables are equal rejects this null hypothesis in most speci…cations, and the failures to reject that we

…nd are driven by large standard errors rather than similar coe¢ cients. Since the growth rate of loans is

larger and more stable over time than the growth rates of electricity and (especially) freight, this …nding

is important for predicting true unobserved Chinese GDP growth. Moreover, we …nd that adding log GDP

to the the separate components of the Li Keqiang index does not materially change the coe¢ cients on

the Li Keqiang variables, and the coe¢ cient on log GDP is only marginally signi…cant. We also …nd that

conservative adjustments for the potential correlation between the measurement error in nighttime lights and

the measurement error in electricity do not change our conclusions concerning the importance of loans in

explaining nighttime lights. We perform similar regressions including other variables besides the Li Keqiang

components that have been used by analysts to predict Chinese growth (e.g. retail sales, passenger tra¢ c

and ‡oor space under construction, among others) and …nd that bank loans continue to be important in

explaining nighttime lights, and therefore, in predicting Chinese economic growth.

   For each regression that we run, we construct forecasts for the path of Chinese growth rates by taking

weighted averages of the national growth rates of the macroeconomic proxies as implied by the regression

coe¢ cients. A remaining problem is that the regression coe¢ cients are proportional, but not identical, to

the variables’optimal weights, and any intercept is unidenti…ed. Hence, we normalize the resulting growth

paths by regressing the o¢ cial GDP growth path on the weighted average for the 2004-2012 period and using

the predicted values of this second regression (in and out of sample) as our predicted GDP growth series. We

obtain standard errors for the predicted paths of Chinese GDP growth by parametric bootstrapping from the

asymptotic distribution of the estimated coe¢ cients from the provincial-level regression. We …nd that GDP

growth in 2015 Q4, a time when the …nancial press was awash with stories about a “hard landing” of the

Chinese economy, is somewhat higher, but quite close to the o¢ cially reported rate, with a 95% con…dence

interval that precludes growth rates consistent with a sharp slowdown of the Chinese economy at this time.

We also obtain this …nding in our most comprehensive speci…cations that include di¤erent sets of macro

proxies corresponding to the various indices used by market participants to predict the Chinese economy.

Our …nding is intuitive because the nighttime lights suggest a particularly high weight for bank loans in the

best unbiased linear predictor of Chinese economic growth, and, unlike freight and electricity growth, which

fell during 2015, bank loan growth remained high over the course of that time.


                                                      3
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the mathematical framework for using

nighttime lights to construct optimal indices of predictor variables. Section 3 presents a description of the

data. Section 4 describes our methodology for converting the index values into forecasts. Section 5 presents

the baseline results. Section 6 presents results with covariates from other indices of the Chinese economy.

Section 7 concludes.



2     Mathematical Framework

2.1    Outline of the Main Approach

This subsection summarizes the mathematical framework of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a and b).

Formally, we assume the model




                                             yiL     =    fi (yi ) + "L
                                                                      i

                                                                     G
                                             yiG     =       G
                                                                 +       yi + "G
                                                                               i

                                                                     E
                                             yiE     =       E
                                                                 +       yi + "E
                                                                               i



    with



                                                   cov (yi ; fi (yi )) 6= 0                              (A0)




                                      E "G          E          L
                                         i jyi = E "i jyi = E "i jyi = 0                                 (A1)




                                          E "L  G          L E
                                             i "i jyi = E "i "i jyi = 0                                  (A2)


    where yiL denotes nighttime lights for location i, yi denotes unobserved true income for location i; and

yiG and yiE are the candidate measures. Note that the only restriction on fi is that it satis…es assumption

A0. Let us consider an estimator of true income


                                                             G G          E E
                                              zi =       +    yi     +     yi


    and let   G   and   B   be the MMSE-minimizing weights for this this estimator. Then, if we run the simple



                                                                 4
linear regression



                                           yiL =    + bG yiG + bB yiE                                          (1)


   we can recover
                                                  bE               E
                                                       =
                                            bG    + bE       G+        E

   The proof is provided in Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a and b). These arguments are straightfor-

wardly extended to more than two proxies, with the result for K proxies being that


                                             bi
                                            PK          = PK i
                                               j=1 bj            j=1   j

   We can straightforwardly extend this framework to assumptions A0-A2 holding conditional on covariates,

such as location and time …xed e¤ects.


2.2    Bounds on Potential Violations of Exogeneity of Errors in Lights

Our framework allows us to consider the possible e¤ects of violations of our identi…cation assumptions. In

particular, one of the right hand-side variables of interest will be electricity consumption, which is likely

jointly determined with nighttime lights. In this case, we may have


                                              E "L  E
                                                 i "i jyi > 0



The covariance of electricity and nighttime lights will then be given by


                                                    E
                                  cov yiL ; yiE =       cov (yi ; fi (yi )) + bias


   where bias is greater than zero. An upper bound for the bias would entail




                                              E
                                                    =    0

                                           bias = cov yiL ; yiE


   In this case, a straightforward correction for the bias will be to replace the empirical covariance of

electricity and nighttime lights with zero in the regression (1). A less conservative correction may be to use
                                                             E
other information to …nd a plausible lower bound on              . In particular, we observe that if assumption A2


                                                         5
held, and we had data on both electricity and bank loans yiloan , we would obtain

                                                                                 E
                                                     cov yiL ; yiE
                                                                     =          loan
                                                    cov yiL ; yiloan
                                                E                                                    loan
     If we assumed that the value of                should be no less than the value of                     , then we could bound

cov yiL ; yiE below by cov yiL ; yiloan . This could be empirically implemented by running an IV regression

of yiE on yiloan , instrumenting using yiL , and then computing



                                       cov yiL ; yiE   true
                                                              = cov yiL ; yiE    estimated
                                                                                             =^bIV



3      Data

3.1     Nighttime Lights Data

This section is very similar to analogous sections in Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a and b).

     Data on lights at night is collected by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Operational Lines-

can System (DMSP-OLS) satellite program and is maintained and processed by the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration (NGDC 2010). Satellites orbit the Earth, sending images of every location

between 65 degrees south latitude and 65 degrees north latitude at a resolution of 30 arcseconds (approxi-

mately 1 square km at the equator) at 20:30 to 22:00 local time.2 The images are processed to remove cloud

cover, snow and ephemeral lights (such as forest …res) to produce the …nal product available for download

at

                           http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html


         The nighttime lights data is available from 1992 to 2013.

         Each pixel (1 square kilometer) in the luminosity data is assigned a digital number (DN) representing

its luminosity. The DNs are integers that range from 0 to 63. We construct our lights proxy for aggregate

income by summing up all the digital numbers across pixels

                                     63
                                     X
                       Lightsj;t =         i (# of pixels in province j and year t with DN = i )
                                     i=1

         This formula has been used to aggregate the nighttime lights maps into lights-based indices for

each country and year in nearly the entire literature on nighttime lights in economics, including Henderson,
   2 There are one or two satellites recording nighttime lights in each year, with an old satellite being retired and a new satellite

being launched every few years. The satellites from which data is available are as follows: the satellite F-10 (in orbit 1992-
1994), F-12 (1994-1999), F-14 (1997-2003), F-15 (2000-2007), F-16 (2004-2009), F-18 (2010-2013), and the VIIRS satellite (April
2012-present).


                                                                   6
Storeygard and Weil (2012), Chen and Nordhaus (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014).

For years with multiple satellites available, we average the logarithms of our aggregate luminosity measure,

following Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012).

        It is very well established that lights are very strongly correlated with measures of economic activity,

such as national accounts GDP, in levels and growth rates. Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) pro-

vide these correlations, dramatic pictures of long-term di¤erences in incomes (North vs. South Korea) as

well as short-term ‡uctuations (the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997-8) re‡ected in lights. Michalopoulos and

Papaioannou (2013, 2014) present evidence that nighttime light density in a sample of African villages is

correlated with development indicators for these villages. Table II of our paper show that there are strong

regression relationships between log nighttime lights per capita and log GDP per capita in Chinese provinces,

conditional on province and year …xed e¤ects.

        Our paper is closest in spirit to Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus

(2011) in that it also considers the problem of optimally combining measures of economic activity. However,

instead of using nighttime lights as a component of such a measure, we use it as an auxiliary variable to help

uncover the correlation structure between the measures we do wish to use in our index. We also consider a

di¤erent type of predictor for true income that do either Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) or Chen

and Nordhaus (2011), which allows us to make fewer assumptions on the data generating processes that we

consider.

        There are also well-known problems with the relation between nighttime lights and economic devel-

opment, which we need to take into account. Pixels with DN equal to 0 or 63 are top- or bottom-censored.

The light data also are a¤ected by overglow and blooming: light tends to travel to pixels outside of those in

which it originates, and light tends to be magni…ed over certain terrain types such as water and snow cover

(Doll 2008). Given that we will compute national-level estimates of aggregate lights, it is unlikely that these

sources of error will be large enough or su¢ ciently correlated with important variables that they will con-

found our analysis. Another problem may be that satellites age in space and are eventually retired. Hence,

they might give inconsistent readings from year to year, or new satellites may give fundamentally di¤erent

readings from old ones. While some evidence of this problem exists, the mathematical framework in Section

2 suggests that our calculations are supported by assumptions that allow nighttime lights to have all of the

data problems described above, so long as nighttime lights are correlated with true income. We will also

address this problem by including year …xed e¤ects (sometimes additionally interacted with cross-sectional

variation) in all speci…cations.




                                                       7
3.2    Chinese Economic Data

We obtain data on a variety of macro proxies for the Chinese economy for each Chinese region (province,

municipality or autonomous region) for the years 2004-2013 from the CEIC database for the years 2004-2013.

We also have national series of all of these variables at a quarterly frequency from 2004 to 2015. The full

list of these variables is as follows:

   1. GDP

   2. Electricity production

   3. Railroad freight volume

   4. Total value of loans made by banks

   5. Total freight volume

   6. Retail sales

   7. Value added by industry

   8. Floor space under construction

   9. Real estate investment

 10. Airport throughput

 11. Exports

 12. Imports

 13. Total passenger tra¢ c

 14. Fixed asset investment

 15. Steel production

 16. CPI

 17. Fixed asset investment price index

 18. Retail price index

 19. Export price index (only at national level)

 20. Import price index (only at national level)


                                                    8
   We merged this data at the region-year level with nighttime lights data from the DMSP-OLS satellite.

Figure 1 presents a map of Chinese provinces for reference about locations, sizes and regions. It is well known

that some Chinese regions are very small and urban (the independent municipalities of Beijing, Tianjin and

Shanghai), and to this end, we combine Hebei, Beijing and Tianjin (one group) as well was Jiangsu and

Shanghai (second group) and Sichuan and Chongqing (third group) to avoid any contamination from cities

having a di¤erent lights to true income relationship than less urban areas do. In our baseline sample, there

are 27 provincial aggregates. We also divide up the provincial aggregates into 3 regional groups, as is shown

in the map. The groups correspond to a group of rich, coastal aggregates (including the cities of Beijing,

Shanghai and Guangzhou), a group of inland but centrally located areas (Manchuria and some hinterland

provinces), and a group of remote western provinces, such as Tibet, Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia, but also

including some urban western provinces such as Sichuan (with Chongqing) and Shaanxi.

   Figure 2 presents national growth rates of GDP, the Li Keqiang index, and its three components (elec-

tricity, freight and loans). We see, in particular, that freight tra¢ c has experienced a sharp but temporary

drop in 2008 and grew at a negative rate in 2013, while the other components of the Li Keqiang index have

not experienced such a deceleration.

   It is well-known in the China forecasting industry that the real GDP growth rates reported by the

provinces are inconsistent with the o¢ cial real GDP growth rates published by the central government.

There are multiple hypotheses as to why this divergence occurs, although it is believed that provincial

governors exaggerate growth …gures, necessitating adjustment to the total. Figure 4 presents the time series

of annual national growth rates for real and nominal GDP as o¢ cially reported by the government and

as implied by a weighted average of the provincial reports. We observe that while there is the evident

discrepancy between o¢ cial and provincial real GDP growth rates, there is much less discrepancy (except in

2005 and 2007) in the nominal GDP growth rates, and the discrepancies in the nominal GDP growth rates

are smaller than in the real GDP growth rates when they exist. We therefore …nd it reasonable to infer

that, in computing national real GDP growth rates, the central government essentially takes the nominal

GDP growth rates reported by the provinces as given, and then de‡ates them using a common de‡ator.3

We therefore look at both nominal and real GDP in our analysis at the provincial level, although we only

look at real GDP when making our forecasts at the national level.

   Many …nancial industry participants outside China have been skeptical of Chinese o¢ cial statistics, with

many analysts believing that the o¢ cial growth rate overstates true growth. Several private forecasters have

created alternative indices that indeed suggest that o¢ cial GDP statistics overstate growth. We take a
   3 In our estimation sample the sum of annual provincial nominal GDPs (in levels) average about 5.6% greater than annual

national GDP, with a maximum of 6.7% in 2012 and a minimum of 3.5% in 2007.




                                                            9
convenience sample of such indices that have received coverage in the …nancial press (Orlik and Chen 2015).

Figure 5 illustrate these indices’predictions. The Barclays index uses purchasing managers’indices (PMIs),

which do not exist at the provincial level, and cannot be replicated in our analysis. The Bloomberg and the

Capital Economics (CAP) indices use linear combinations of variables such as industrial production (value

added of industry or VAI), freight, passenger tra¢ c, electricity production, ‡oor space completed and retail

sales. The Lombard Street index recomputes the de‡ator for real GDP by including prices of …xed asset

investment, imports, exports and consumer prices into the calculation. We see that all the four indices show

shortfalls in growth relative to the o¢ cial numbers. The Bloomberg index is roughly in agreement with

the o¢ cial statistics, while the Barclays and the CAP indices show growth modestly lower than the o¢ cial

statistics do (in the range of 4.8-5.5% relative to 6.9% for 2015 Q3), while the Lombard Street index is

consistent with radically lower Chinese growth at 3% in the same time period. Additionally, we investigate

the determinants in the index proposed by John Fernald et al. (2015), who look at extracting principal

components from a broad set of potential determinants of growth.4



4     Forecast Methodology

Once we obtain optimal weights on various possible variables in the provincial-level regressions, we will need

to turn them into forecasts of recent Chinese GDP growth. We do so by 1) computing the weighted average

of the national growth series corresponding to the regressors in the provincial regressions, with the weights

equal to the provincial regression coe¢ cients, 2) regressing the o¢ cial national quarterly real GDP series on

this weighted average (which, recall, is also national and at quarterly frequency) during the period 2005-2012

(before the divergences between the forecasting indices and o¢ cial GDP growth begins), and 3) using the

…tted values of this regression as predictions of GDP growth rates in China both in and out of sample. We

bootstrap this procedure 100 times by drawing index weight vectors from the asymptotic distribution of

the provincial regression coe¢ cients and computing a separate prediction with each vector. We present the

prediction based on the point estimates of the provincial regression as our point estimate. Figures 10 and

11 show the predicted paths of Chinese growth using this forecast procedure, together with 95% con…dence

intervals and with the o¢ cial GDP growth series. We also present the prediction and 95% con…dence interval

for 2015 Q4 at the foot of each speci…cation we consider.
   4 Traditionally, forecasters have used macroeconomic variables to predict Chinese GDP growth. In a novel contribution,

Nakamura, Steinsson and Liu (2016) have computed adjustments to o¢ cial GDP …gures using Engel curves derived from micro
data consumption surveys in China, …nding that GDP growth between 1995 and 2011 has been less smooth than implied by
the o¢ cial statistics.




                                                           10
5     Results

5.1     Speci…cation

Figure 3 presents the national growth rates for o¢ cial GDP and aggregate nighttime lights in China for

the period 2005-2013. It is apparent that, in the aggregate time series, nighttime lights experiences erratic

swings in growth, most noticeably in 2010. While that particular swing is caused by a new (and considerably

more sensitive) nighttime lights recording satellite being launched in 2010, other swings cannot be traced

to any speci…c satellite replacements, but rather should be attributed to changing detection properties of

existing satellites. In fact, in the pure time series, Chinese o¢ cial GDP growth rates are uncorrelated with

Chinese nighttime lights growth rates. Hence, we need to ‡exibly control for changing satellite detection

properties in our empirical analysis, which we do by employing year …xed e¤ects in all speci…cations. Thus,

we are identifying our estimates exclusively from di¤erential growth in nighttime lights and economic activity

measures across Chinese provinces, and not from the national-level series. As we are interested in growth rates

rather than levels, we always include province …xed e¤ects in all speci…cations. The baseline speci…cation

that we estimate is

                                                                     K
                                                                     X
                                             L
                                            yi;t =   i   +   t   +         bK yi;t
                                                                               K
                                                                                   + "i;t
                                                                     k=1

                                         1      2         K
    if the candidate proxy measures are yi;t ; yi;t ; :::yi;t .

    An additional concern could be that changes in the nighttime lights detection technology produce di¤er-

ential e¤ects in di¤erent places, in particular because places with large agglomerations of bright lights may

experience top-coding that censors part of the increase in lights that takes place when a satellite becomes

more sensitive. We can address this concern by allowing changes in nighttime lights detection technology

to have e¤ects that vary with a variable that proxies for the extent of lights agglomeration, such as initial

urbanization level. Hence, we also present estimates in which year …xed e¤ects are interacted with 2004

provincial urbanization rates. We …nd that the resulting estimates are similar to the more parsimonious

province and year …xed e¤ects speci…cation, providing con…dence that controlling for year …xed e¤ects re-

moves the spurious variation generated by changing nighttime lights detection technology. Our speci…cation

including urbanization by year …xed e¤ects becomes

                                                                            K
                                                                            X
                                       L                        2004
                                      yi;t =   i+    t+      t ui    +            bK yi;t
                                                                                      K
                                                                                          + "i;t
                                                                            k=1

    where u2004
           i    is the urbanization rate of province i in 2004.



                                                                 11
5.2    Descriptive Statistics

Table I presents associations between nighttime lights and various measures of the Chinese economy. All

speci…cations include province and year …xed e¤ects, so the resulting correlations should be interpreted as

taking place between growth rates. The …rst three columns of Panel I show that the components of the Li

Keqiang index have a strong and positive individual association with nighttime lights growth. In particular,

column 1 of panel 1 shows that a 1 percentage point (pp) increase in the growth rate of electricity production

is associated with a 0.28 pp increase in the growth rate of aggregate nighttime lights. The association between

nighttime lights growth and railroad freight growth is somewhat weaker (0.079) and the association between

nighttime lights growth and bank loan growth is somewhat stronger (0.41), foreshadowing results to come.

   Columns 4 through 12 of Table I present individual associations between nighttime lights growth and the

growth rates of the macroeconomic indicators that are used by the Bloomberg, CAP and Fernald indices

described in Section 3.2, as well as the growth rate of our approximation of the Lombard Street indicator at

the province by year level. Contrary to what we observe for the Li Keqiang variables, the associations between

nighttime lights growth and the growth rates of these indicators are typically statistically insigni…cant (except

for airport throughput, …xed asset investment and steel production in columns 8, 11 and 12). For example, the

association between nighttime lights growth and completed ‡oor space growth is a statistically insigni…cant

0.029 pp (panel 1, column 6), while the association between nighttime lights growth and rail passenger

growth is negative. Hence, the Li Keqiang indicators appear to be considerably better suited to predicting

Chinese economic activity than plausible alternative indicators.

   Panel 2 of Table I replicates the speci…cations of Panel 1, but now adds in log real provincial GDP as an

additional covariate. We see that the growth rate of real provincial GDP is signi…cantly partially correlated

with nighttime lights growth in all speci…cations (hence, for each of the other determinants of Chinese growth

considered), except for the speci…cation with bank loans (column 3). This observation shows that nighttime

lights growth is tightly correlated with real provincial GDP growth in a panel setting (in contrast to the lack

of correlation between nighttime lights growth and o¢ cial GDP growth in the pure time series in Figure

3), but there is suggestive evidence that bank loan growth might be a potentially stronger predictor of

Chinese economic activity. Panels 3 and 4 repeat the speci…cations of Panel 1 and 2, but now include year

…xed e¤ects interacted with 2004 urbanization rates in order to capture the potential heterogeneity of the

impact of satellite changes on lights measurement in di¤erent Chinese provinces. We see that the estimated

correlations are little changed, suggesting that year …xed e¤ects are satisfactory in extracting the variation

attributable to erratic satellite measurement quality.




                                                       12
5.3       Baseline Results

Table II presents the core results of the paper: the regressions of nighttime lights on the Li Keqiang variables.

As noted in Section 3.2, there is a large discrepancy between o¢ cial real GDP growth rates and the real

growth rates implied by aggregating the provincial growth rates (Figure 4), but there is much less discrepancy

between o¢ cial nominal GDP growth rates and the nominal growth rates implied by provincial data. Hence,

o¢ cial real GDP growth apparently can be approximated as aggregated nominal provincial GDP growth

de‡ated by a nationwide de‡ator. Therefore, we use log nominal provincial GDP as our measure of GDP (we

investigate robustness to using real GDP later). Once again, we present results in two panels: speci…cations

in the …rst have province and year …xed e¤ects, while speci…cations in the second have province and year

…xed e¤ects interacted with provincial urbanization in 2004. At the foot of each regression, we report the

prediction of Chinese 12-month growth in 2015 Q4 and its 95% con…dence interval based on the regression

and on the forecasting procedure described in Section 4.

    Column 1 of Panel 1 presents the association between aggregate lights growth and nominal GDP growth

in the panel of provinces. We see that a 1 pp increase in the growth rate of nominal GDP is associated with

a 0.54 pp increase in the growth rate of aggregate nighttime lights. Hence, GDP growth and lights growth

are strongly correlated, which is consistent with both of them being correlated with unobserved true income

growth (recall that Assumption A1 requires lights growth to be correlated with true income growth). The

forecast of growth in this column is just the o¢ cial GDP growth rate in 2015 Q4, which was 6.6% in log

points (whenever we try to forecast GDP with only a single variable, there are no standard errors, because

a single slope coe¢ cient is not identi…ed in the mathematical framework of Section 2). Column 2 looks at

the correlation between growth in nighttime lights and the Li Keqiang index (the average of the growth of

electricity production, railroad freight and bank loans).5 There is a statistically signi…cant but much smaller

association, with a 1 pp growth in the Li Keqiang being associated with a 0.086 pp growth in aggregate

lights. The Li Keqiang index (normalized by regression to o¢ cial GDP growth between 2005 and 2012)

suggests that growth in 2015 Q4 was 6.3%, very slightly lower than the o¢ cial …gure. Column 3 includes

both GDP and the Li Keqiang on the right hand-side of the regression. The coe¢ cient on GDP declines in

magnitude to 0.327 pp, while the coe¢ cient on the Li Keqiang index does not change much. The predicted

growth rate of o¢ cial real GDP in 2015 Q4 is 5.9%, with a 95% con…dence interval from 5.6% to 6.4%, and

is statistically signi…cantly lower than the o¢ cial real GDP growth rate of 6.6%, though not by much, and
   5 We   de…ne the Li Keqiang variable as
                                  (1=3)      ln electricity i;t + ln railfreighti;t + ln (loansi;t )
  and when province …xed e¤ects are included in our regressions, we are essentially looking at di¤erences of this variable over
time.




                                                                  13
certainly not in a way that would indicate an alarming slowdown of Chinese growth. Figure 7 presents a

time plot of the predicted growth rate of o¢ cial real GDP from this regression. This plot looks very similar

to the plot of the o¢ cial real GDP growth rate, except in 2015 and early 2016, when it temporarily (but

statistically signi…cantly) dips below the o¢ cial numbers.

   Column 4 presents a regression of log aggregate lights on the logs of the three Li Keqiang measures

included as separate variables. Recall that under our assumptions in Section 2, regressing nighttime lights

on these variables would yield coe¢ cients that are proportional to these variables’weights in the best unbiased

linear predictor of unobserved true income. Therefore, if the original Li Keqiang index were optimal, we

would expect each of the separate variables to get the same coe¢ cient. Instead, a 1 pp increase in electricity

growth is associated with a 0.153 pp increase in nighttime lights growth, a 1 pp increase in railroad freight

growth with a 0.035 pp increase in nighttime lights growth, and a 1 pp increase in loan growth with a 0.275

pp increase in nighttime lights growth. These partial elasticities imply that an "optimized version" of the Li

Keqiang index should place 33% of the weight on electricity growth, 8% of the weight on freight growth, and

59% of the weight on bank loans growth, instead of giving each measure a weight of 13 . A test of equality of

the coe¢ cients, reported below the regression, strongly rejects the null hypothesis. This rebalancing of the

weight on the Li Keqiang index implies a predicted Chinese growth rate that is considerably higher than the

one reported: the point prediction is 8.2%, with a 95% con…dence interval between 7.1% and 9.2%.

   Figure 10 part 1 plots our entire predicted series with the associated pointwise con…dence interval (re-

calling from Section 4 that the predictions before 2012 are in-sample, while the predictions after 2012 are

out-of-sample). We see that our methodology predicts Chinese GDP growth to have been lower than of-

…icial estimates before the crisis of 2008, to have experienced a shallower decline in 2008 and a stronger

recovery in 2009 and 2010, and to have stabilized at a higher level after 2011. Across the 11-year period

under consideration, our predicted Chinese growth series appears to be on a horizontal trend, while the

o¢ cial growth estimates are on a declining trend. Our predictions for past Chinese growth agree, at least

in spirit, with some market participants’estimates. For example, our index agrees with both the Barclays

and the Bloomberg indices in estimating Chinese growth to have been around 11% in 2007, and not to have

experienced a substantial spike before the …nancial crisis, while the o¢ cial GDP series records growth as

spiking from 12% to 15% between 2005 and 2007. However, our predictions for current Chinese growth rates

are above those of market participants, as well as of the Chinese government itself.

   The explanation for why we get this contrarian prediction is that nighttime lights growth appears to be

strongly correlated with bank loan growth net of national trends in both variables, and bank loan growth

has not been declining in China as a whole, while railroad freight growth, which declined precipitously in

2015, is not very correlated with nighttime lights growth. Figure 2 shows that bank loan growth has not


                                                      14
experienced the fall-o¤ observed in railroad freight growth (and to a lesser extent, electricity production

growth) since 2011. Hence, the prediction implied by the nighttime lights data and Assumptions A0-A2 is

that Chinese true income growth did not fall o¤ by very much either since 2010. It is worth noting that the

‡atness of our predicted time series for Chinese growth in Figure 8 closely resembles the shape of the bank

loan growth series in Figure 2. It is also worth noting that the con…dence interval for our latest predictions is

considerable, ranging from close to the o¢ cial estimate (slightly above, or slightly below) to an upper bound

of slightly below 10% in late 2016. Our results suggest that true Chinese GDP growth is not appreciably

lower than reported in the o¢ cial statistics, and possibly may be higher.

   Column 5 adds log nominal GDP to the three Li Keqiang measures on the right hand-side of the regression.

The coe¢ cient on nominal GDP declines further relative to the speci…cation in column 3, and is now

signi…cant only at 10%. It is, however, still large relative to the coe¢ cients on electricity and railroad

freight, and is only slightly smaller than the coe¢ cient on bank loans. We still reject the null that the

coe¢ cients on the three components of the Li Keqiang index are equal. The predicted o¢ cial real GDP

growth rate in 2015 Q4 is now 7.2%, just a little above the o¢ cial rate of 6.6%, with a 95% con…dence

interval stretching from 6.7% to 9.2%. The path of the prediction over time (Figure 9) is somewhat more

similar to the path of the o¢ cial GDP growth rate than the one based on the regression in column 4;

however, the nighttime lights still suggest that the growth of the Chinese economy was considerably closer

to its pre-2008 level than the o¢ cial statistics suggest.

   As we have mentioned, we use nominal GDP as a right hand-side variable in Column 5 because o¢ cial

nominal GDP growth coincides much closer with the growth of the provincial aggregate nominal GDP than

o¢ cial real GDP growth coincides with the growth of the provincial aggregate real GDP. It is useful to check

that our methodological choice does not particularly a¤ect our results. Column 6 replicates column 5 with

real GDP standing in for nominal GDP, and our coe¢ cient estimates and growth rate predictions remain

much the same.

   One concern with our analysis may be that nighttime lights systematically re‡ect certain sectors of the

economy to a greater extent than others, and that this may cause nighttime lights to place a greater weight

on measures re‡ecting these sectors than might be warranted for measuring overall economic activity. For

example, if most bank loans are funding construction projects and construction generates more nighttime

light per unit of economic activity than other sectors, nighttime lights may assign too high a weight to bank

loans. To address this concern as a …rst pass, we include the logs of primary, secondary and tertiary output

as right hand-side variables in column 7 (the coe¢ cients of these variables being omitted). We see that

the coe¢ cient on bank loans is una¤ected, while the coe¢ cient on electricity drops slightly, and predicted

Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 rises to 8.2%.


                                                        15
   A concern with the analysis is that Assumption A2 may fail for electricity, as measurement error in

electricity may be positively correlated with measurement error in nighttime lights. To address this concern,

we use the methodology of Section 2.2 to conservatively correct for the bias in electricity. Columns 8 and

9 perform this check under the assumptions that the covariance of electricity and lights is no smaller than

the covariance between electricity and loans (which reduces the covariance of electricity and lights by a

factor of 1.3; column 8) and that the covariance of the signal in electricity and lights is zero, so that their

entire measured covariance is a result of correlated errors (column 9). While the coe¢ cient on electricity

shrinks (and becomes sharply negative in column 9), the coe¢ cient on loans rises and remains signi…cant,

substantially increasing the prediction for the Chinese GDP growth rate in 2015 Q4 (albeit with similar

con…dence intervals to previous speci…cations). The truth is likely to be somewhere in between columns 5

and columns 9 (perhaps at column 8), but for any intermediate assumption between these two cases, the

values of the regression coe¢ cients will be intermediate to the ones in these two columns.

   It is important to examine how our results vary for di¤erent regions of China and for di¤erent subperiods

of our sample. China is a very economically diverse country, with most economic activity taking place

along the Paci…c coast, while the western part of the country is sparsely populated and thinly developed. A

concern could be that our estimates are not representative of the economically most relevant regions of China.

Moreover, China has been undergoing a structural transformation away from manufacturing and towards

services, so di¤erent variables could, in principle, be better predictors of true Chinese growth rates at the end

of our sample period than at the beginning. Table III checks the robustness of our estimates to excluding

di¤erent subsamples of years and Chinese regions. Column 1 replicates the baseline for reference. Columns

2 through 4 check robustness to exclusion of one of the three major groups of provinces (coastal, central and

western). Columns 5 through 7 restrict the sample to the period prior to (and including 2008), the period

following (and including) 2010, and the entire period excluding the crisis years 2008-2010, respectively. We

see that in all robustness checks, the coe¢ cient on loans is remarkably stable and similar to the baseline.

While the magnitudes of the other coe¢ cients vary, they remain qualitatively similar to the baseline, except

for the coe¢ cient on log GDP. The predicted growth rate of the Chinese economy in 2015 Q4 never falls

below the baseline estimate, and the estimated 95% con…dence intervals of the growth rate predictions are

remarkably stable across speci…cations.

   In both Table II and Table III, Panel 2 presents results from all the above regressions, but now including

year by 2004 provincial urbanization …xed e¤ects. These more ‡exible …xed e¤ects allow the e¤ects of

changing technology of lights measurement to be heterogeneous by province as a function of urbanization.

Despite the added ‡exibility of the model, the results are much the same as in Panel 1. We reliably …nd that

our best estimate of the true unobserved growth rate of the Chinese economy in 2015 Q4 is inconsistent with


                                                       16
a sharp slowdown of the Chinese economy at the time, and may be consistent with higher Chinese growth

than in the o¢ cial statistics.



6     Results for Other Indicators

6.1     Baseline Estimates

Besides the Li Keqiang index, there exist many other e¤orts of market participants to understand possible

departures of the Chinese economy from the o¢ cial statistics, which were discussed in Section 1. We consider

the following four indices: the Barclays GDP tracker, the Bloomberg monthly GDP estimate,6 the China

Activity Proxy (CAP) produced by Capital Economics, and the Lombard Street Research real GDP indicator.

In tables IV through V we perform a similar analysis of these indices as we do for the Li Keqiang variables,

and we check the robustness of our earlier conclusions about the Li Keqiang variables when the variables

included in alternative indices of the Chinese economy are controlled for.We know the predictors that are

combined by the Barclays index to generate its estimates of Chinese growth rates, but cannot use several of

them (3 variables relating to purchasing managers’indices as well as auto sales) as they are not de…ned at

the provincial level for China. We do not know the formulas generating the Bloomberg and the CAP indices,

but we believe that they are linear functions of the variables that they use, so we include these variables

in our regressions. We use an approximation to the formula for the Lombard Street index, which reweights

nominal output from various sectors using di¤erent price indices.

    In addition to indices created by forecasters in the …nancial industry, we also consider the methodology

of John Fernald et al. (2015), who extracts principal components from a broad set of potential growth

determinants, and then regresses data on exports to China from developed countries on the resulting series.

Fernald’s argument is that exports to China are measured by developed countries, and therefore, their errors

should be uncorrelated with measurement errors in economic variables reported by China. We prefer to

analyze Fernald’s approach by including all the variables that he uses that are available at the provincial

level rather than extracting their principal component because including the variables separately induces the

regression to assign them coe¢ cients that maximize the explanatory power of the regression, and therefore,

that can shift the coe¢ cients on variables that we are already considering.

    Table IV presents regressions of log aggregate nighttime lights on the components of the Li Keqiang,

Barclays, Bloomberg, CAP and Fernald indices, as well as on our approximation to the Lombard Street

index. We refer to all indices as "pseudo" indices to highlight that we are not analyzing the exact indices
    6 Bloomberg also considers a modi…ed Li Keqiang index in which bank loans and electricity each get 40% of the weight, while

railroad freight gets 20% of the weight. Based on our coe¢ cient estimates in Table II column 5, we can reject this pattern of
weighting at the 3% signi…cance level.


                                                              17
used by these researchers, but rather some of their components or our approximations of them. Here, the

regressions using year by urbanization …xed e¤ects are side by side, rather than in separate panels. Column

1 reproduces Column 4 in Table II and reproduces the regression of log nighttime lights on the separated

components of the Li Keqiang index. Column 2 reports estimates of the proxy depending on the available

variables of the Barclays index. We see that electricity, FAI and retail sales receive considerable weight.

Column 3 reports estimates for the proxy containing variables in the Bloomberg index; its components are

a subset of the Barclays index components, and once again, electricity, FAI and retail sales receive most

of the weight. Column 4 reports estimates for the proxy only depending on the Lombard Street indicator

evaluated at the provincial level (with national-level price indices for imports and exports). We note that

the Lombard Street indicator is just log nominal GDP minus the log of a weighted average of several price

de‡ators (the CPI, the FAI price index, and the export and import price indices). Column 5 reports the

regression of log nighttime lights on the components of the CAP index. It is clear that electricity is helpful

in predicting economic activity, while the total freight, passenger and the ‡oor space completed variables

aren’t. Lastly, Column 6 reports the regression of log nighttime lights on eight of the variables analyzed by

Fernald et al. (2015). Once again, the coe¢ cients on the three Li Keqiang variables do not change with the

addition of the other indicators.

    The di¤erent indices o¤er divergent predictions for Chinese GDP growth in 2015 Q4. At one extreme,

using the Li Keqiang covariates suggests that Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 was 8.2%. The pseudo CAP, pseudo

Lombard Street and pseudo Fernald indices suggest growth rates relatively consistent with the o¢ cial data

at 7.1%, 6.8% and 6.6% respectively.7 On the other hand, the point estimate prediction using the Barclays

covariates is 4.3%, with a lower con…dence bound of 3.8%, which would be consistent with a considerable

slowdown in China’s growth rate, though is still above the Lombard Street o¢ cial calculation of under 3%.

The pseudo Bloomberg index lies in between, with a prediction that the Chinese economy grew by 5.3% in

2015 Q4, but a lower con…dence bound of 4.7%. However, the upper con…dence bounds on the predictions

based on these speci…cations are considerably above the o¢ cially reported 2015 Q4 growth rate of 6.6% (they

are 7.9% for the pseudo Barclays and 8.3% for the pseudo Bloomberg) suggesting that these speci…cations

could still be compatible with the Chinese economy growing at o¢ cially reported rates or higher. Columns

7 through 12 of Table IV present results for speci…cations with 2004 urbanization by year …xed e¤ects; the
   7 The fact that our prediction for Chinese GDP growth in 2015 Q4 using the Lombard Street indicator is 6.8% is very

surprising because the predicted growth rate of Chinese GDP in 2015 Q4 according to the methodology of Lombard Street is
2.9%. The reason for this discrepancy lies in the fact that our methodology normalizes any predictor of Chinese GDP growth
by regressing on it the o¢ cial Chinese GDP growth series between 2005 and 2012. Hence, if that series reports systematically
lower or higher growth rates, or if it reports systematically more or less volatile growth rates, the prediction regression will
remove this source of discrepancy of the series with GDP. It turns out that the Lombard Street index can indeed be seen as
being very close to a linear transformation of o¢ cial Chinese growth rates (it has larger booms and larger busts, but the booms
and the busts take place roughly contemporaneously with the ones in the o¢ cial series), so our prediction methodology undoes
this transformation, and the Lombard Street index turns out to be very close to o¢ cial GDP.



                                                              18
predictions are slightly higher for the pseudo Barclays and pseudo Bloomberg indices and slightly lower for

the other indices, but not substantively di¤erent. Figures 10 and 11 (top panels) present graphs of the

predicted paths of Chinese growth rates from columns 1-6 implied by the di¤erent proxies in combination

with our assumptions. We see that the Barclays and the Bloomberg indices imply a slowdown that started

after 2013 and reached its nadir around the end of 2015, while the other indices imply a much gentler

downward trend in Chinese GDP growth that lies above the o¢ cial estimates.

   Table V presents the same regressions as Table IV, but now also includes log provincial GDP as a

control. These regressions are similar to Column 5 in Table II. The coe¢ cient on log provincial GDP is

not statistically signi…cant in speci…cations involving the pseudo Barclays or the pseudo Fernald indices,

but tends to be signi…cant at least at the 10% level in the others. It is worth noting that in speci…cations

including the Lombard Street index, the coe¢ cient on log GDP shoots up in order to o¤set the log GDP term

inside the Lombard Street index, and that the negative coe¢ cient on the Lombard Street index should be

interpreted as a positive coe¢ cient on the log of the Lombard Street de‡ator. The predicted Chinese growth

rates for 2015 Q4 are also, generally, closer to the o¢ cially reported value of 6.6%, but the predictions using

the pseudo Barclays index (4.7% in column 2) is still compatible with a considerable slowdown in Chinese

growth, as is the lower con…dence bound on the prediction using the pseudo Bloomberg index (4.4% in

column 3).


6.2    Adding the Li Keqiang Variables

From Tables IV and V we learn that two of the indices that do not include the bank loans measure as a

component –the pseudo Bloomberg and the pseudo Barclays –suggest predictions for recent growth rates of

the Chinese economy that are markedly lower than those obtained when bank loans are used as a predictor,

as well as the o¢ cially reported growth rates. It is therefore important to examine the predictions for Chinese

growth rates when both the bank loans measure (and the Li Keqiang variables more generally) as well as

the pseudo Bloomberg and pseudo Barclays variables (nominal retail sales, nominal …xed asset investment as

well as others) are included together on the right hand-side of regression (1). We consider such speci…cations

in Table VI, which presents regressions of log nighttime lights on log GDP, the three Li Keqiang variables

and the variables from other indicators of the Chinese economy. Additionally, these regressions can be seen

as tests of the exclusion restriction in the Li Keqiang regressions of Table II by analyzing their robustness to

inclusion of variables that other researchers have claimed to be important for predicting Chinese economic

growth. Once again, columns 1 through 6 present results from regressions with province and year …xed

e¤ects, while columns 7 through 12 present results with province and 2004 urbanization by year …xed e¤ects.



                                                      19
   Column 1 of Table VI replicates column 5 of Table II and presents our baseline result that using the

Li Keqiang variables separately alongside with log nominal GDP suggests a growth rate for China in 2015

Q4 that is slightly higher than the o¢ cial measure (7.2%). Column 2 now adds the variables from the

pseudo Barclays index to this regression. We see that the coe¢ cients on the Li Keqiang variables remain

remarkably stable, with the coe¢ cient on the loans variable declining slightly from 0.224 in Column 1 to

0.206 in Column 2, but retaining signi…cance at the 5% level. In contrast, the coe¢ cients on electricity and

retail sales change considerably relative to those in the second columns of Tables IV and V. The prediction

for Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 rises to 5.6%, which is higher than the predictions using the Barclays, CAP

and Lombard Street indices discussed in Section 3, albeit with a lower con…dence bound of 4.7%, which is

close to the o¢ cial prediction of the CAP index. Column 3 of Table VI replicates our analysis using the

covariates from the pseudo Bloomberg index (which are a subset of the covariates in the pseudo Barclays

index). We observe results similar to those in the previous column. The coe¢ cient on bank loans remains

statistically signi…cant and similar to our baseline result, while the coe¢ cients on the components of the

pseudo Bloomberg index vary more markedly, and the prediction for Chinese economic growth in 2015 Q4

rises relative to the prediction in Column 3 of Tables IV and V (from 5.3% to 5.8%), though its lower

con…dence bound (5.1%) is still compatible with considerably lower (though not catastrophically lower)

rates of Chinese growth than reported in the o¢ cial statistics. Columns 4 through 6 investigate the e¤ect of

adding the full suite of Li Keqiang variables (and log nominal GDP) to the pseudo Lombard, pseudo CAP

and pseudo Fernald indices (the latter already included all the Li Keqiang variables). We observe that for all

of them, the coe¢ cient on bank loans remains remarkably stable and close to the baseline, while predicted

Chinese growth rate in 2015 Q4 is close to the o¢ cially reported growth rate of 6.6%. Our results change

little when we add 2004 urbanization by year …xed e¤ects in columns 7 through 12.

   We can therefore conclude that while using only the variables in the pseudo Barclays and pseudo

Bloomberg indices can generate low predictions for Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 (as well as more gener-

ally), it is appropriate to supplement these variables with additional variables out of the Li Keqiang index,

especially with the bank loans variable, and once this is done, the predicted growth rates rise to levels that

are not severely inconsistent with o¢ cially reported growth rates, and that are incompatible with the most

pessimistic views of the Chinese economy at that time. Moreover, the con…dence intervals on the predictions

for all speci…cations allow for the possibility of Chinese growth being considerably higher than the o¢ cially

reported growth rate. The subsequent subsection will show that further improvement of the set of predictors

leads us further towards a more optimistic view of Chinese growth.




                                                     20
6.3    Adding De‡ators

So far, the monetary variables that we have used as predictors of log nighttime lights in provincial regressions

have all been nominal, in order to be consistent with our use of nominal GDP as well as with the way that

these variables are used in the indices that we have considered. However, our framework allows us to

evaluate whether or not these variables should be de‡ated and in what way simply by adding the logarithms

of candidate de‡ators as right hand-side covariates to the regression (1). The resulting model nests our old

model as a special case, allowing us to understand whether the de‡ators may have been important omitted

variables in the earlier model. We employ three de‡ators: 1) the retail price index, which we include in all

speci…cations containing retail sales, 2) the FAI price index, which we include in all speci…cations containing

bank loans or real estate investment, and 3) the GDP de‡ator, which we include in all speci…cations containing

GDP.

   Table VII replicates Table IV, but now accounts for the de‡ators. Column 1 presents results for the Li

Keqiang variables. We see that the coe¢ cients on the Li Keqiang variables change little, while the log FAI

price de‡ator enters with a large, positive, but insigni…cant coe¢ cient. The positive coe¢ cient on the log

FAI price de‡ator implies that instead of dividing bank loans by the price de‡ator, we should be multiplying

bank loans by (a function of) the de‡ator, suggesting that Chinese regions with higher growth of investment

prices also experience higher nighttime lights growth (and hence, higher unobserved true income growth).

Therefore, investment prices may be measuring not just the price of investment goods, but also unobservables

associated with growth. The predicted 2015 Q4 Chinese growth rate is 7.7%, somewhat less than in Table

IV, but still higher than the o¢ cially reported growth rate.

   Columns 2 and 3 present results for the components of the pseudo Barclays and pseudo Bloomberg

indices respectively. Recall that in Table IV we observed that using these components as right hand-side

variables without any de‡ators generated predictions for Chinese growth that were considerably lower than

the o¢ cially reported growth rates. Now, once FAI and retail price index de‡ators have been included, these

predictions are around 8.8%, comfortably above the o¢ cially reported growth rates. While the coe¢ cient on

the log FAI price index is small, the coe¢ cient on the retail price index is large (around unity) and statistically

signi…cant at the 10% level. Since both of these speci…cations nested the speci…cations in Columns 2 and 3

of Table IV, we become more con…dent that Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 was relatively high because having

given the data a choice between models with di¤erent predictions for Chinese growth, the data chose the

model predicting higher growth.

   Columns 4 through 6 of Table VII present results for the components of the pseudo Lombard, pseudo

CAP and pseudo Fernald indices. Neither the pseudo Lombard nor the pseudo CAP indices require the



                                                        21
addition of de‡ators (the pseudo Lombard index provides its own de‡ator, while the pseudo CAP index uses

only intrinsically real quantities, such as freight volume or passenger tra¢ c), so these columns are identical

to corresponding columns in Table IV. When we consider the pseudo Fernald index, we observe that the

weight on the log FAI price index is tiny, while the weight on the log retail price index is 1.27 and statistically

signi…cant at 1%, with the predicted growth rate in 2015 Q4 rising to 9.4% (relative to 6.6% in column 6

of Table IV). Adding de‡ators to this speci…cation, if anything, reinforces our result that Chinese growth

in 2015 Q4 was not substantially lower than o¢ cially reported, and may have even been higher. Columns 7

through 12 of Table VII present results of the same regressions as columns 1 through 6, but now including

2004 urbanization by year …xed e¤ects, with the results being little changed.

   Figures 10 and 11 (bottom panels) present the full time paths and con…dence intervals of our predicted

Chinese growth rates from the speci…cations estimated in columns 1 through 6 of Table VII. We observe

that the resulting paths of GDP growth rates are considerably ‡atter and closer to Chinese long-run average

growth than the ones coming from speci…cations without de‡ators in Table IV (top panels). However, we

note that the con…dence intervals in the last few years include growth rates that are essentially equal to the

o¢ cially reported ones as well as growth rates substantially above that level.

   Table VIII replicates Table VII but now controls for log real GDP and the log of the GDP de‡ator

in each speci…cation. Note that log nominal GDP is a linear combination of these two variables, so these

speci…cations are agnostic about whether we should use nominal or real GDP. Our conclusion that Chinese

growth was not substantially below, and could have been above the o¢ cially reported growth rates in 2015

Q4 remains valid, with all the point estimates of predicted Chinese growth rates in 2015 Q4 no smaller than

6.4%. The only potential concern is that in the pseudo Barclays speci…cation without urbanization by year

…xed e¤ects (column 2), the lower con…dence bound for the prediction is 4.6%, which is in line with the

o¢ cial estimate of the CAP index (though still above that of the Lombard Street indicator). The coe¢ cient

on real GDP is statistically signi…cant at least at the 10% level in all the speci…cations excluding log bank

loans –speci…cally, all except the Li Keqiang (column 1) and the pseudo Fernald (column 6).

   Table VIII replicates Table VI in including all the Li Keqiang components in every speci…cations, but now

controls for the relevant de‡ator variables. We see that once again, the point estimates of our predictions

of Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 are close to or above the o¢ cially reported growth rate, with the lowest one

being 6.4% (for the pseudo CAP with urbanization by year …xed e¤ects). The lowest value of the lower

con…dence bound is 5.2%, slightly below the o¢ cial Barclays prediction. In all speci…cations, the coe¢ cient

on the log bank loan volume variable is signi…cant at least at the 10% level and ranges from 0.19 to 0.28

in magnitude. Since there is some heterogeneity in the con…dence bounds on the predictions of the various

indicators, we run a speci…cation including all the macroeconomic proxies from all the indices that we have


                                                        22
considered, together with their de‡ators, in column 7. We predict Chinese growth in 2015 Q4 to have been

8.6%, with a 95% con…dence bound from 7% to 10.6%. (The results in column 14, which include 2004

urbanization by year …xed e¤ects, are similar, except the lower con…dence bound extends to 6.5%). While

this speci…cation is very large and raises concerns of over…tting, we …nd it reassuring that when we allow

the best unbiased linear estimator to depend on every macroeconomic proxy used in all the indices in the

analysis, our predictions are remarkably in line with our baseline results, suggesting that Chinese growth in

2015 Q4 was not substantially lower than o¢ cially reported, and may have been considerably higher. Figure

12 presents the graph of the resulting time path of predicted Chinese growth rates; we observe that it is

similar to the paths of the pseudo Barclays, Bloomberg and Fernald indices with de‡ators included, being

shallower than the o¢ cial growth rate series, and in particular, suggesting a more gentle decline in growth

rates in the 2010s.



7     Conclusion

There is a suspicion among analysts and the popular press at Chinese o¢ cial statistics have overstated recent

growth. We provide a novel approach based on our recent research (Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2016a and

b) that uses satellite-recorded nighttime lights data to compute the optimal way to weight macroeconomic

proxies (including GDP) in predicting unobserved true income and its growth rate. In this paper, we use

this methodology to predict Chinese growth using proxy variables frequently cited in the literature (in

particular, the variables comprising the Li Keqiang index among others). We …nd that the Li Keqiang

variables perform well in predicting nighttime lights growth in China, although we reject the equal weighting

of the variables, …nding instead that bank loans should get considerably more weight while railroad freight

should get considerably less. Hence, according to our assumption, the Li Keqiang variables with modi…ed

weights do a good job at predicting true unobserved Chinese economic growth. This result changes little

when we add other variables used by the literature to forecast Chinese GDP.

    Using our estimates, we can construct predictions of Chinese growth rates and compare them to the

o¢ cial statistics and to the predictions of various forecasters active in the literature. Our results show that

Chinese growth rates are not appreciably less than o¢ cially reported growth rates, and may be considerably

above them, in a way consistent with no sharp slowdown in Chinese growth over the 2014-2016 period.

This …nding is surprising because most other indicators trying to calculate Chinese growth estimate an even

sharper decline in growth than is present in the o¢ cial statistics.

    The intuition for our …nding that Chinese growth is no lower than in the o¢ cial statistics is that nighttime

lights growth across Chinese provinces (netting out changes that are common at the national level) is more


                                                       23
correlated with growth indicators that have remained roughly stable (bank lending, and, to a lesser degree,

electricity) than with indicators that have declined (such as railroad freight). However, our result does not

depend on including bank lending as one of the predictors. Given a su¢ cient breadth of possible right hand-

side variables in a regression, the nighttime lights tend to select the ones consistent with a no less optimistic

growth performance relative to trend than is present in the o¢ cial real GDP growth series.

   Why might Chinese o¢ cial statistics be understating, rather than overstating, GDP growth? While our

methodology allows us to obtain this …nding, it does not shed light on the mechanisms behind it. One

explanation consistent with our results could be if Chinese national accounts understate the growth rate of

services, which would progressively understate growth as services become a larger fraction of the Chinese

economy (for example, Rosen and Bao (2015) argue that Chinese national accounts data underestimate

the level of the services sector, especially of its real estate component). More generally, there have been

concerns that GDP growth is understated in many developed countries as well because of the failure to

account for structural transformations towards new goods and services, especially those delivered electroni-

cally (Boskin Commission 1996). Investigating both of these potential explanations quantitatively remains

an open question for future research.



References
 [1] Adams, F. Gerard, and Yimin Chen. "Skepticism about Chinese GDP growth–the Chinese GDP
     elasticity of energy consumption." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 22, no. 4 (1996): 231-
     240.
 [2] Boskin, Michael J. Toward a more accurate measure of the cost of living: Final report to the Senate
     Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index. Advisory
     Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index. 1996
 [3] Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. "Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic Statistics"
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011
 [4] Doll, Christopher N.H. "CIESIN Thematic Guide to Night-time Light Remote Sensing and its
     Applications." Manuscript. 2008

 [5] Fernald, John, Eric Hsu, Mark M. Spiegel. 2015. “Is China Fudging its Figures? Evidence from
     Trading Partner Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015-12.
 [6] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. "Measuring Economic Growth
     from Outer Space." American Economic Review 102 (2012), no. 2: 994-1028.

 [7] Holz, Carsten A. "The quality of China’s GDP statistics." China Economic Review 30 (2014): 309-
     338.
 [8] Maddison, Angus, and Harry Wu. "China’s Economic Performance: How Fast has GDP Grown?
     How Big is it Compared with the USA?." University of Queensland (2006).

 [9] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contem-
     porary African Development." Econometrica 81 (2013), no. 1: 113-152.


                                                       24
[10] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "National Institutions and Sub-national Devel-
     opment in Africa." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2014) no. 1:151-213.
[11] Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, and Miao Liu. "Are Chinese Growth and In‡ation too Smooth?
     Evidence from Engel Curves." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8, no. 3 (2016): 113-144.

[12] National     Geophysical    Data   Center  (NGDC). “Version 4 DMSP-OLS Night-
     time    Lights  Time     Series.” National Oceanic     and     Atmospheric     Administration.
     http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html. 2010. (accessed September 2013).
[13] Orlik, Tom and Fielding Chan. 2015. "China Proxy Wars." Bloomberg Brief: Economics Asia.
[14] Perkins, Dwight H., and Thomas G. Rawski. "Forecasting China’s economic growth to 2025."
     China’s great economic transformation (2008): 829-86.
[15] Pinkovskiy, Maxim, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2016a. "Lights, Camera. . . Income! Illuminating
     the National Accounts-Household Surveys Debate." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 2: 579-631.
[16] Pinkovskiy, Maxim, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2016b. "Newer need not be better: evaluating the
     Penn World Tables and the World Development Indicators using nighttime lights." National Bureau of
     Economic Research No. w22216.
[17] Rawski, Thomas G. "What is happening to China’s GDP statistics?." China Economic Review 12,
     no. 4 (2001): 347-354.
[18] Rosen, Daniel H. and Beibei Bao. 2015. Broken Abacus? A More Accurate Gauge of the Chinese
     Economy. CSIS.




                                                   25
     8            Tables
                                                                                                                                                                                       Ta b le I




                                                                                                                                                                      C h in a : P o s s ib le In d ic a t o r s o f G r ow t h
                                                                                                                                                                         D ependent Variable is Log L ight Intensity
                                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                 (6)                  (7)                  (8)                  (9)                 (10)                  (11)                       (12)                     (13)                   (14)                   (15)               (16)

                                                  E le c t             R a il               Bank                To ta l              R e ta il              VA I                 FA I             E xp orts            Im p o rts             Steel                   LS                  F lo o r S p .               Passen                 RE                       A ir             F lo o r
                                                  R ic ity            Fr e ig h t           Loans              Fr e ig h t           S a le s                                                                                                 P ro d.                GDP                U nder C onst.                  G ers             Investm ent                T h rp u t         Starts

                                                                                                                                                                                P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

        L o g In d . Va r.                       .2 8 2 * * *          .0 6 8 * *          .4 1 1 * * *           .0 5 6            .8 1 1 * * *            .1 6 5            .2 2 7 * * *            .0 4 2             -.0 0 7             .0 7 8 * * *          .4 8 2 * * *                  .0 9 4                  -.0 0 5                 .0 5 3              .2 1 4 * * *       .0 6 2 * *
                                                  (.0 4 4 )            (.0 3 1 )            (.1 0 2 )           (.0 3 7 )            (.2 9 3 )            (.1 1 8 )            (.0 6 0 )            (.0 3 2 )           (.0 3 3 )             (.0 2 7 )             (.1 3 5 )                  (.0 6 4 )                (.0 2 5 )              (.0 4 4 )              (.0 5 8 )         (.0 2 8 )
        W ith in R 2                                .1 3                 .0 5                 .1 4                .0 1                 .0 6                 .0 2                 .0 8                 .0 1                .0 0                  .0 2                  .0 7                       .0 2                     .0 0                   .0 2                   .0 8              .0 3
                                                                                                                                                                         G D P and P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

        Log G D P                                .3 5 8 * * *         .4 7 4 * * *          .3 1 1 * *          .5 5 2 * * *        .4 4 4 * * *         .6 8 1 * * *         .4 1 6 * * *         .5 3 0 * * *         .5 4 3 * * *         .5 1 0 * * *         1 .8 5 3 * * *              .5 0 6 * * *             .5 4 3 * * *           .5 2 3 * * *            .3 9 7 * *        .4 9 9 * * *
                                                  (.1 1 9 )            (.1 2 6 )            (.1 2 3 )            (.1 2 5 )           (.1 4 5 )            (.1 7 7 )            (.1 3 7 )            (.1 2 0 )            (.1 2 0 )            (.1 2 5 )            (.5 1 2 )                   (.1 2 3 )                (.1 2 2 )              (.1 3 7 )              (.1 7 9 )          (.1 2 5 )
        L o g In d . Va r.                       .2 0 9 * * *          .0 4 0 * *          .3 0 8 * * *           -.0 0 6              .4 0 8              -.1 4 5             .1 4 3 * *             .0 3 4              -.0 1 1               .0 4 9           -1 .4 4 6 * * *                 .0 3 4                   .0 0 3                 .0 1 1                 .1 1 4             .0 2 9
                                                  (.0 3 4 )            (.0 1 6 )            (.0 9 2 )            (.0 4 0 )           (.2 9 5 )            (.1 4 5 )            (.0 7 1 )            (.0 2 5 )            (.0 2 7 )            (.0 3 2 )            (.5 5 1 )                   (.0 4 9 )                (.0 2 2 )              (.0 3 9 )              (.0 7 9 )          (.0 2 6 )
        W ith in R 2                                .1 7                 .1 2                 .1 7                 .1 1                .1 2                 .1 2                 .1 4                 .1 2                 .1 1                 .1 2                  .1 5                       .1 1                     .1 1                   .1 1                   .1 3               .1 1
                                                                                                                                                                P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects

        L o g In d . Va r.                       .2 5 8 * * *          .0 7 0 * *          .3 5 8 * * *           .0 3 2               .4 8 7               .0 9 0            .1 9 3 * * *           -.0 1 4             -.0 2 0             .0 7 1 * * *           .4 0 2 * *                .1 2 7 * * *               -.0 1 7               .0 5 8 * *            .1 8 4 * * *       .0 6 5 * * *
                                                  (.0 5 2 )            (.0 3 3 )            (.1 1 6 )           (.0 4 7 )            (.4 6 5 )            (.1 3 5 )            (.0 5 6 )            (.0 4 6 )           (.0 3 3 )             (.0 1 9 )             (.1 7 0 )                  (.0 4 8 )                (.0 2 7 )              (.0 2 6 )              (.0 6 2 )          (.0 2 3 )
        W ith in R 2                                .1 0                 .0 5                 .1 1                .0 0                 .0 1                 .0 0                 .0 6                 .0 0                .0 0                  .0 2                  .0 5                       .0 5                     .0 0                   .0 3                   .0 7               .0 3
                                                                                                                                                         G D P and P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects

        Log G D P                                .3 2 4 * * *         .3 8 9 * * *          .2 9 2 * *          .4 9 9 * * *        .4 6 0 * * *         .6 4 6 * * *          .3 7 0 * *          .4 6 9 * * *         .4 7 1 * * *         .4 3 9 * * *        1 .7 9 1 * * *                .3 7 7 * *              .4 6 6 * * *            .4 2 7 * *               .3 4 2          .4 1 4 * * *
                                                  (.1 2 5 )            (.1 4 7 )            (.1 2 5 )            (.1 4 7 )           (.1 5 3 )            (.1 9 9 )            (.1 7 2 )            (.1 5 3 )            (.1 4 5 )            (.1 5 3 )            (.4 8 6 )                   (.1 7 6 )                (.1 4 7 )              (.1 7 5 )              (.2 1 6 )          (.1 5 7 )
        L o g In d . Va r.                       .1 9 8 * * *          .0 4 7 * *          .2 6 9 * * *           -.0 2 1              .0 5 5              -.1 9 2              .1 2 7 *             -.0 0 1              -.0 2 2              .0 4 9 *          -1 .4 4 1 * * *                 .0 7 6                  -.0 0 5                 .0 2 4                 .1 0 1             .0 3 8
                                                  (.0 3 2 )            (.0 2 0 )            (.0 9 9 )            (.0 4 6 )           (.4 1 6 )            (.1 5 2 )            (.0 7 1 )            (.0 4 1 )            (.0 2 6 )            (.0 2 6 )            (.5 3 3 )                   (.0 5 2 )                (.0 2 4 )              (.0 3 1 )              (.0 8 7 )          (.0 2 6 )




26
        W ith in R 2                                .1 4                 .1 1                 .1 3                 .0 9                .0 8                 .1 0                 .1 1                 .0 8                 .0 9                 .0 9                 .1 3                        .1 0                     .0 8                   .0 9                   .1 0               .1 0
        N um b er of O bs.                         270                  270                   270                 270                  270                 270                   270                 270                   270                  269                  270                         270                     270                    270                    270                 270
        N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs                  27                  27                    27                  27                   27                   27                  27                    27                   27                  27                    27                          27                      27                      27                     27                 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (I)
             Ta b le I p re s e n ts re g re s s io n s o f lo g lig h t in te n s ity o n t h e in d e p e n d e n t va ria b le s in t h e c o lu m n h e a d in g s u s in g t h e p a n e l o f C h in e s e p rov in c e s d e s c rib e d in S e c tio n 3 . S t a n d a rd e rro rs c lu s t e re d o n p rov in c e in
     p a re n th e s e s . A ll va ria b le s a re fro m o r b a s e d o n th e C E IC . T h e va ria b le s a re 1 ) lo g e le c tric ity p ro d u c tio n , 2 ) lo g ra ilro a d fre ig h t vo lu m e , 3 ) lo g to ta l n o m in a l va lu e o f lo a n s m a d e b y b a n k s , 4 ) lo g to ta l fre ig h t vo lu m e ,
     5 ) l o g n o m i n a l r e t a i l s a l e s , 6 ) l o g v a l u e a d d e d o f i n d u s t r y, 7 ) l o g … x e d a s s e t i n v e s t m e n t e x p e n d i t u r e , 8 ) l o g n o m i n a l e x p o r t s , 9 ) l o g n o m i n a l i m p o r t s , 1 0 ) l o g s t e e l p r o d u c t i o n , 1 1 ) a u t h o r s ’ e s t i m a t e o f p r o v i n c i a l - l e v e l
     l o g G D P u s i n g t h e m e t h o d o l o g y o f t h e L o m b a r d S t r e e t i n d i c a t o r , 1 2 ) l o g ‡o o r s p a c e u n d e r c o n s t r u c t i o n , 1 3 ) l o g t o t a l p a s s e n g e r s , 1 4 ) l o g r e a l e s t a t e i n v e s m e n t , 1 5 ) l o g a i r p o r t t h r o u g h p u t , 1 6 ) l o g ‡o o r s t a r t s . M o r e
     d a ta o n th e s e va ria b le s is ava ila b le in th e D a ta A p p e n d ix .
                                                                                                 Table II


                                                                                    C hina: Li K eqiang Regressions
                                                                  D ependent Variable is Log L ight Intensity: P rediction is for 2015 Q 4
                                                         (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)

                                                        GDP         Li Keqiang      GDP        Separate     Baseline      Real GDP    Industry     Elect. Slop e   Electricity
                                                        Only           Only        and LK      M easures                   Baseline   Controls     Like Loans      Zero E¤ect

                                                                                     P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                            Log GDP                    .541***                      .335**                    .210*          .246        -.477         .245*            .362
                                                        (.120)                      (.141)                   (.125)        (.179)       (.403)        (.145)          (.228)
                            Li Keqiang                                .086***      .062***
                                                                       (.026)       (.022)
                            Log Electricity                                                     .153***      .134***       .156***      .106**          .038          -.279*
                                                                                                 (.045)       (.043)        (.045)      (.042)        (.077)          (.165)
                            Log Freight                                                          .035**       .027**        .030**     .029***          .033            .050
                                                                                                 (.013)       (.011)        (.012)      (.011)        (.028)          (.051)
                            Log Loans                                                           .275***      .224***       .241***     .262***        .278**          .454**
                                                                                                 (.092)       (.086)        (.091)      (.090)        (.132)          (.230)
                            W ithin R2                   .11            .13           .16          .19          .20           .20         .22           .20             .20
                            P-value 3 coe¤s equal         0              0             0            0            0             0           0            .04             .04                        (II)
                            Prediction                   6.6            6.3           5.9          8.2          7.2           7.1         8.2           8.0            10.6
                            CI For Prediction         (6.6,6.6)      (6.3,6.3)     (5.6,6.4)   (7.1,9.2)    (6.7,9.2)     (6.6,9.4)   (6.7,10.2)    (6.4,10.5)      (7.5,10.9)




27
                                                                          P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                            Log GDP                    .470***                       .276*                     .194          .243        -.152          .218            .297
                                                        (.146)                      (.150)                   (.125)        (.176)       (.439)        (.163)          (.246)
                            Li Keqiang                                .080***      .062***
                                                                       (.024)       (.021)
                            Log Electricity                                                     .144***      .129***       .145***     .111***          .046           -.227
                                                                                                 (.043)       (.041)        (.045)      (.041)        (.079)          (.183)
                            Log Freight                                                          .040**       .033**        .036**      .032**          .038            .055
                                                                                                 (.016)       (.014)        (.015)      (.013)        (.039)          (.069)
                            Log Loans                                                            .231**        .187*        .200**      .223**          .230           .371*
                                                                                                 (.105)       (.100)        (.100)      (.098)        (.145)          (.220)
                            W ithin R2                   .08            .12           .14          .16          .17           .17         .18           .17             .17
                            P-value 3 coe¤s equal          0              0            0           .01          .01           .01         .01           .16              .1
                            Prediction                   6.6            6.3           5.8          7.9          6.9           6.8         7.8           7.4            10.7
                            CI For Prediction         (6.6,6.6)      (6.3,6.3)     (5.6,6.4)   (6.9,9.2)    (6.5,9.1)     (6.4,9.1)   (6.6,10.0)    (5.9,10.6)      (7.3,11.3)
                            Numb er of Obs.              270            270           270          270          270           270        270            270             270
                            Numb er of Clusters           27             27            27          27           27            27          27             27              27

     Table II presents regressions of log light intensity on log provincial GDP and the com p onents of the Li Keqiang index. Standard errors clustered on province in parentheses. All indep endent
     variables are from the CEIC; see the Data App endix for details. All predictions com puted using the m ethod explained in Section 4. Colum n 7 controls for log nom inal GDP in prim ary
     industry, log nom inal GDP in secondary industry and log nom inal GDP in tertiary industry; the coe¢ cients on these variables are available on request. Colum n 8 provides estim ates of
     the regression coe¢ cients accounting for p otential correlation b etween the m easurem ent error in log light intensity and log electricity production under the assum ption that the elasticity
     of log electricity production with resp ect to log unobserved true incom e is the sam e as the elasticity of log total value of loans m ade by banks with resp ect to log unobserved true incom e.
     Colum n 9 provides the sam e estim ates under the assum ption that the elasticity of log electricity production with resp ect to log unobserved true incom e is zero.
                                                                                             Table III


                                                                          C hina: Li K eqiang Regressions, Subsam ples
                                                              D ependent Variable is Log L ight Intensity: P rediction is for 2015 Q 4
                                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)

                                                                  Baseline    No West      No Central    No Coastal      Before          After    Excluding
                                                                               China         China         China          2008           2010       Crisis

                                                                                 P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                                         Log GDP                     .210*        .269       .331***         -.003          .074        -.197        .159*
                                                                    (.125)      (.266)        (.109)        (.159)        (.269)       (.354)       (.095)
                                         Log Electricity           .134***        .066       .143***        .103**          .040        -.017      .166***
                                                                    (.042)      (.095)        (.046)        (.041)        (.117)       (.052)       (.039)
                                         Log Freight                .027**        .009        .014**        .041**        .022**        -.026         .011
                                                                    (.011)      (.079)        (.007)        (.019)        (.010)       (.040)       (.008)
                                         Log Loans                 .224***       .311*        .223**       .224***       .309***        .218*      .300***
                                                                    (.086)      (.181)        (.110)        (.083)        (.117)       (.117)       (.077)
                                         W ithin R2                   .20         .10           .33           .16           .11          .05          .44
                                         P-value 3 coe¤s equal         0          .24            0             0            .06          .19           0                                   (III)
                                         Prediction                   7.2         8.3           7.1           8.1           9.4          9.5          8.0
                                         CI For Prediction        (6.7,9.2)   (6.3,10.6)    (6.6,9.0)     (6.9,10.5)    (6.7,10.5)   (5.8,10.8)   (7.1,9.4)
                                                                      P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects




28
                                         Log GDP                      .194        .265       .321***         -.008          .082        -.284        .158*
                                                                    (.125)      (.246)        (.081)        (.180)        (.278)       (.416)       (.092)
                                         Log Electricity           .129***        .161        .107**       .117***          .048        -.024      .151***
                                                                    (.041)      (.119)        (.047)        (.042)        (.135)       (.049)       (.034)
                                         Log Freight                .033**       -.040          .016        .044**       .028***        -.019         .016
                                                                    (.014)      (.093)        (.010)        (.017)        (.009)       (.041)       (.010)
                                         Log Loans                   .187*        .247        .251**          .181        .286**         .190      .290***
                                                                    (.100)      (.184)        (.098)        (.121)        (.127)       (.120)       (.081)
                                         W ithin R2                   .17         .10           .32           .16           .11          .04          .38
                                         P-value 3 coe¤s equal        .01         .16             0           .01           .13          .29           0
                                         Prediction                   6.9         8.3           7.3           7.6           9.0          9.0          7.9
                                         CI For Prediction        (6.5,9.1)   (6.1,11.6)    (6.5,9.4)     (6.6,10.5)    (6.3,10.6)   (6.3,10.4)   (7.0,9.3)
                                         Numb er of Obs.              270         160          190            190          135          108           189
                                         Numb er of Clusters           27          16            19            19            27           27           27

     Table III presents regressions of log light intensity on log provincial GDP and the com p onents of the Li Keqiang index for selected subsam ples. Standard errors clustered on province in
     parentheses. All indep endent variables are from the CEIC; see the Data App endix for details. All predictions com puted using the m ethod explained in Section 4. The division of China
     into the three regions is shown in Figure 1. Crisis years are de…ned to b e 2008-2010.
     8.1      Results with Alternative Indices
                                                                                                      Table IV

                                                                                       C hina: Alternative Indices
                                                             N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                     U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                       (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)        (11)        (12)
                                      Li        Pseudo          Pseudo         Pseudo       Pseudo       Pseudo        Li        Pseudo        Pseudo        Pseudo      Pseudo       Pseudo
                                    Keqiang     Barclays       Bloomb erg        LS          CAP         Fernald     Keqiang     Barclays     Bloomb erg       LS         CAP         Fernald

                                                                         P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects
           Log Electricity           .153***     .214***          .241***                   .253***       .109**     .144***      .220***       .254***                  .217***       .120**
                                      (.045)      (.042)           (.034)                    (.046)       (.054)      (.043)       (.042)        (.043)                   (.048)       (.054)
           Log Rail Freight           .035**                                                              .032**      .040**                                                          .037***
                                      (.013)                                                              (.014)      (.016)                                                           (.013)
           Log Loans                 .275***                                                               .210*      .231**                                                            .196*
                                      (.092)                                                              (.111)      (.105)                                                           (.111)
           Log Total Freight                       -.022                                       .022                                 -.002                                   .020
                                                  (.037)                                     (.036)                                (.037)                                 (.041)
           Log Retail Sales                       .438**           .346**                                   .350                     .352          .309                                 .291
                                                  (.211)           (.170)                                 (.214)                   (.302)        (.235)                               (.256)
           Log VAI                                 -.015            -.062                                                           -.041         -.067
                                                  (.136)           (.117)                                                          (.139)        (.116)
           Log FAI                               .188***          .180***                                                         .201***       .186***
                                                  (.059)           (.066)                                                          (.063)        (.068)
           Log Exp orts                             .017             .015                                   .027                     .006          .008                                 .024      (IV )




29
                                                  (.029)           (.032)                                 (.029)                   (.043)        (.044)                               (.040)
           Log Im p orts                           -.038                                                                            -.041
                                                  (.030)                                                                           (.030)
           Log Steel Pro duction                    .045                                                                             .038
                                                  (.030)                                                                           (.033)
           Log LS GDP                                                          .482***                                                                        .402**
                                                                                (.135)                                                                        (.170)
           Log Floor Space                                                                     .060                                                                       .092**
                                                                                             (.045)                                                                       (.042)
           Log Passengers                                                                     -.002                                                                        -.002
                                                                                             (.024)                                                                       (.022)
           Log RE Investm ent                                                                               .022                                                                         .032
                                                                                                          (.026)                                                                       (.027)
           Log Air Thrput                                                                                  .093*                                                                         .074
                                                                                                          (.053)                                                                       (.047)
           Log Floor Starts                                                                                 .006                                                                         .005
                                                                                                          (.017)                                                                       (.026)
           W ithin R2                  .19          .22             .20          .07           .14          .24         .16          .18           .17          .05         .13          .19
           Prediction                  8.2          4.3             5.3          6.8           7.1          6.6         7.9          4.4           5.2          6.8         6.8          6.3
           CI For Prediction        (7.1,9.2)    (3.8,7.9)       (4.7,8.3)    (6.8,6.8)     (6.4,8.4)    (6.0,9.8)   (6.9,9.2)   (3.8,10.3)    (4.9,10.2)    (6.8,6.8)   (6.4,7.9)   (5.6,10.0)
           Numb er of Obs.             270          270             270          270           270          270         270         270           270           270         270         270
           Numb er of Clusters          27           27             27           27             27           27         27            27           27            27          27           27

         Table IV presents regressions of log light intensity on com p onents of the indices in the colum n headings. Standard errors clustered on province in parentheses. All predictions com puted
     using the m ethod explained in Section 4. All indep endent variables are from the CEIC and listed in the note to Table I; see the Data App endix for details.
                                                                                                                                             Ta b le V

                                                                                                                     C h in a : A lte rn a tive In d ic e s a n d G D P
                                                                                          N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                                                    U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                                            (1 )             (2 )               (3 )                (4 )              (5 )              (6 )              (7 )             (8 )                (9 )               (1 0 )            (1 1 )            (1 2 )

                                                            Li            P se u d o        P se u d o           P se u d o        P se u d o       P se u d o            Li            P se u d o         P se u d o          P se u d o         P se u d o       P se u d o
                                                        K e q ia n g     B a rc lay s     B lo o m b e rg           LS              CAP             Fe rn a ld        K e q ia n g     B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg          LS               CAP             Fe rn a ld

                                                                                                              P rovince, Year and U rban P ct. by Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                     Log G D P                             .2 1 0 *          .3 4 9           .4 0 2 * *        1 .8 5 3 * * *     .3 8 0 * * *        -.0 5 2            .1 9 4           .3 5 6            .4 1 2 * *        1 .7 9 1 * * *       .2 8 6 *          -.0 2 2
                                                          (.1 2 5 )        (.2 2 5 )          (.1 8 9 )          (.5 1 2 )          (.1 2 9 )         (.1 9 9 )         (.1 2 5 )        (.2 3 2 )           (.1 9 4 )          (.4 8 6 )          (.1 6 0 )         (.1 9 8 )
                     L o g E le c tric ity               .1 3 4 * * *     .1 8 8 * * *       .1 9 4 * * *                          .2 1 3 * * *       .1 0 9 * *       .1 2 9 * * *     .1 8 9 * * *        .1 9 8 * * *                          .1 9 1 * * *       .1 2 0 * *
                                                          (.0 4 2 )        (.0 3 4 )          (.0 3 1 )                             (.0 3 8 )         (.0 5 4 )         (.0 4 1 )        (.0 3 7 )           (.0 4 2 )                             (.0 3 4 )         (.0 5 3 )
                     L o g R a il Fre ig ht               .0 2 7 * *                                                                                  .0 3 4 * *        .0 3 3 * *                                                                                  .0 3 8 * * *
                                                          (.0 1 1 )                                                                                   (.0 1 5 )         (.0 1 4 )                                                                                    (.0 1 4 )
                     Log Loans                           .2 2 4 * * *                                                                                 .2 1 9 * *         .1 8 7 *                                                                                    .2 0 0 * *
                                                          (.0 8 6 )                                                                                   (.1 0 3 )         (.1 0 0 )                                                                                    (.0 9 9 )
                     L o g To ta l Fre ig ht                                -.0 2 6                                                  -.0 2 5                                              -.0 1 0                                                  -.0 1 5
                                                                           (.0 3 3 )                                                (.0 3 6 )                                            (.0 3 5 )                                                (.0 4 1 )
                     L o g R e ta il S a le s                                .1 7 3             .0 7 2                                                  .3 8 4                             .0 4 5            -.0 1 9                                                  .3 0 9
                                                                           (.2 8 0 )          (.2 2 4 )                                               (.2 5 5 )                          (.3 3 4 )          (.2 5 1 )                                               (.2 9 3 )
                     L o g VA I                                             -.1 5 2           -.2 1 7 *                                                                                   -.1 7 7           -.2 2 6 *
                                                                           (.1 5 9 )          (.1 2 2 )                                                                                  (.1 5 5 )          (.1 2 5 )
                     L o g FA I                                           .1 7 4 * * *        .1 7 0 * *                                                                                .1 8 6 * * *        .1 7 4 * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (V )
                                                                           (.0 6 2 )          (.0 6 7 )                                                                                  (.0 6 8 )          (.0 7 1 )
                     L o g E x p o rts                                       .0 3 8             .0 3 8                                                  .0 2 7                             .0 2 7             .0 3 1                                                  .0 2 4
                                                                           (.0 2 9 )          (.0 3 0 )                                               (.0 2 9 )                          (.0 4 1 )          (.0 4 2 )                                               (.0 4 0 )




30
                     L o g Im p o rts                                       -.0 2 6                                                                                                       -.0 3 1
                                                                           (.0 3 3 )                                                                                                     (.0 3 3 )
                     L o g S te e l P ro d u c tio n                         .0 2 5                                                                                                        .0 1 9
                                                                           (.0 3 3 )                                                                                                     (.0 3 4 )
                     L o g R E Inve stm e nt                                                                                                            .0 2 5                                                                                                        .0 3 3
                                                                                                                                                      (.0 2 6 )                                                                                                     (.0 2 9 )
                     L o g A ir T h rp u t                                                                                                              .1 0 1                                                                                                        .0 7 8
                                                                                                                                                      (.0 7 6 )                                                                                                     (.0 7 1 )
                     Log LS G D P                                                                               -1 .4 4 6 * * *                                                                                               -1 .4 4 1 * * *
                                                                                                                  (.5 5 1 )                                                                                                     (.5 3 3 )
                     L o g F lo o r S p a c e                                                                                         .0 2 0                                                                                                        .0 5 8
                                                                                                                                    (.0 4 0 )                                                                                                     (.0 4 8 )
                     L o g F lo o r S ta rts                                                                                                            .0 0 5                                                                                                        .0 0 4
                                                                                                                                                      (.0 1 6 )                                                                                                     (.0 2 6 )
                     L o g P a sse n g e rs                                                                                           .0 1 2                                                                                                         .0 0 8
                                                                                                                                   (.0 2 4 )                                                                                                      (.0 2 2 )
                     W ith in R 2                           .2 0             .2 3               .2 2                .1 5              .1 7              .2 4              .1 7             .2 0                .1 9                .1 3              .1 5              .1 9
                     P re d ic tio n                        7 .2             4 .7               5 .6                9 .8              6 .9              6 .8              6 .9             5 .0                5 .9                9 .7              6 .5              6 .4
                     C I Fo r P re d ic tio n           (6 .7 ,9 .2 )    (4 .1 ,8 .3 )      (4 .4 ,8 .5 )      (9 .2 ,1 0 .4 )    (6 .1 ,8 .4 )    (5 .7 ,1 0 .3 )    (6 .5 ,9 .1 )   (3 .9 ,1 0 .5 )      (4 .6 ,9 .8 )      (8 .9 ,1 0 .4 )    (5 .9 ,7 .8 )    (5 .7 ,1 0 .6 )
                     N u m b e r o f O b s.                 270              270                270                270                270              270                270             270                  270                270                270              270
                     N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs             27              27                 27                  27                 27               27                 27               27                 27                   27                27                27

            Ta b le V p re se nts re g re ssio n s o f lo g lig ht inte n sity o n lo g p rov in c ia l G D P a n d c o m p o n e nts o f th e in d ic e s in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g s. S ta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d o n p rov in c e in p a re nth e se s. A ll p re d ic tio n s
     c o m p u te d u sin g th e m e th o d e x p la in e d in S e c tio n 4 . A ll in d e p e n d e nt va ria b le s a re fro m th e C E IC a n d liste d in th e n o te to Ta b le I; se e th e D a ta A p p e n d ix fo r d e ta ils.
                                                                                                                                                Ta b le V I

                                                                                                       C h in a : A lte rn a tive In d ic e s a n d L i K e q ia n g C o m p o n e nts
                                                                                          N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                                                     U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                                            (1 )             (2 )               (3 )                (4 )                 (5 )              (6 )             (7 )             (8 )              (9 )               (1 0 )            (1 1 )            (1 2 )

                                                           B a se         P se u d o        P se u d o          P se u d o           P se u d o        P se u d o         B a se         P se u d o         P se u d o         P se u d o         P se u d o        P se u d o
                                                           L in e        B a rc lay s     B lo o m b e rg         LS1                 CAP              Fe rn a ld         L in e        B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg        LS1               CAP              Fe rn a ld

                                                                                                                                 P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                    Log G D P                              .2 1 0 *          .1 6 4             .2 1 5          1 .2 0 5 * * *           .1 8 2          -.0 5 2            .1 9 4           .1 8 7            .2 3 8          1 .2 4 6 * * *        .0 8 9           -.0 2 2
                                                          (.1 2 5 )        (.2 1 6 )          (.1 9 0 )          (.4 6 2 )             (.1 2 6 )        (.1 9 9 )         (.1 2 5 )        (.2 2 1 )         (.1 9 6 )          (.4 6 8 )          (.1 5 4 )         (.1 9 8 )
                    L o g E le c tric ity                .1 3 4 * * *      .1 1 8 * *        .1 2 5 * * *         .0 9 9 * *           .1 1 9 * *       .1 0 9 * *       .1 2 9 * * *     .1 2 6 * * *      .1 3 7 * * *         .1 0 0 * *        .0 9 8 * *        .1 2 0 * *
                                                          (.0 4 2 )        (.0 4 7 )          (.0 4 0 )          (.0 4 3 )             (.0 4 6 )        (.0 5 4 )         (.0 4 1 )        (.0 4 2 )         (.0 4 4 )          (.0 4 1 )          (.0 4 2 )         (.0 5 3 )
                    L o g R a il Fre ig ht                .0 2 7 * *         .0 3 0             .0 2 9            .0 2 3 * *          .0 3 6 * * *      .0 3 4 * *        .0 3 3 * *        .0 3 1 *          .0 3 1 *           .0 2 7 * *       .0 4 8 * * *      .0 3 8 * * *
                                                          (.0 1 1 )        (.0 2 0 )          (.0 1 8 )          (.0 1 0 )             (.0 1 0 )        (.0 1 5 )         (.0 1 4 )        (.0 1 8 )         (.0 1 7 )          (.0 1 2 )          (.0 1 5 )         (.0 1 4 )
                    Log Loans                            .2 2 4 * * *      .2 0 6 * *         .2 0 8 * *          .2 3 5 * *          .2 7 9 * * *      .2 1 9 * *         .1 8 7 *         .1 8 0 *          .1 8 1 *            .1 9 9 *         .2 4 0 * *        .2 0 0 * *
                                                          (.0 8 6 )        (.0 9 2 )          (.0 8 9 )          (.0 9 5 )             (.0 9 6 )        (.1 0 3 )         (.1 0 0 )        (.0 9 7 )         (.0 9 6 )          (.1 0 8 )          (.1 0 8 )         (.0 9 9 )
                    L o g To ta l Fre ig ht                                 -.0 2 7                                                     -.0 3 4                                             -.0 1 4                                                 -.0 2 3
                                                                           (.0 3 5 )                                                   (.0 3 3 )                                           (.0 3 3 )                                               (.0 3 7 )
                    L o g R e ta il S a le s                                 .2 6 9             .1 5 9                                                    .3 8 4                             .1 5 6            .0 7 6                                                  .3 0 9
                                                                           (.2 9 4 )          (.2 5 1 )                                                 (.2 5 5 )                          (.3 2 2 )         (.2 5 7 )                                               (.2 9 3 )
                    L o g VA I                                              -.1 2 3            -.1 8 6                                                                                      -.1 4 4           -.1 9 5
                                                                           (.1 5 0 )          (.1 1 9 )                                                                                    (.1 4 5 )         (.1 2 1 )
                    L o g FA I                                             .1 6 5 * *         .1 6 5 * *                                                                                  .1 7 8 * * *       .1 7 1 * *
                                                                           (.0 6 4 )          (.0 6 7 )                                                                                    (.0 6 8 )         (.0 7 1 )                                                                    (V I)
                    L o g E x p o rts                                        .0 3 0             .0 2 9                                                    .0 2 7                             .0 2 3            .0 2 6                                                  .0 2 4
                                                                           (.0 3 1 )          (.0 3 2 )                                                 (.0 2 9 )                          (.0 4 0 )         (.0 4 1 )                                               (.0 4 0 )




31
                    L o g Im p o rts                                        -.0 1 9                                                                                                         -.0 2 5
                                                                           (.0 3 0 )                                                                                                       (.0 2 9 )
                    L o g S te e l P ro d u c tio n                          .0 2 9                                                                                                          .0 2 4
                                                                           (.0 3 2 )                                                                                                       (.0 3 2 )
                    Log LS G D P                                                                                -1 .0 6 3 * *                                                                                                  -1 .1 2 1 * *
                                                                                                                 (.4 7 8 )                                                                                                      (.4 9 9 )
                    L o g F lo o r S p a c e                                                                                            .0 5 6                                                                                                     .0 9 7 * *
                                                                                                                                      (.0 3 4 )                                                                                                    (.0 4 2 )
                    L o g P a sse n g e rs                                                                                              .0 3 1                                                                                                       .0 2 3
                                                                                                                                      (.0 2 8 )                                                                                                    (.0 2 7 )
                    L o g R E Inve stm e nt                                                                                                               .0 2 5                                                                                                      .0 3 3
                                                                                                                                                        (.0 2 6 )                                                                                                   (.0 2 9 )
                    L o g A ir T h rp u t                                                                                                                 .1 0 1                                                                                                      .0 7 8
                                                                                                                                                        (.0 7 6 )                                                                                                   (.0 7 1 )
                    L o g F lo o r S ta rts                                                                                                               .0 0 5                                                                                                      .0 0 4
                                                                                                                                                        (.0 1 6 )                                                                                                   (.0 2 6 )
                    W ith in R 2                            .2 0             .2 6               .2 6               .2 2                  .2 2              .2 4             .1 7             .2 3              .2 2                .2 0              .2 0              .1 9
                    P -va lu e 3 c o e ¤s e q u a l           0               0                  0                   0                    0                .0 1             .0 1               0                0                  .0 3              .1 2              .0 2
                    P re d ic tio n                         7 .2             5 .6               5 .8              1 0 .1                 7 .3              6 .8             6 .9             5 .7              5 .6               1 0 .0             6 .9              6 .4
                    C I Fo r P re d ic tio n            (6 .7 ,9 .2 )    (4 .7 ,9 .7 )     (5 .1 ,1 0 .1 )    (7 .4 ,1 0 .2 )       (6 .0 ,1 0 .0 )   (5 .8 ,1 0 .0 )   (6 .5 ,9 .1 )   (4 .3 ,1 0 .6 )   (4 .9 ,1 0 .3 )     (7 .5 ,1 0 .2 )   (5 .6 ,1 0 .2 )   (5 .8 ,1 0 .5 )
                    N u m b e r o f O b s.                  270              270               270                270                   270               270               270             270               270                 270               270               270
                    N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs              27              27                 27                  27                   27                27                27              27                27                  27                27                27

             Ta b le V I p re se nts re g re ssio n s o f lo g lig ht inte n sity o n lo g p rov in c ia l G D P, th e c o m p o n e nts o f th e L i K e q ia n g in d e x a n d c o m p o n e nts o f th e in d ic e s in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g s. S ta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d
     o n p rov in c e in p a re nth e se s. A ll p re d ic tio n s c o m p u te d u sin g th e m e th o d e x p la in e d in S e c tio n 4 . A ll in d e p e n d e nt va ria b le s a re fro m th e C E IC a n d liste d in th e n o te to Ta b le I; se e th e D a ta A p p e n d ix fo r
     d e ta ils.
     8.2          Results with De‡ators as Covariates
                                                                                                                                          Ta b le V I I

                                                                                                                 C h in a : A lte rn a tive In d ic e s a n d D e ‡a to rs
                                                                                             N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                                                U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                                                (1 )             (2 )              (3 )               (4 )            (5 )              (6 )              (7 )             (8 )               (9 )              (1 0 )           (1 1 )           (1 2 )

                                                                Li           P se u d o         P se u d o        P se u d o       P se u d o       P se u d o            Li            P se u d o         P se u d o         P se u d o      P se u d o        P se u d o
                                                            K e q ia n g    B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg        LS             CAP             Fe rn a ld        K e q ia n g     B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg         LS            CAP              Fe rn a ld

                                                                                                                             P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                       L o g E le c tric ity                 .1 3 8 * * *     .1 4 5 * * *      .1 7 8 * * *                       .2 5 3 * * *         .0 4 9         .1 3 3 * * *     .1 5 8 * * *       .1 9 9 * * *                        .2 1 7 * * *        .0 7 2
                                                              (.0 4 4 )        (.0 4 5 )         (.0 4 6 )                          (.0 4 6 )         (.0 5 3 )         (.0 4 3 )        (.0 4 9 )          (.0 5 2 )                           (.0 4 8 )        (.0 5 1 )
                       L o g R a il Fre ig ht                 .0 3 1 * *                                                                              .0 3 1 * *        .0 3 5 * *                                                                              .0 3 5 * * *
                                                              (.0 1 2 )                                                                               (.0 1 3 )         (.0 1 5 )                                                                                (.0 1 1 )
                       Log Loans                             .2 6 2 * * *                                                                             .2 3 6 * *        .2 2 1 * *                                                                                .2 2 5 *
                                                              (.0 9 9 )                                                                               (.1 1 8 )         (.1 1 1 )                                                                                (.1 1 5 )
                       L o g To ta l Fre ig ht                                  -.0 2 4                                               .0 2 2                                              -.0 0 3                                                .0 2 0
                                                                               (.0 3 7 )                                            (.0 3 6 )                                            (.0 3 6 )                                             (.0 4 1 )
                       L o g R e ta il S a le s                               .5 6 2 * * *      .4 8 1 * * *                                         .5 5 2 * * *                        .5 7 4 * *         .5 4 0 * *                                          .6 4 2 * * *
                                                                               (.1 9 6 )         (.1 7 1 )                                            (.1 9 7 )                          (.2 5 9 )          (.2 1 5 )                                            (.2 2 6 )
                       L o g VA I                                                .0 1 2           -.0 4 0                                                                                 -.0 1 2            -.0 4 4
                                                                               (.1 4 1 )         (.1 2 0 )                                                                               (.1 3 7 )          (.1 1 3 )
                       L o g FA I                                               .1 2 8 *           .1 2 2                                                                                .1 4 0 * *          .1 2 7 *
                                                                               (.0 6 9 )         (.0 7 6 )                                                                               (.0 7 1 )          (.0 7 7 )
                       L o g E x p o rts                                         .0 2 8            .0 2 6                                               .0 2 5                             .0 2 8             .0 3 0                                               .0 3 3
                                                                               (.0 2 6 )         (.0 3 0 )                                            (.0 2 6 )                          (.0 3 7 )          (.0 3 8 )                                            (.0 3 3 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (V I I)
                       L o g Im p o rts                                         -.0 4 8                                                                                                  -.0 5 0 *




32
                                                                               (.0 2 9 )                                                                                                 (.0 2 9 )
                       L o g S te e l P ro d u c tio n                           .0 4 5                                                                                                    .0 3 9
                                                                               (.0 3 2 )                                                                                                 (.0 3 6 )
                       Log LS G D P                                                                                .4 8 2 * * *                                                                                               .4 0 2 * *
                                                                                                                    (.1 3 5 )                                                                                                 (.1 7 0 )
                       L o g F lo o r S p a c e                                                                                       .0 6 0                                                                                                   .0 9 2 * *
                                                                                                                                    (.0 4 5 )                                                                                                  (.0 4 2 )
                       L o g P a sse n g e rs                                                                                        -.0 0 2                                                                                                    -.0 0 2
                                                                                                                                    (.0 2 4 )                                                                                                  (.0 2 2 )
                       L o g R E Inve stm e nt                                                                                                          .0 0 2                                                                                                     .0 0 7
                                                                                                                                                     (.0 2 5 )                                                                                                  (.0 3 0 )
                       L o g A ir T h rp u t                                                                                                            .0 4 6                                                                                                     .0 2 5
                                                                                                                                                     (.0 6 3 )                                                                                                  (.0 5 7 )
                       L o g F lo o r S ta rts                                                                                                         -.0 0 7                                                                                                    -.0 1 2
                                                                                                                                                     (.0 2 0 )                                                                                                  (.0 2 9 )
                       L o g FA I P ric e In d e x             .6 5 7            .1 7 7            .0 5 5                                              -.0 4 5           .6 5 9            .2 0 2             .0 8 4                                               .0 0 7
                                                             (.4 0 0 )        (.4 9 8 )         (.4 6 6 )                                            (.3 6 5 )         (.4 0 4 )        (.4 9 4 )          (.4 7 6 )                                            (.3 7 3 )
                       L o g R e ta il P ric e In d e x                        1 .0 3 9 *         1 .0 1 1                                          1 .2 6 9 * * *                       1 .1 3 7 *         1 .1 0 4 *                                         1 .4 4 5 * * *
                                                                              (.6 0 9 )         (.6 1 8 )                                            (.4 8 5 )                          (.6 1 4 )          (.6 2 0 )                                            (.5 4 4 )
                       W ith in R 2                             .2 1             .2 4              .2 3               .0 7            .1 4              .2 6             .1 8              .2 2               .2 0               .0 5            .1 3              .2 3
                       P re d ic tio n                          7 .7             8 .8              8 .8               6 .8            7 .1              9 .4             7 .7              9 .0               8 .8               6 .8            6 .8              9 .4
                       C I Fo r P re d ic tio n             (6 .5 ,9 .5 )    (6 .0 ,9 .8 )     (6 .1 ,9 .7 )      (6 .8 ,6 .8 )   (6 .4 ,8 .4 )    (7 .9 ,1 0 .4 )   (6 .4 ,9 .3 )    (6 .2 ,1 0 .2 )     (6 .6 ,9 .7 )      (6 .8 ,6 .8 )   (6 .4 ,7 .9 )    (8 .2 ,1 0 .2 )
                       N u m b e r o f O b s.                   270              270               270                270             270              270               270               270                270                270             270              270
                       N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs               27               27                27                 27              27                27              27                 27                 27                27               27                27

           Ta b le V I I p re se nts re g re ssio n s o f lo g lig ht inte n sity o n c o m p o n e nts o f th e in d ic e s in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g s. S ta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d o n p rov in c e in p a re nth e se s. A ll p re d ic tio n s c o m p u te d u sin g th e
     m e th o d e x p la in e d in S e c tio n 4 . A ll in d e p e n d e nt va ria b le s a re fro m th e C E IC a n d liste d in th e n o te to Ta b le I (d e ‡a to rs d e sc rib e d in th e te x t); se e th e D a ta A p p e n d ix fo r d e ta ils.
                                                                                                                                                Ta b le V I I I




                                                                                                           C h in a : A lte rn a tive In d ic e s, G D P a n d D e ‡a to rs
                                                                                         N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                                                      U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                                          (1 )              (2 )               (3 )                (4 )               (5 )                (6 )             (7 )             (8 )                (9 )               (1 0 )             (1 1 )            (1 2 )

                                                          Li            P se u d o         P se u d o           P se u d o         P se u d o         P se u d o           Li            P se u d o         P se u d o           P se u d o        P se u d o        P se u d o
                                                      K e q ia n g     B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg           LS               CAP               Fe rn a ld       K e q ia n g     B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg           LS              CAP              Fe rn a ld

                                                                                                                             P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

                Log R eal G D P                           .2 1 3          .7 9 5 * *         .8 3 2 * *        2 .0 1 7 * * *      .4 0 2 * * *          .1 2 0            .2 1 2       1 .0 7 7 * * *       1 .0 2 5 * *       2 .0 1 1 * * *        .3 2 1 *           .1 2 3
                                                        (.1 8 7 )         (.3 5 3 )          (.3 2 7 )          (.5 5 3 )           (.1 4 8 )          (.2 2 6 )         (.1 8 8 )        (.4 0 7 )           (.4 0 0 )          (.5 9 1 )           (.1 8 5 )         (.2 3 7 )
                L o g E le c tric ity                  .1 3 4 * * *      .1 4 2 * * *       .1 6 9 * * *                           .2 1 6 * * *          .0 6 0         .1 3 2 * * *     .1 3 6 * * *        .1 7 2 * * *                           .1 9 5 * * *         .0 7 9
                                                        (.0 4 7 )         (.0 4 0 )          (.0 4 4 )                              (.0 3 8 )          (.0 5 4 )         (.0 4 6 )        (.0 4 7 )           (.0 5 0 )                              (.0 3 9 )         (.0 5 1 )
                L o g R a il Fre ig ht                  .0 2 6 * *                                                                                     .0 3 1 * *        .0 3 1 * *                                                                                   .0 3 6 * * *
                                                        (.0 1 1 )                                                                                      (.0 1 3 )         (.0 1 4 )                                                                                     (.0 1 2 )
                Log Loans                               .2 2 6 * *                                                                                     .2 4 4 * *         .1 9 0 *                                                                                     .2 3 0 * *
                                                        (.0 9 1 )                                                                                      (.1 0 9 )         (.1 0 2 )                                                                                     (.1 0 5 )
                L o g To ta l Fre ig ht                                    .0 0 3                                                   -.0 2 5                                                 .0 2 4                                                   -.0 1 5
                                                                         (.0 3 8 )                                                 (.0 3 6 )                                             (.0 4 4 )                                                  (.0 4 0 )
                L o g R e ta il S a le s                                   .3 3 4             .1 8 5                                                   .5 8 2 * * *                         .0 8 0             -.0 2 3                                                .6 3 7 * * *
                                                                         (.2 6 6 )          (.2 4 7 )                                                   (.2 2 3 )                        (.2 9 3 )           (.2 7 8 )                                                 (.2 4 5 )
                L o g VA I                                                -.2 7 2           -.3 1 4 * *                                                                                  -.3 8 1 * *         -.3 8 1 * *
                                                                         (.1 7 7 )          (.1 4 0 )                                                                                    (.1 8 5 )           (.1 5 8 )
                L o g FA I                                               .1 3 5 * *          .1 2 8 *                                                                                    .1 5 4 * *           .1 3 8 * *
                                                                         (.0 6 4 )          (.0 6 8 )                                                                                    (.0 6 2 )           (.0 6 8 )
                L o g E x p o rts                                          .0 4 0            .0 4 8 *                                                    .0 2 0                             .0 2 9              .0 4 3                                                  .0 2 6
                                                                         (.0 2 6 )          (.0 2 6 )                                                  (.0 2 7 )                         (.0 3 6 )           (.0 3 5 )                                                (.0 3 5 )




33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (V I I I)
                L o g Im p o rts                                          -.0 3 7                                                                                                          -.0 4 7
                                                                         (.0 3 1 )                                                                                                       (.0 3 2 )
                L o g S te e l P ro d u c tio n                            .0 5 2                                                                                                           .0 5 6
                                                                         (.0 3 9 )                                                                                                       (.0 3 9 )
                Log LS G D P                                                                                   -1 .5 4 8 * * *                                                                                                  -1 .5 7 3 * * *
                                                                                                                 (.5 2 1 )                                                                                                        (.5 2 7 )
                L o g F lo o r S p a c e                                                                                             .0 2 0                                                                                                           .0 5 8
                                                                                                                                   (.0 4 0 )                                                                                                        (.0 4 8 )
                L o g P a sse n g e rs                                                                                               .0 1 2                                                                                                           .0 0 8
                                                                                                                                   (.0 2 4 )                                                                                                        (.0 2 3 )
                L o g R E Inve stm e nt                                                                                                                   .0 0 1                                                                                                         .0 0 6
                                                                                                                                                       (.0 2 8 )                                                                                                      (.0 3 4 )
                L o g A ir T h rp u t                                                                                                                     .0 4 3                                                                                                         .0 2 1
                                                                                                                                                       (.0 7 5 )                                                                                                      (.0 6 9 )
                L o g F lo o r S ta rts                                                                                                                  -.0 1 1                                                                                                        -.0 1 4
                                                                                                                                                       (.0 1 8 )                                                                                                      (.0 2 8 )
                L o g D e ‡a to r                         .0 8 4           -.1 4 3             .0 5 4          1 .8 7 9 * * *        .3 5 5              -.1 9 4          .0 5 0           -.2 5 8             .0 2 5           1 .8 1 4 * * *        .2 4 6            -.1 7 4
                                                        (.2 5 2 )        (.3 3 8 )          (.2 6 5 )           (.4 9 6 )          (.2 7 1 )           (.2 8 8 )        (.2 5 6 )        (.3 5 2 )          (.2 7 1 )            (.4 7 6 )          (.2 7 7 )         (.2 8 3 )
                L o g FA I P ric e In d e x               .5 7 1            .2 9 8             .0 8 0                                                     .0 2 4          .5 9 6            .4 5 8             .1 7 7                                                    .0 7 2
                                                        (.4 2 2 )        (.4 9 6 )          (.4 4 0 )                                                  (.3 6 4 )        (.4 4 8 )        (.5 2 4 )          (.4 6 8 )                                                 (.3 9 3 )
                L o g R e ta il P ric e In d e x                         1 .2 1 3 * *       1 .1 2 1 * *                                              1 .4 3 1 * * *                     1 .2 0 6 * *        1 .0 5 8 *                                              1 .5 6 8 * * *
                                                                         (.5 6 6 )          (.5 5 0 )                                                  (.4 9 4 )                         (.5 4 2 )          (.5 5 0 )                                                 (.5 4 9 )
                W ith in R 2                              .2 1              .2 7               .2 6                .1 5               .1 7                .2 7             .1 8             .2 6               .2 3                 .1 3              .1 5               .2 4
                P re d ic tio n                           6 .8              7 .8               7 .8                9 .6               6 .6                9 .4             6 .9             7 .4               7 .6                 9 .7              6 .4               9 .3
                C I Fo r P re d ic tio n              (5 .9 ,8 .9 )     (4 .6 ,9 .4 )      (6 .4 ,9 .4 )      (8 .7 ,1 0 .0 )     (6 .2 ,7 .9 )      (8 .1 ,1 0 .4 )   (5 .8 ,9 .0 )    (5 .1 ,9 .2 )      (6 .4 ,9 .3 )       (8 .7 ,1 0 .1 )    (6 .1 ,7 .9 )     (8 .1 ,1 0 .2 )
                N u m b e r o f O b s.                    270               270                270                270                 270                270               270              270                270                 270                270               270
                N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs                27                27                 27                 27                  27                  27               27               27                 27                  27                 27                 27


            Ta b le V I I I p re se nts re g re ssio n s o f lo g lig ht inte n sity o n lo g p rov in c ia l G D P a n d c o m p o n e nts o f th e in d ic e s in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g s. S ta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d o n p rov in c e in p a re nth e se s. A ll p re d ic tio n s
     c o m p u te d u sin g th e m e th o d e x p la in e d in S e c tio n 4 . A ll in d e p e n d e nt va ria b le s a re fro m th e C E IC a n d liste d in th e n o te to Ta b le I (d e ‡a to rs d e sc rib e d in th e te x t); se e th e D a ta A p p e n d ix fo r d e ta ils.
                                                                                                                                           Ta b le IX

                                                                                                  C h in a : A lte rn a tive In d ic e s, L i K e q ia n g C o m p o n e nts a n d D e ‡a to rs
                                                                                       N o U rban P ct. by Year F E                                                                                                      U rban P ct. by Year F E
                                                (1 )              (2 )               (3 )               (4 )              (5 )              (6 )              (7 )             (8 )             (9 )               (1 0 )             (1 1 )            (1 2 )           (1 3 )             (1 4 )

                                              B a se          P se u d o         P se u d o          P se u d o       P se u d o        P se u d o           A ll             B a se         P se u d o         P se u d o          P se u d o       P se u d o        P se u d o           A ll
                                              L in e         B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg          LS             CAP              Fe rn a ld       C o ntro ls          L in e        B a rc lay s      B lo o m b e rg          LS             CAP              Fe rn a ld       C o ntro ls

                                                                                                                                   P rovince and Year F ixed E ¤ ects

       Log R eal G D P                          .2 1 3          .5 7 0 *          .5 9 0 * *         2 .8 6 8 * *         .2 0 9           .1 2 0             .7 6 7           .2 1 2         .8 3 2 * *         .7 5 0 * *         3 .0 1 5 * *         .1 4 4           .1 2 3            1 .0 5 7
                                              (.1 8 7 )        (.3 1 6 )          (.2 9 0 )          (1 .2 7 5 )        (.1 6 1 )        (.2 2 6 )        (1 .8 0 6 )        (.1 8 8 )        (.3 7 2 )          (.3 8 2 )          (1 .3 4 1 )        (.1 8 2 )        (.2 3 7 )        (1 .7 6 7 )
       L o g E le c tric ity                 .1 3 4 * * *        .0 6 3            .0 8 8 *            .0 8 9 *         .1 2 2 * *         .0 6 0             .0 6 1        .1 3 2 * * *        .0 6 5           .0 9 9 * *           .0 8 9 *         .1 0 6 * *         .0 7 9             .0 6 5
                                              (.0 4 7 )        (.0 5 4 )          (.0 4 8 )           (.0 5 0 )         (.0 5 1 )        (.0 5 4 )          (.0 4 2 )        (.0 4 6 )        (.0 5 0 )          (.0 4 9 )           (.0 4 8 )         (.0 4 7 )        (.0 5 1 )         (.0 4 1 )
       L o g R a il Fre ig ht                 .0 2 6 * *         .0 2 2            .0 2 5 *           .0 1 9 * *       .0 3 3 * * *      .0 3 1 * *           .0 1 6         .0 3 1 * *         .0 2 0           .0 2 7 * *          .0 2 3 * *       .0 4 5 * * *     .0 3 6 * * *          .0 1 9
                                              (.0 1 1 )        (.0 1 4 )          (.0 1 3 )           (.0 0 8 )         (.0 1 2 )        (.0 1 3 )          (.0 1 7 )        (.0 1 4 )        (.0 1 2 )          (.0 1 3 )           (.0 0 9 )         (.0 1 6 )        (.0 1 2 )         (.0 1 8 )
       Log Loans                              .2 2 6 * *       .2 2 9 * *         .2 2 7 * *         .2 4 2 * * *      .2 8 1 * * *      .2 4 4 * *        .2 5 8 * * *       .1 9 0 *        .2 1 0 * *         .2 0 5 * *           .2 0 5 *         .2 4 5 * *       .2 3 0 * *         .2 3 9 * *
                                              (.0 9 1 )        (.1 0 6 )          (.1 0 3 )           (.0 9 3 )         (.0 9 7 )        (.1 0 9 )          (.0 9 8 )        (.1 0 2 )        (.1 0 0 )          (.1 0 2 )           (.1 0 5 )         (.1 0 6 )        (.1 0 5 )         (.0 9 6 )
       L o g To ta l Fre ig ht                                   .0 0 1                                                  -.0 3 5                             -.0 1 6                            .0 2 0                                                  -.0 2 3                              .0 0 1
                                                               (.0 3 8 )                                                (.0 3 6 )                           (.0 4 2 )                         (.0 4 0 )                                                (.0 3 9 )                          (.0 4 3 )
       L o g R e ta il S a le s                                  .4 4 8             .3 0 7                                               .5 8 2 * * *         .4 4 3                            .2 5 3             .1 6 3                                              .6 3 7 * * *          .3 6 8
                                                               (.2 8 7 )          (.2 7 7 )                                               (.2 2 3 )         (.2 9 1 )                         (.2 9 2 )          (.2 9 2 )                                              (.2 4 5 )         (.3 0 7 )
       L o g VA I                                               -.2 3 0           -.2 6 6 * *                                                                -.2 4 4                          -.3 2 5 *          -.3 1 8 * *                                                               -.2 8 2 *
                                                               (.1 6 2 )          (.1 3 1 )                                                                 (.1 5 6 )                         (.1 7 2 )          (.1 5 5 )                                                                (.1 7 1 )
       L o g FA I                                               .1 2 1 *           .1 1 7 *                                                                 .1 6 3 * *                        .1 4 0 * *          .1 2 7 *                                                                 .1 6 5 * *
                                                               (.0 6 3 )          (.0 6 5 )                                                                 (.0 6 8 )                         (.0 6 1 )          (.0 6 5 )                                                                (.0 6 7 )
       L o g E x p o rts                                         .0 3 1             .0 3 8                                                 .0 2 0             .0 2 8                            .0 2 7             .0 3 9                                                 .0 2 6             .0 3 0
                                                               (.0 2 7 )          (.0 2 7 )                                              (.0 2 7 )          (.0 2 8 )                         (.0 3 3 )          (.0 3 3 )                                              (.0 3 5 )         (.0 3 4 )
       L o g Im p o rts                                         -.0 3 3                                                                                      -.0 2 6                           -.0 4 3                                                                                      -.0 3 5
                                                               (.0 2 9 )                                                                                    (.0 3 5 )                         (.0 2 9 )                                                                                   (.0 3 5 )




34
       L o g S te e l P ro d u c tio n                           .0 5 4                                                                                       .0 5 8                            .0 5 9                                                                                       .0 6 2
                                                               (.0 3 9 )                                                                                    (.0 3 9 )                         (.0 3 8 )                                                                                   (.0 4 0 )
       Log LS G D P                                                                                  -2 .5 2 4 * *                                           -.2 0 2                                                                -2 .6 7 4 * *                                           -.3 6 4
                                                                                                     (1 .2 4 3 )                                          (1 .6 9 1 )                                                               (1 .3 0 3 )                                          (1 .7 2 6 )
       L o g F lo o r S p a c e                                                                                          .0 4 5                               .0 2 1                                                                                  .0 8 7 * *                             .0 3 7
                                                                                                                       (.0 3 5 )                            (.0 5 3 )                                                                                 (.0 4 2 )                           (.0 4 4 )
       L o g P a sse n g e rs                                                                                            .0 3 5                               .0 2 2                                                                                    .0 2 8                               .0 2 0
                                                                                                                       (.0 2 7 )                            (.0 2 9 )                                                                                 (.0 2 6 )                           (.0 2 9 )
       L o g R E Inve stm e nt                                                                                                              .0 0 1           -.0 2 8                                                                                                      .0 0 6            -.0 3 2
                                                                                                                                         (.0 2 8 )          (.0 2 9 )                                                                                                  (.0 3 4 )          (.0 2 9 )
       L o g A ir T h rp u t                                                                                                                .0 4 3            .0 5 6                                                                                                      .0 2 1             .0 2 8
                                                                                                                                         (.0 7 5 )          (.0 7 3 )                                                                                                  (.0 6 9 )          (.0 6 9 )
       L o g F lo o r S ta rts                                                                                                             -.0 1 1           -.0 1 9                                                                                                     -.0 1 4            -.0 1 1
                                                                                                                                         (.0 1 8 )          (.0 2 3 )                                                                                                  (.0 2 8 )          (.0 3 1 )
       L o g D e ‡a to r                        .0 8 4           -.3 0 4            -.1 1 7          2 .4 5 7 * *        .0 6 7            -.1 9 4           -.1 2 1           .0 5 0          -.3 9 8             -.1 3 1          2 .5 7 8 * *       -.0 3 8           -.1 7 4            -.0 2 4
                                              (.2 5 2 )        (.3 3 8 )          (.2 7 1 )          (1 .1 5 5 )       (.2 6 9 )         (.2 8 8 )        (1 .6 6 8 )        (.2 5 6 )       (.3 3 5 )           (.2 6 4 )          (1 .2 1 2 )       (.2 7 8 )        (.2 8 3 )         (1 .7 0 1 )
       L o g FA I P ric e In d e x              .5 7 1            .2 5 1             .0 2 3           -1 .0 2 7          .5 4 0             .0 2 4            .1 4 8           .5 9 6           .3 9 7              .0 9 6           -1 .0 9 6          .4 7 5            .0 7 2             .1 5 3
                                              (.4 2 2 )        (.4 2 6 )          (.3 7 1 )           (.8 9 5 )        (.4 3 1 )         (.3 6 4 )        (1 .0 5 1 )        (.4 4 8 )       (.4 5 9 )           (.3 9 7 )           (.9 2 0 )        (.4 0 5 )        (.3 9 3 )         (1 .0 8 8 )
       L o g R e ta il P ric e In d e x                       1 .3 1 7 * * *     1 .2 4 5 * * *                                         1 .4 3 1 * * *      1 .2 3 1 *                      1 .3 5 7 * * *      1 .2 3 6 * * *                                        1 .5 6 8 * * *       1 .2 8 9 *
                                                               (.4 5 9 )          (.4 4 1 )                                              (.4 9 4 )          (.6 4 6 )                        (.4 6 3 )           (.4 6 3 )                                             (.5 4 9 )          (.6 7 5 )
       W ith in R 2                             .2 1              .3 0               .2 9               .2 3             .2 3               .2 7              .3 2             .1 8             .2 9                .2 7               .2 1              .2 1             .2 4               .3 0
       P -va lu e 3 c o e ¤s e q u a l            0               .0 1                 0                  0                0                .0 3              .0 1             .0 1             .0 4                .0 2               .0 4              .0 8             .0 6               .0 5
       P re d ic tio n                          6 .8              8 .2               8 .0              1 0 .1            6 .7               9 .4              8 .6             6 .9             7 .8                7 .6              1 0 .1             6 .4             9 .3               8 .5
       C I Fo r P re d ic tio n             (5 .9 ,8 .9 )    (5 .2 ,1 0 .0 )     (5 .8 ,9 .5 )     (8 .5 ,1 0 .4 )   (5 .6 ,9 .2 )     (8 .1 ,1 0 .4 )   (7 .0 ,1 0 .6 )   (5 .8 ,9 .0 )    (5 .5 ,9 .9 )       (5 .8 ,9 .4 )     (8 .5 ,1 0 .3 )    (5 .6 ,9 .8 )   (8 .1 ,1 0 .2 )    (6 .5 ,1 0 .2 )
       N u m b e r o f O b s.                   270              270                 270               270               270               270                270              270              270                 270               270                270             270                 270
       N u m b e r o f C lu ste rs               27                27                 27                27                27                 27                27               27               27                  27                 27               27                27                 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (IX )
            Ta b le IX p re se nts re g re ssio n s o f lo g lig ht inte n sity o n lo g p rov in c ia l G D P, th e c o m p o n e nts o f th e L i K e q ia n g in d e x a n d c o m p o n e nts o f th e in d ic e s in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g s. S ta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d
     o n p rov in c e in p a re nth e se s. A ll p re d ic tio n s c o m p u te d u sin g th e m e th o d e x p la in e d in S e c tio n 4 . A ll in d e p e n d e nt va ria b le s a re fro m th e C E IC a n d liste d in th e n o te to Ta b le I (d e ‡a to rs d e sc rib e d in th e
     te x t); se e th e D a ta A p p e n d ix fo r d e ta ils.
9    Figures

           Figure 1                                                                                                   (1)




                      Figure 2                                                                                        (2)

                                                     Growth Rates of Chinese Output Indicators
                                          30


                                          20
                         Growth Rate, %




                                          10


                                           0


                                          -10


                                          -20
                                            2005q1         2008q1           2011q1         2014q1            2017q1
                                                                             date

                                                      GDP Growth             Li Keqiang         Electricity Growth
                                                      Freight Growth         Loan Growth




    All data from CEIC




                                                                       35
                                            Figure 3                                                                                                                                                                                          (3)

                                                                                                                    GDP and Lights
                                                                  40


                                                                  30
                                               Growth Rate, %
                                                                  20


                                                                  10


                                                                       0


                                                                 -10
                                                                           2005          2006          2007         2008      2009                         2010          2011               2012       2013
                                                                                                                              year
                                                                                                 Official Real GDP Growth                                         Aggregate Lights Growth




GDP data from CEIC; lights data from NOAA


      Figure 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (4)
                                      Official and Provincial Statistics: Real GDP                                                                         Official and Provincial Statistics: Nominal GDP
                         20
                                                                                                                                               20
        Growth Rate, %




                                                                                                                              Growth Rate, %




                         15
                                                                                                                                               15




                         10                                                                                                                    10




                         5                                                                                                                     5
                              2005   2006   2007                2008       2009   2010   2011   2012    2013    2014   2015                         2005   2006   2007    2008      2009     2010   2011    2012     2013     2014     2015
                                                                                  year                                                                                                       year
                                        Official Real GDP Growth                         Province-Aggregate Real GDP Growth                                   Official Nominal GDP Growth            Province-Aggregate Nominal GDP Growth




All data from CEIC




                                                                                                                       36
                 Figure 5                                                                                     (5)

                                               Growth of Official GDP and Proxy Indexes
                                     20
                                     19
                                     18
                                     17
                                     16
                                     15
                                     14
                    Growth Rate, %
                                     13
                                     12
                                     11
                                     10
                                      9
                                      8
                                      7
                                      6
                                      5
                                      4
                                      3
                                      2
                                      1
                                      0

                                      2007q1       2009q3             2012q1           2014q3        2017q1
                                                                       date3

                                                Official GDP               Bloomberg            Barclays
                                                Lombard Street             CAP




Sources: Barclays, Bloomberg, Capital Economics and Lombard Street Research




                                                                 37
                   Figure 7                                                                                                     (7)

                                                Province and Year Fixed Effects: GDP and LK
                                    14



                                    12

                      Growth Rate
                                    10



                                     8



                                     6

                                         2005q3               2008q1               2010q3               2013q1         2015q3
                                                                                    date

                                                          Official GDP Growth                       Predicted GDP Growth
                                         Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4


                   Figure 8                                                                                                     (8)

                                          Province and Year Fixed Effects: Separate Measures
                                    14



                                    12
                      Growth Rate




                                    10



                                    8



                                    6
                                         2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                                    date

                                                          Official GDP Growth                       Predicted GDP Growth
                                         Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4




                                                                             38
                   Figure 9                                                                                                     (9)

                                                   Province and Year Fixed Effects: Baseline
                                    14



                                    12
                      Growth Rate

                                    10



                                    8



                                    6
                                         2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                                    date

                                                          Official GDP Growth                       Predicted GDP Growth
                                         Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4




                                                                            39
      Figure 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (10)
                                                                 Li Keqiang                                                                                           Pseudo Barclays                                                                                         Pseudo Bloomberg
                       14                                                                                                        14                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                                 12                                                                                                        12
                       12

                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                                        10
                       10
                                                                                                                                 8                                                                                                         8




         Growth Rate
                                                                                                                   Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Growth Rate
                       8                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6

                                                                                                                                 4
                       6                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                            2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                       date                                                                                                      date                                                                                                      date

                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth
                            Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




                                                        Deflators+Li Keqiang                                                                                 Deflators+Pseudo Barclays                                                                               Deflators+Pseudo Bloomberg
                       14                                                                                                        14                                                                                                        14



                       12                                                                                                        12                                                                                                        12




40
                       10                                                                                                        10                                                                                                        10




         Growth Rate
                                                                                                                   Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Growth Rate




                       8                                                                                                         8                                                                                                         8



                       6                                                                                                         6                                                                                                         6
                            2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                       date                                                                                                      date                                                                                                      date

                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth
                            Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




     Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4
      Figure 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (11)
                                                                 Pseudo LS                                                                                               Pseudo CAP                                                                                              Pseudo Fernald
                       14                                                                                                        14                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                                 12
                       12                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                 10
                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                 8




         Growth Rate
                                                                                                                   Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Growth Rate
                       8                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                 6


                       6                                                                                                         4                                                                                                         6

                            2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                       date                                                                                                      date                                                                                                      date

                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth
                            Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




                                                        Deflators+Pseudo LS                                                                                     Deflators+Pseudo CAP                                                                                    Deflators+Pseudo Fernald
                       14                                                                                                        14                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                                 12
                       12                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12




41
                                                                                                                                 10
                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                 8




         Growth Rate
                                                                                                                   Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Growth Rate




                       8                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                 6


                       6                                                                                                         4                                                                                                         6
                            2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3                      2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                       date                                                                                                      date                                                                                                      date

                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth
                            Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction                               Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction




     Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4
      Figure 12                                                                                                    (12)


                                                        Deflators: All Controls
                       14



                       12
         Growth Rate




                       10



                       8



                       6
                            2005q3               2008q1               2010q3              2013q1          2015q3
                                                                       date

                                             Official GDP Growth                      Predicted GDP Growth
                            Shaded region indicates bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for prediction



Red vertical line indicates end of calibration period; blue vertical line indicates 2015 Q4




                                                                 42
10     Data Appendix
The raw data for this analysis was collected from the CEIC China Premium database, with all series,
calculations, and adjustments (as relevant) described below (CEIC series codes are available on request). The
main regressions using provincial and nighttime light data were conducted with annual series. National level
GDP forecasts utilized quarterly series. All growth rates were calculated as year-over-year log di¤erences.
    Log GDP: Log nominal or real GDP (depending on context).
    Log Primary, Log Secondary, Log Tertiary: Log nominal or real GDP (depending on context) by
sector.
    Log LS GDP: Log real “Pseudo Lombard St. GDP”. LS GDP was calculated from o¢ cial nominal
GDP growth and a de‡ator comprised of the weighted average of the CPI, …xed asset price index, and export
and import unit value indexes, using 2010 GDP weights of consumption, investment, exports, and imports.
The resulting series has a correlation of 0.97 with the actual Lombard Street Research proprietary real GDP
index, which was kindly provided to the authors for comparison.
    Log Electricity: Log electricity production, kWh bn, at national and provincial level. Due to missing
data in 1/2016 and 2/2016, data for Q1 2016 is …lled-in by linear interpolation.
    Log Rail Freight: Railway freight tra¢ c, million tons.
    Log Loans: Log bank loans in local currency. Provincial annual data is the annual average of monthly
data. In order to help control for certain bad loan write-o¤s and series breaks, national level monthly data
is computed from the stock of RMB loans at end 2001 and the cumulative “new increased loans in local
currency” from the o¢ cial aggregate …nancing (“total social …nancing”) data. The national level quarterly
data is computed as the three month average of this monthly data.
    Log Total Freight: Log total freight tra¢ c, million tons, by air, inland water, rail, and road.
    Log Retail Sales: Log retail sales of consumer goods, RMB billions, at provincial level. To mitigate
problems caused by missing data in January and February, substantial discrepancies between o¢ cially pub-
lished year-to-date and monthly data in levels, and substantial discrepancies between o¢ cially published
levels and percent changes, the following methodology is used to construct the national quarterly series: A
nominal index in levels is constructed from the o¢ cially published seasonally adjusted monthly change from
1/2011 to the present, and backwards from 12/2010 to 1/2004 using the o¢ cially published percent year-
over-year change series, which is regarded as being adjusted to make data comparable to earlier readings. It
should be noted that the methodology underlying the o¢ cially published percent change is non-transparent,
appears to have undergone numerous series breaks since the mid-1990s, and in years prior to 2011 at least
may have included some adjustments for price increases. In practice, during the period 2005 to 2010 the
o¢ cially published year-over-year percent change is always nearly identical to the percent change computed
from o¢ cially published levels except for 2005 and 2010, when the o¢ cially published percent change is sub-
stantially lower and smoother. The quarterly index is computed as the three-month average of this monthly
index.
    Log VAI: Log real value added of industry. For provincial annual data indexes in levels are computed
from o¢ cial real percent growth data. To minimize missing data, for national level data an index is levels is
computed from o¢ cial monthly seasonally adjusted changes from 1/2011 to the present, and backwards from
12/2010 to 1/2004 from the o¢ cially published real percent year-over-year changes. The quarterly index
is computed as the three-month average of the monthly data. Due to missing data in January, the …rst
quarters of 2004 to 2011 includes only February and March.
    Log FAI: Log of nominal …xed asset investment, RMB millions. Quarterly national level series is
computed from the o¢ cially reported year-to-date data.
    Log Exports: Log exports, by location of exporter, USD millions, at national and provincial level.
Converted to RMB at the average annual or quarterly exchange rate, as relevant.
    Log Imports: Log imports, by location of importer, USD millions, at national and provincial level.
Converted to RMB at the average annual or quarterly exchange rate, as relevant.
    Log Steel Production: Log industrial production of steel products, thousand tons, at provincial level
from China Iron and Steel Association, and at national level from National Bureau of Statistics. The
quarterly national level series is computed from the o¢ cially reported year-to-date data.
    Log Floor Space: Log of ‡oor space under construction, commodity building residential and non-
residential, square meters, at national and provincial level. Annual data is ‡oor space under construction as


                                                     43
of December. Quarterly is ‡oor space under construction as of the end of each quarter.
    Log Floor Start: Log of ‡oor space started, commodity building residential and non-residential, square
meters. Annual series is cumulative starts through December of each year. Quarterly series is ‡oor space
started in each quarter computed from o¢ cially published year-to-date monthly data.
    Log Passengers: Log of transport passenger tra¢ c by air, road, water, and rail, millions of persons.
    Log RE Investment: Log of real estate investment, RMB millions. Quarterly series is computed from
o¢ cially published year-to-date data.
    Log Air Thrput: Log of airport passenger tra¢ c. Provincial data is “airport passenger throughput”
in thousands of persons and national data is “air passenger tra¢ c” in millions of persons.
    Log De‡ator: Implicit overall GDP de‡ators computed from nominal and real GDP series for both
annual provincial GDP and quarterly national GDP.
    Log FAI Price Index: Log of the …xed asset price index at the national level.
    Log Retail Price Index: Log of the retail price index at the national level.




                                                   44
