NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS EUROPE AN OPTIMAL POLITICAL AREA?
Alberto Alesina
Guido Tabellini
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 23325
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23325

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

Prepared for the BPEA 2017 Conference. We are grateful to our editor Jim Stock and our
discussants Markus Brunnermeier and Elias Papaioannou for detailed comments on an earlier
draft. Matilde Bombardini, Nicola Gennaioli, Francesco Giavazzi, Luigi Guiso, Francesco
Passarelli, and Eric Weese provided useful comments. We thank Bocconi University and CIFAR
for financial support and Igor Cerasa, Clémence Idoux, Matteo Ferroni, Armando Miano, and
Giorgio Saponaro for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Alberto Alesina, Guido Tabellini, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Europe an Optimal Political Area?
Alberto Alesina, Guido Tabellini, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 23325
April 2017
JEL No. P48,Z1
ABSTRACT
Employing a wide range of individual-level surveys, we study the extent of cultural and
institutional heterogeneity within the EU and how this changed between 1980 and 2008. We
present several novel empirical regularities that paint a complex picture. While Europe has
experienced both systematic economic convergence and an increased coordination across national
and subnational business cycles since 1980, this was not accompanied by cultural nor institutional
convergence. Such persistent heterogeneity does not necessarily spell doom for further political
integration, however. Compared to observed heterogeneity within member states themselves, or
in well functioning federations such as the US, cultural diversity across EU members is a similar
order of magnitude. The main stumbling block on the road to further political integration is not
heterogeneity of tastes or of cultural traits, but other cleavages, such as national identities.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Guido Tabellini
IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
guido.tabellini@unibocconi.it

Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
and CIFAR
and also NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca

Introduction
The European Union (EU) is in trouble. Throughout the EU, citizens have
become less trusting of EU institutions and less tolerant of supranational
interferences with domestic policies. As a result, the process of European
integration is struggling and, for the first time it may have reversed direction.
In 2016 the United Kingdom chose to leave. The threat of Greece being
forced out of the Eurozone is looming. European nationalistic parties, who
blame the EU for everything that is wrong in their own country, have gained
popularity. Animosity between countries and, particularly, a North versus
South cleavage is becoming more apparent.1
Why is this happening? Is it just a by-product of the recent financial
crisis? Or are the recent tensions a manifestation of pre-existing and deeper
cleavages? By making Europeans more interdependent, the process of economic integration was also supposed to lead to cultural assimilation and
deeper political integration. Was the project too ambitious, because Europeans are too heterogeneous in their economic interests, beliefs, and sociocultural values to form a successful political union? Or are the current diﬃculties mainly an artefact of inadequate supranational institutions, which may
induce voters and their representatives to pursue national interests without
a unified European perspective? And was the process of European economic
integration accompanied by cultural assimilation? These are the general
questions motivating this paper. The answers are not simple and we uncover
forces pushing in opposite directions.
We rely on the conceptual framework suggested by the economic analysis
of political integration (e.g. Alesina and Spolaore, 2007). This literature emphasizes the trade-oﬀ between the benefit of integration in terms of economies
of scale in market size and public good provision (for instance, a common
army) or scope (for instance, in administering public policy), and the cost
due to heterogeneity in preferences and state capacities (Alesina and Spolaore, 1997 and 2005; Weese, 2015; Gancia, Ponzetto and Ventura, 2016).
Two regions that diﬀer in their cultural traits are likely to disagree over policy priorities. These conflicting policy views are exacerbated by diﬀerences
in the stage of economic development, and by diﬀerences in state capacities
and in the functioning of institutions. An optimal political area is one in
1
For an extensive discussion of the poltical dificultes facing the EU including the rise
of populist parties see Stokes (2016) and Beck and Underhill (2017).

2

which diversity is suﬃciently small, so that citizens can take advantage of
economies of scale and scope arising from size, without being bogged down
in political conflicts or being hurt if they are in the minority.
We do not attempt to assess the benefits of European political integration,
and focus instead on heterogeneity within Europe, investigating two specific
questions. First, during the last 30 years have European countries become
more similar, in terms of economic, institutional, and cultural fundamentals?
Second, how diﬀerent are European countries now, in terms of fundamental
cultural traits? Although we consider all three dimensions (economic, institutional, and cultural), we give particular prominence to the analysis of
cultural traits, both because of its importance in the long-run viability of a
political union, and because less is known about it, than about economics
and institutions in Europe. Throughout we consider the EU 15 countries plus
Norway in the period between 1980 and 2008. Thus, we do not investigate
Central and Eastern Europe, nor do we study the consequences of the recent
financial crisis.2
Our first set of findings suggests an optimistic outlook for a politically
more integrated Europe. Europe has witnessed a deep process of economic
integration in goods, services, and financial markets. The first phase of this
process, approximately between 1980 and the late 1990s, was also accompanied by economic convergence, with poorer European countries growing
faster than richer ones. While convergence slowed down in the late 1990s at
about the same time as the start of the single currency, we show that the
continent kept witnessing increased co-movement across EU economies, both
at the national and subnational (NUTS3) level. In addition, and contrary
to the United States, after-tax income inequality among the citizens of this
groups of countries as a whole did not increase since 1980. So far, so good.
One would expect this prolonged period of increased economic integration
and convergence to be accompanied by increased homogeneity in attitudes
and values between citizens of diﬀerent countries. Increasingly shared values and cultural convergence were among the anticipated benefits that the
founding fathers of the EU had posited (for instance, see the 1950 Schuman
Declaration). We find no evidence of this. On the contrary, between 1980
and 2009 Europeans became slightly more diﬀerent in their attitudes towards
2
Thus the countries considered are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, the UK.

3

trust, general values (such as appreciation of hard work or obedience), gender
roles, sexual morality, religiosity, ideology, and role of the state in the economy and related economic issues. This is not because these cultural traits
have remained unchanged and are inherently immovable. They evolved over
this period; both Northern European countries and Southern ones moved in
a more secular and “modern” direction, but the former at a faster rate than
the latter, so that cross country diﬀerences increased.
The process of European integration also consisted of deliberate attempts
to harmonize institutions and policies in several areas, establishing common
benchmarks and targets for institutional improvements. Here too therefore,
one would expect to observe some institutional convergence. But again, we
find mixed evidence of this. In some institutional areas European countries
became more similar, but in others the opposite happened. In particular,
the quality of the public administrations and of the legal systems did not
converge, with Southern Europe falling further behind relative to Northern
Europe.
These intertemporal comparisons thus suggest that the trade-oﬀ did not
become more favorable to European political integration. Despite decades of
successful economic integration and convergence (before the financial crisis),
European countries did not become more similar in terms of fundamental
values and beliefs, and of institutional outcomes. If anything they became
more diﬀerent
Does this mean that the project of a political union in Europe is doomed?
Not so fast. In the second part of the paper we show that preference heterogeneity and cultural diversity are about ten times as large within each EU
country in our sample than between them. This finding applies not only to
individual data, but also to regional averages. Within country diﬀerences in
regional averages are sometimes larger than diﬀerences between the average
traits of regions belonging to diﬀerent countries (think of Northern Italy versus Southern Germany and Northern Italy versus Southern Italy). Then, if
the fully functioning democracies in Europe can handle a substantial amount
of within-country cultural diversity, why could the EU not handle a similar
level of heterogeneity between individuals of diﬀerent countries?
A comparison with the United States, which we report in the final part of
the paper, also leads to similar considerations. Europeans are not more different from each other than Americans, who, incidentally are also becoming
more diﬀerent from each other over time. If the United States can handle
these diﬀerences relatively well, what prevents Europe from also doing so?
4

Probably in Europe relatively small cultural diﬀerences are vasty amplified
by other cleavages, such as national identity and language. Cooperation and
conflict resolution are much easier if individuals share a common history,
centuries of nation building, and a common language. The United States
have had 250 years of nation and institution building, and the Civil War is
170 years old. Europe did not have an extended nation building process and
the last inter-European war that ended 70 years ago left legacies that are
still felt today (Fouka and Voth, 2016).
All of this suggests that the important issue for the future of European
integration is not so much that Europeans are still too diﬀerent from each
other in terms of culture, policy preferences, or national interests. The important question is the evolution of national versus European identities. In the
concluding section we discuss some evidence on the evolution of nationalistic
sentiments, showing that here the news are not so good: feelings of national
pride were on the rise already before the financial crisis, which probably made
things worse.
Our paper is related to several recent contributions. Spolaore (2013)
adopts the same conceptual approach of our paper, emphasizing the benefit
of scale and the cost of heterogeneity, with a detailed discussion of the history of the EU. He also discusses Monnet’s theory, according to which any
additional move toward integration in Europe cannot be reversed. Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2016) argue that the EU is stuck in the “middle of
the river”: gone far enough to be very costly to abandon, but subject to too
many forces pulling in a centrifugal direction. Guiso, Morelli, and Herrera
(2016) also explore the role of cultural diﬀerences in economic unions and
provide theoretical and case study evidence related to the sovereign crisis in
Europe (with specific emphasis on the German-Greek cultural divide). Our
more systematic empirical evidence seems to provide a more optimistic view,
at least in terms of quantitative analysis of the “cultural fundamentals”.
Brunnermeier, James, and Landau (2016) highlight how diﬀerent economic
ideas, between the French and the German especially, are a crucial impediment to further economic integration. These diﬀerences are clearly there,
and in our analysis we confirm that cultural attitudes in France are more
pronouncedly diﬀerent from the rest of Europe. Unlike Brunnermeier et al.,
however, we focus on deep cultural traits that we think are more important
for the long-run viability of a political union, compared to possibly contingent
ideas about the appropriate macroeconomic policy framework. Our analysis
also suggests that in the United States, where we certainly have individuals
5

close to the stereotypical French and the stereotypical German (as it would
appear by just sampling opinion pieces or editorials in the New York Times
and in the Wall Street Journal), such individuals are able to share a national
government.
This paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses economic convergence in Europe. Section II considers cultural convergence. Section III deals
with institutional convergence. Section IV compares cultural heterogeneity
within and across EU countries. Section V compares the EU countries regions
with US states. The last section concludes.

I

Economic Convergence

One the purposes of the EU has been to achieve greater economic integration
among its members and this goal has been vastly achieved.3
What has been the eﬀect of economic integration on various measures
of convergence between European countries and regions? A large literature
has addressed this question, with mixed results that depend on the sample
of countries, on the time period, on the method of analysis, and the type
of convergence. Existing studies generally find evidence of economic convergence between GDP per capita in the long run, due to the catch up in growth
of the poorer countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain in the earlier
period, and Eastern Europe more recently).4
An equally large literature has asked whether trade and financial integration makes business cycles more or less synchronized. A priori the eﬀect
could go either way, as trade integration may lead to specialization and hence
divergence, or complementarity in production and convergence. Likewise, financial integration could amplify the domestic eﬀects of idiosyncratic shocks
or increase the international transmission of such shocks, with ambiguous
eﬀects on synchronization. The evidence is mixed, although the prevailing
view is that business fluctuations have become more synchronized within
3

Several studies document how, up until the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, the
various phases of EU deepening have led to greater trade integration (Gil-Pareja, LlorcaVivero and Martìnez-Serrano, 2008), more financial integration (Jappelli and Pagano,
2010) and more labor mobility (Portes, 2015, European Commission 2015) between EU
member states.
4
See for instance ECB (2008), Kutan and Yigit (2009), Boldrin and Canova (2001),
Villaverde and Maza (2008).

6

Europe and the Eurozone in particular.5
In this section we revisit and complement the analysis of economic convergence and output co-movement for the EU 15 countries plus Norway in
the period 1980-2009. This is the same sample of countries and the same
period covered by the analysis of cultural convergence in Section II. The
data sources for the variables used in this session are listed in Table A.1 in
Appendix.

I.A

Trends in Average Per Capita Income

We start with long run convergence in GDP per capita. The source is the
Penn World Tables 9.6 Figure 2.1 depicts the standard deviation of real GDP
per capita among the 16 countries in our sample. Barro and Sala-i-Martín
(1992) pioneered this type of analysis, which they call Sigma convergence.
After an initial drop in the 1980s and 1990s, the dispersion in real GDP per
capita remained roughly stable between the late 1990s and 2009. 7
Figure 2.1 here
This pattern is confirmed by the analysis of Beta convergence (again using
Barro and Sala-i-Martín’s terminology). In Figure 2.2 we illustrate a crosscountry regression plot, where we estimate a linear regression of the growth
of real GDP per capita between 1980 and 2009 against the initial level of
real GDP per capita in 1980 (in logs) in the same sample of countries. The
slope of the regression line is negative and statistically diﬀerent from zero,
indicating that throughout this period average growth was higher for the
initially poorer countries.
Figure 2.2 here
This evidence of Beta convergence reflects two diﬀerent patterns, however, in the early and later parts of our sample period. Figures 2.3.a and
5

See for instance Frankel and Rose (1998), Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2013), Gogas (2013),
Backus, Kydland, Kehoe (1992).
6
Our result holds also using GDP data from Cambridge Econometrics. The main
diﬀerence between the two sources is that Cambridge Econometrics does not adjust for
deviations of market exchange rates from PPP.
7
We do not cover the period after the 2008-09 crisis for two reasons. First and most
importantly, we do not have data on culture and values after 2010 (this is the data essential
to our analysis in Section 3 and following). Second, the shock of the 2008 crisis may have
not been fully absorbed in terms of a return to long-run levels for some European countries
(Italy and Greece come to mind), which is the focus of our analysis of convergence.

7

2.3.b split the sample in two subperiods, coinciding with the introduction of
the single currency: 1980-1998 and 1999-2009. The same regression is then
estimated for each subperiod. In the first subperiod, there is strong evidence
of catch-up growth: the poorer countries grew faster, and the beta coeﬃcient
is negative and significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% confidence level.
But in the second subperiod, the regression line is flat, indicating that convergence stopped approximately with the start of the Euro - although some
of the poor countries like Greece, Spain and Ireland are above the estimation
regression line. The sample includes countries that belong to the Economic
and Monetary Union (EMU) and countries that do not. But the pattern is
similar if we confine attention to the EMU.
Figure 2.3.a and Figure 2.3.b here

I.B

Income Inequality

We now turn to the dispersion of individual income within Europe. Income
(which is highly correlated with education and occupational status) is a key
determinant of cultural traits (Inglehart 1997). Atkinson (2015) and Piketty
(2014), among others, document that inequality has increased in some (but
not all) advanced countries (although the European Commission (2017) notes
how the EU is a region with relative low inequality relative to the rest of
the world). At the same time, in the early part of the sample there was
convergence in average per capita income between countries in Europe. The
net eﬀect of these two forces is potentially ambiguous on income diﬀerentials
within Europeans. Did overall income inequality within Europe increase or
decrease between the early 1980s and 2010?
To answer this question, we rely on micro data from the Luxembourg
Income Study (LIS), which are obtained from independent income surveys
and are harmonized ex-post. The data are available for only a subset of the
countries in our sample, namely Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Income is measured as total disposable household income (net of taxes and transfers). It is
converted into individual income using weighted household size by country,
and then it is converted in 2010 international dollars for all years. We pool
together all households in our sample, irrespective of nationality, and from
the pooled data set we compute a yearly value for the Gini coeﬃcient, measuring after-tax income inequality within this subset of European countries
8

over time.8 The evolution of the after-tax Gini coeﬃcient is roughly flat
between 1985 and 2010. The forces of economic convergence and the withincountry dynamics of increased inequality appear to cancel out each other.
Thus, in Europe as a whole (at least for this subset of countries for which
we have LIS data) inequality has not increased, contrary to what happened
in the US (Piketty and Saez, 2003). The (flat) plot of the Gini is in Figure
A.1 in Appendix.

I.C

Correlation in Yearly Growth Rates

Next, we consider the issue of economic convergence within the EU at the
business cycle frequency. The unit of analysis is the NUTS3 region and
the data is from Cambridge Econometrics. We split the sample in the two
subperiods before and after the single currency: 1980-1998 and 1999-2009.
For each subperiod, we estimate a matrix of pairwise linear correlation coeﬃcients,  , of the yearly growth rate of GDP between all regions in our
sample, where  and  denote regions and  = 1 2 denotes subperiods. We
then compute the change in these correlation coeﬃcients over the two subperiods,   = 2 − 1 . Figure 2.4 illustrates the kernel density of these
changes, the distribution of  , for ( ) pairs of regions belonging to the
same country (dotted line) and to diﬀerent countries (solid line).9 While the
same-country distribution is centered approximately around zero, the distribution for regions belonging to diﬀerent countries is clearly shifted to the
right (the median and mean of the kernel density are positive). Thus, the
introduction of the Euro is associated with an increase in the correlation of
yearly output growth for ( ) pairs belonging to diﬀerent countries, while
within-country correlations have not changed substantially on average. In
other words, since the start of the Euro there is increased synchronization of
regional output across European countries at the yearly frequency, but not
within countries.
This result also holds when focusing only on ( ) pairs of regions with
sum of log populations (measured in 1980) above the median or above the
75th percentile and also for regional pairs with geographic distance of the regions’ centroids above the median or above the 75th percentile. So increased
8

See Brandolini (2009) for the issues that arise in computing a supernational measure
of income inequality.
9
The distribution has been fitted with the Epanechnikov kernel and with a bandwith
of 0.046.

9

output co-movement does not come solely for tiny or very close pairs of regions, but holds across all Europe and it is not only due to the catching up
of small regions. We have also disaggregated output by sector, and the result
of enhanced co-movement between regions belonging to diﬀerent countries
holds for all sectors, with the exception of agriculture.10
Finally, notice that while our estimates of  are likely carrying noise
due to sampling variability, this particular issue should not aﬀect the relative position of the distributions that we report - bar some not prima facie
intuitive time variation in this type of variability.
Figure 2.4 here
Is this enhanced correlation in yearly growth rates just a consequence of
sharing a common monetary policy and a common currency, or does it reflect
more general tendencies, such as commercial and financial integration? To
address this question, we consider the change in correlation coeﬃcients,   ,
between diﬀerent groups of regions. Figures 2.5 depicts the distribution of
 within the EMU, outside of the EMU, and between regions inside and
outside the EMU. The shift to the right is most pronounced for regions
within the EMU, but the change in correlation between ins and outs of EMU
also has a large density mass above zero, suggesting that the increased output
synchronization is not just due to sharing a common monetary policy.
Figure 2.5 here
We then focus on EMU countries only. We repeated the same exercise as
Figure 2.5, but for three groups of regions: ( ) pairs within the core set of
countries in the Eurozone, within the periphery only, and between core and
periphery. The core is defined as Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. The periphery consists of Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Increased co-movement has taken place
for all three groups of regions, but it is most pronounced within the core and
10

We also explored co-movement in regional employment, with the same method. On
average the correlation coeﬃcients of the yearly growth of employment have gone down for
regions belonging to the same country, while they have remained stable for regions belonging to diﬀerent EU cotuntries. In other words, in the more recent period there has been
less comovement in employment within countries, but not across countries. Given the patterns described above for GDP growth, this is the mirror image of divergent productivity
growth within (but not across) countries.

10

between core and periphery, suggesting that the shocks that have hit the periphery have remained more idiosyncratic (recall that the second subperiod
ends in 2009, and so the analysis does not include the European sovereign
debt crisis). Figure A.2 in Appendix shows the results.

I.D

Cluster Analysis

Finally, we consider cluster analysis, which imposes less structure on the
data, to look at co-movements in regional output. Here too, the raw data
are yearly growth rates in regional real GDP, for the same two subperiods
1980-1998 and 1999-2009. We employ three methods of analysis. The first
two are dimensionality reduction methods (Principal Component Analysis
and Multidimensional Scaling). The third method is a partitioning cluster
analysis (Spectral Clustering). Dimensionality reduction methods aim at
reducing a multidimensional problem into a lower dimensional one. For us
this is equivalent to saying: although output dynamics of Europe at the
regional level in our sample can be described by 966 diﬀerent output time
series (one for each NUTS3 region), we can do equally well by concentrating
on only one or two main dimensions. This would be a valid approximation,
for instance, if in Europe there were one or two groups of regions following
near identical growth trajectories within each cluster. Spectral Clustering
is a more subtle method and aims not only at reducing the dimensionality
of the problem, but at truly classifying observations (regions) into groups of
connected regions (with “connected” meaning that   co-vary together in
terms of output). More precisely, Spectral Clustering levers on the spectral
properties of the graph that is associated to the similarity matrix of the
problem, which, for©us ª
is the matrix of real GDP correlation coeﬃcients
among regions, Γ =  . Just to see where the graph comes from, think of
each correlation coeﬃcient as telling us the strength of the link among two
regions. So the correlation matrix is essentially equivalent to the adjacency
matrix of a weighted undirected graph, where nodes are regions and the link
weights are given by the correlation coeﬃcients. It turns out that counting
clusters in this network is the same as trying to find the number of connected
components of the graph (visually, the bundles of nodes tight to each other,
but far away from other bundles).11
Figure 2.6 illustrates the results for the 15 EU countries. The top panel
11

Trebbi and Weese (2015) oﬀer additional discussion of some of these methodologies.

11

refers to the first subperiod, 1980-98, and the bottom panel refers to the
second subperiod, 1999-2009. The first graphs on the left hand side depicts
Spectral Clustering (SC). Finding the number of connected components is
equivalent to estimating the rank of Γ (see Trebbi and Weese, 2015). Let
us indicate such rank as  and  be the −th largest eigenvalue of Γ.
Asymptotically, the first  of these eigenvalues will be positive and bounded
away from zero, while the remaining  −  will hover around zero. The
statistic that we report and that will visually indicate the appropriate  is:
Eigengap =  − +1 .
Such statistic has the same intuition of standard screeplots, but focusing on
diﬀerences rather than levels of eigenvalues. Comparing the bottom panel
with the top one, a reduction in the number of estimated clusters is evident.
The remaining graphs, in the middle and on the right hand side, depict the
results employing Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Multidimensional Scaling (MDS).12 Here too we see a reduction in the dimensionality
in the bottom panel. The PCA graph is striking, and shows how regional
output growth within Europe is almost one-dimensional in 1999-2009.13
Figure 2.6 here

I.E

Discussion

The early phase of European integration in the 1980s and 1990s, which coincided with the development of the single market, saw economic convergence
and catch-up growth by the poorer countries. This convergence slowed down
(almost to a halt) in the second phase of European integration that coincides
with the single currency, namely from the late 1990s and until 2008. On
the other hand, the single currency period was associated with an increased
co-movement in regional output growth at the yearly frequency, especially
between the core countries of the EMU, but also between core and periphery of the EMU, and between regions inside and outside the EMU. Finally,
overall income inequality within the subset of European countries for which
12

For MDS we report the Mardia goodness of fit statistics defined as Mardia et al.
(1979), with higher values indicating more accurate approximations and values above 085
indicated as a “good” fit. We employ the Manhattan distance for the MDS exercise, as
MDS with Euclidean distance is equivalent to the case of PCA.
13
Virtually identical result are obtained if we restrict ourselves to EMU countries.

12

we have data remained stable between the mid-1980s and the onset of the
financial crisis.

II

Cultural Divergence

Have Europeans become culturally more similar during the last three decades?
The answer is no.
Several arguments would lead us to expect cultural convergence from 1980
onward. First, as argued before, this was a period of economic integration,
with more mobility of goods, capital, and people within Europe. Increased
economic exchange should strengthen mutual adaptation and understanding.14 Second, at least until the end of the 1990s European countries’ GDP
per capita converged and this should lead to convergence of cultural traits.
Third, the single currency led to correlated economic shocks (e.g. of monetary
nature) and policy coordination in Europe. This may also reinforce cultural
similarities, as national media and public debates devote more attention to
common European issues. Fourth, this period was not associated with an
increase in income inequality, which could have bred cultural divergence.
On the other hand, there are also some more subtle reasons for expecting
divergence. Trade integration changes relative prices and the structure of
production, leading diﬀerent countries to specialize in diﬀerent sectors and
in some cases this can push countries towards cultural divergence. (Olivier,
Thoenig and Verdier, 2008). Moreover, sharing common economic policies
can increase conflicts and antagonize public opinions (Feldstein, 1997).
We consider a broad range of questions in waves 1 to 4 of the European
Value Surveys (EVS), which are approximately ten years apart, with the first
one in 1980-81 and the last one in 2008-9. We have data for the same EU
15 countries plus Norway considered in the previous section, although for a
few countries the first two waves are missing.15 We selected several (longitudinally harmonized) questions asked in all waves, which capture attitudes
towards five sets of issues extensively studied in the literature.16 Because in
14

See Kuran and Sandholm (2008) for a theoretical contribution and Norris and Inglehart
(2009) for qualitative discussion.
15
The first wave is missing for Austria, Greece, Luxembourg, Portugal and Finland.
Moreover, the first wave was asked only for West Germany. The second wave is missing
for Greece and Luxembourg.
16
See for instance Alesina and Giuliano (2014, 2015), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales

13

Section V we compare Europe and the US, a criterion for selecting questions
was also the availability of comparable questions in the General Social Survey
(GSS) for the US.
The issues are: i) Religiosity, namely questions that seek to capture the
strength of religious beliefs and principles (including acceptance of euthanasia
and suicide) and the adherence to religious practices. ii) Sexual morality,
such as attitudes towards homosexuality, divorce, and abortion. iii) Gender
equality, concerning the role of women in the work place and in the family.
iv) Role of the state, namely questions eliciting beliefs on the role of the state
vis-à-vis the market, the desirability of redistribution, the respondent’s left
to right ideology, whether success in life reflects eﬀort or luck. v) Cultural
capital, namely questions eliciting general social values and attitudes towards
others, like generalized trust or specific virtues appreciated in children such
as obedience, hard work and unselfishness. Note that these are questions
relating to deep cultural beliefs, some of which evolve relatively slowly over
time, and that are not particularly sensitive to business cycle fluctuations.17
These questions seek to capture fundamental cultural traits and values that
may be considered as prerequisite for sharing common political institutions
and identities. The full set of questions is listed in Table 3.1 below. An
asterisk denotes the questions that were not asked in wave 1. Like in any
multi country survey it is possible that the same question asked in diﬀerent
language may lead to some measurement error because the questions may
not be interpreted identically in every country. Below and in Appendix we
discuss issues on measurement error which relate also to this point.
Table 3.1 here
We also consider a set of individual socio-economic covariates, such as age,
education, occupation etc. which are likely determinants of cultural traits,
listed in Table A.2 of the Appendix. They are all coded as binary variables.
For computational simplicity, we only consider a random subsample of 250
respondents per country and for each wave (each survey has about 1 500
respondents on average). The computational issues will become evident in
the construction of the pairwise individual distance measures described in
the following subsection.
(2015), Tabellini (2008).
17
See Giavazzi, Petrov, and Schiantarelli (2014) on this point and Alesina and Giuliano
(2015) for a broader discussion of the evolution of cultural values in relation to institutional
changes.

14

II.A

Cultural Diﬀerences

Here we only consider the questions and countries which were included in
all four waves.18 Since for each country-wave we have 250 individuals19 ,
our sample consists of 2 750 individuals per wave20 . For each individual in
our sample we have a vector of responses to the questions listed in Tables
3.1 and A.1. Thus an individual is a vector in the  dimensional space
of cultural attitudes and of socio-economic characteristics. Let  denote
the entire ( × 1) vector of cultural dimensions for individual  in wave ,
with elements  , and  be the vector of his  socio-economic features,
with elements  . They summarize the answers to the questions. We can
construct a measure of cultural distance between individuals  and  in wave
 based on the Gaussian Kernel as  () = 1 − exp[− (|| −  ||)2 ],
P
where  is the Kernel width and where || −  || = [  ( −  )2 ]12 is
the Euclidean distance. Socio-economic distance 
 () between individuals
is similarly defined. 21 We can compute pairwise distances  (), 
 ()
for each pair of individuals per wave, giving 3 779 875 = (2 750 × 2 749) 2
total   pairs for each   and each . It is then clear why we impose
a balanced number of individuals (250) for each country, as much of our
analysis will evolve around generating distributions of pairwise individual
distances  ().
A natural conjecture is that, as socio-economic distance 
 () between
two individuals increases, so does cultural distance  (). To remove the
18

They are Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Italy, Ireland, Spain, Sweden, and the UK, and the included questions are those without an asterisk
in Table 3.1.
19
To explore sensitivity to this restriction, we have also extended the analysis to 500
individuals per country-wave when available. Our results on cultural diﬀerences do not
appear sensitive to the increase in the sample size along this dimension.
20
Note that diﬀerent individuals are sampled in each wave and we do not have a panel
of survey participants.
21
The parameter  in the Gaussian Kernel is  = 122 where  controls the width of
the neighborhoods over which individuals are compared. For small ,  is large, implying
that two individuals that are minimally diﬀerent in their answers are deemed very far
apart already. For large ,  is small, implying that distance away from a point increases
at a slower rate. Note that this  parameter is not the same as the variance of the answer
to the questions in the population (which is normalized to 1 in all answers/dimensions
here).  is a parameter regulating the definition of distance in the answer space. We
calibrate , i.e. the Kernel bandwidth, to the number of dimensions following Hainmuller
and Hazlett (2014).

15

eﬀect of socio-economic distance, we can compute the conditional cultural
distance between any two individuals, by conditioning each element of vector
 on the vector  (i.e. by taking the residuals of a set of regressions of
each component  on the entire vector  and then computing the distance
between these residuals for any two individuals).
We can then estimate non-parametrically the distribution of cultural
distances between all individuals in our sample at diﬀerent points in time.
In particular, we can estimate the distribution of cultural distances between
citizens of the same and of diﬀerent countries in waves  = 1 4. Comparing
these two waves tells us how the distribution of cultural distances evolved
during the last 30 years.
These distributions are illustrated in Figure 3.1. The densities are estimated using the Epanechnikov Kernel function. The dotted line refers to
wave 1 (about 1980), the solid line to wave 4 (about 2009). The top two
charts refer to unconditional distances, the bottom two to conditional distance. The left-hand-side charts refer to within-country cultural distances
(that is, using distances generated by   belonging to the same country),
the right hand side to distances among individuals of diﬀerent countries. The
more recent ( = 4) distribution is shifted to the right, both unconditionally
and conditionally, and by approximately the same amount within and between countries. On average Europeans have become more dissimilar, both
within and across countries.
Figure 3.1 here
This result, in part, may depend upon the distance metric used. The
Gaussian Kernel function is a quadratic function and gives more weight to the
dimensions across which the individuals appear most dissimilar. Estimating
the same distribution of distances using the Cosine distance,  () =  ·
 || || || ||, which does not place as much weight on large diﬀerences
across specific cultural dimensions, gives two almost overlapping distributions
in waves 1 and 4, both unconditionally and conditionally, and both within
and between countries.22 Thus, we can conclude that during the last 30
years there is virtually no evidence of cultural convergence, neither within
nor across countries. If anything, we see cultural divergence.
While Figure 3.1 illustrates the overall distribution of cultural distance
for all countries in our sample, we can also consider each country in isolation,
22

These results are available from the authors upon request.

16

focusing for simplicity on average cultural distance, rather than on the entire
distribution of distances. This is done in Table A.3 in the on line Appendix.
For each country, we report the change in average cultural distance between
wave 1 and wave 4, within each country (columns 1 and 2), and between citizens of that country and European citizens from all other countries (columns
3 and 4), unconditionally and conditionally on socio-economic covariates.
The last row reports the change in average distance, within and between all
countries in the sample. All countries became more diﬀerent from the others, and also within countries cultural distance increased over time by about
the same amount. In wave 1 average cultural distance within and across
countries is about 055 with our standardized measures. Thus, on average
cultural distance between two random individuals increased by about 10%
both across and within countries between 1980 and 2009 (the average change
is slightly larger across than within countries). The change is also highly
statistically significant, for all countries.23 The increase is particularly pronounced for Italy and Ireland, but there is no pattern concerning core versus
periphery, or inside versus outside EMU. Finally, note that wave 4 dates to
2008-09, so before the sovereign debt crisis that plunged Southern Europe
into a deep recession. In fact, some divergence could already be observed
comparing wave 1 with wave 3 (sampled in 1999-2000).

II.B

Specific Cultural Traits

We now consider changes in specific cultural traits. We include all 16 countries and all questions in Table 3.1 (except for altruism - see below) and
closely follow Norris and Inglehart (2009, ch.10). For each of the five broad
issue categories listed in Table 3.1 (religiosity, sexual morality, gender equality, role of the state, and cultural capital), we extract the first principal
component of the specific survey answers referring to that issue in the overall
sample which pools together answers on all questions for all countries and all
waves. The specific questions within each broad issue are generally highly
correlated with the respective first principal components, as shown in Table
A.4 in the Online Appendix, except for the question on altruism, which we
therefore omit from this part of the analysis. Throughout we only focus on
23

The statistics in Table A.3 in the Appendix are estimated parametrically from the
matrix of all bilateral distances (i.e. they are not the change in the mean of the distribution
depicted in Figure 3.1, but the average change in the data), so the sensitivity to the distance
metric (Gaussian Kernel vs Cosine) does not arise.

17

country means.
Figures A.3.a-A.3.e in the online Appendix depict the EU average (the
solid line) and each country average (the dots), of each of these first principal
components. The figures refer to unconditional responses, but our results are
very similar repeating the exercise on first principal components constructed
from the residuals from the regression on socio-economic covariates. Some
change clearly took place, in almost all cultural dimensions: religiosity decreased on average, sexual morality and gender equality became less “traditional”, and attitudes turned in favor of state intervention. Moreover, for
all these dimensions except the last one (role of the state), the dispersion
between country averages appears to have increased over time or remained
constant. This is generally visible from the figures, and it is confirmed by
the analysis of the standard deviation across countries (limiting the sample
of countries to only those that are sampled in waves 1-4).
Finally, for each of the five principal components, we looked at their
evolution over time, by country, against the time plot of the EU average. In
most cases (four out of five) the divergence (or lack of convergence) is due to
several Northern European countries accentuating their diﬀerences relative
to the EU average in the more recent waves, and likewise to several Southern
European countries (most notably Greece, Italy, and Portugal) moving in
the opposite direction relative to the EU average. In other words and in the
terminology of Inglehart (1997), while Northern Europe is becoming more
“modern” at a faster pace than the EU average, Southern Europe (with the
exception of Spain) follows the general trend, but it is increasingly lagging
behind. Results are displayed in tables A.4-A.8 in the online Appendix.

II.C

Discussion

The evidence discussed above suggests that European citizens have not become more similar to one another over the last 30 years. The lack of cultural
convergence also cannot be attributed to persistence in cultural traits. Individual traits have changed: all of Europe has become more secular, less
traditional and more tolerant, and also more inclined to accept a larger role
of the state in risk sharing and redistribution. Moreover, the lack of cultural
convergence (or the cultural divergence) cannot be blamed to an increase in
inequality.

18

III

Institutional Convergence or Divergence?

This subsection considers institutional and policy outcomes in a wide range
of dimensions, and asks whether they became more similar across European
countries over time.
Here too, a priori one would expect to see convergence. Harmonization
of policies and institutions was an explicit goal of the process of European
integration in several areas, in particular in product and financial market regulation. Even where member states retained unconstrained sovereignty, such
as for labor market policies, several aspects of product markets and services,
education, social policies, Europe provided benchmarks and incentives with
the goal of improving national policies and public governance.24 Moreover,
thanks to the single market and the single currency, competition between
producers located in diﬀerent countries became more intense, and capital
and labor mobility increased. Presumably this strengthened the incentives
to gain competitiveness also through institutional reforms, particularly for
the laggard countries.
On the other hand, deeper integration may have also set in motion countervailing forces pushing toward institutional divergence. As trade barriers
fall, countries are led to specialize in diﬀerent tradable goods sectors. Moreover, the single currency led to long lasting changes in the relative prices of
tradable versus nontradable goods in some countries relative to others. As the
real exchange rate appreciated, the relative price of nontradable goods rose
in Southern Europe, while it moved in the opposite direction in Northern Europe (especially in Germany and the Netherlands). This, in turn, induced a
shift of resources towards the nontradable goods sectors in Southern Europe,
while the opposite happened in some Northern European countries. These
opposite changes in the structure of production of European countries may
have altered government incentives to pursue specific policies and structural
reforms. In particular, countries with better functioning institutions (that
gave them a comparative advantage in more sophisticated tradable goods
sectors) faced stronger incentives to consolidate their institutions-based comparative advantage, since a larger share of the economy would benefit from
it, while the opposite happened in the institutionally weaker Southern countries, where the tradable goods sectors became smaller. This process may
24
Learning from other European countries also became more salient in the policy debates, and this too may have led to institutional convergence, as in Buera et al. (2011).

19

have led to institutional divergence.25
We consider a wide range of institutional outcomes, in five specific policy areas: i.a) Quality of government and of public administration. Here
we extract the first principal component from three sets of variables, which
aggregate information about the quality and timeliness of the information
provided by public administrations, the extent to which the executive can be
held accountable by voters, the eﬀectiveness and quality of the bureaucracy,
the absence of corruption in the public administration and in the political
system.26 i.b) Governance Indicator constructed as the principal component
from a number of World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators, similar to
those measured by the Quality of Government index above ii) Quality of
legal institutions. This variable aggregates a variety of indicators based on
perceptions about the quality of diﬀerent aspects of the legal system, such
as eﬀectiveness of property right protection, judicial independence, court impartiality, protection of the rule of law, civil liberties. The primary sources
are institutional classifications compiled by the Fraser Institute, the World
Bank, the Heritage Foundation, ICRG, and Freedom House. iii) Education.
Here we use the first principal component of PISA test scores in three areas:
mathematics, science, and reading comprehension. iv) Regulatory Environment. Here we use OECD data, and in particular the variable Product
Market Regulation in the OECD data base, which is a summary indicator of the regulatory environment in a broad range of areas, including state
control and involvement, barriers to entrepreneurship and barriers to trade
and investment. A full list of the variables in each of these areas, with the
corresponding sources and periods of availability, is described in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 here
We start by asking whether we observe convergence or divergence in these
institutional outcomes between countries, by examining Sigma convergence
25

Levchenko (2007) and Nunn (2007) study institutions as a source of comparative
advantage, while Tabellini (2008) shows how culture too can be a source of comparative
advantage. These papers treat institutions (or culture) as exogenous. Do and Levchenko
(2009) study a theoretical model where a reduction in trade costs can lead to institutional
deterioration.
26
Some of the underlying components of the original variables are coded on the basis of
hard information, others are based on surveys and report perceptions about the quality
of government or the absence of corruption. The correlation coeﬃcients between the
extracted first principal component and the three underlying variables is always very high,
ranging from 0.8 to 0.9.

20

plots. Thus, Figures 4.1.a-4.1.d plot the standard deviation (across countries)
of each of the four broad indicators over time.27 The quality of the public
administration converged between countries in the 1980s and 1990s, but since
2000 diverged sharply, and by 2010 dispersion was above its initial point. The
same pattern emerges from the Governance indicators, that are available only
from the lathe 1990s onwards. The quality of legal institutions too is available
only from 1990 onwards. Here too we observe divergence, particularly since
2000.28 PISA scores converged, although the data is available only every
three years between 2000 and 2012. Product market regulation converged
(data is available from 1998 every 5 years), and this was an explicit EU policy
goal.
These outcomes do not just reflect the underlying economic trends. In
fact, conditioning on per capita income does not change the picture much.29
The first period of convergence in the quality of government is much dampened, but the divergence since 2000 remains pronounced. For the quality
of legal institutions, conditioning on per capita income does not change the
result of Sigma divergence. Similarly, conditioning on income per capita does
not change the evidence of Sigma convergence in the PISA scores, although
convergence in product market regulation is not evident anymore.
Figure 4.1.a - Figure 4.1.e here
Like for culture, the divergence in quality of government and legal institutions is largely driven by Southern Europe (mainly Italy, Greece, and
Portugal) deteriorating relative to the European average, and some of the
Nordic European countries improving relative to the average. For Europe as
a whole the quality of government remained roughly stationary, while legal
institutions improved. In the two areas where there has been convergence,
education and regulation, the process seems uniform, with most countries
converging, from above or from below the European average. Figures A.9A.12 in the on line Appendix highlight these patterns.
27

In the quality of government plot, Germany and Luxembourg are omitted because
data are available for only some years. In the plot with PISA scores, the year 2003 is
missing for the UK.
28
These results are constent with, and complement those of Papaioannou (2016).
29
Specifically, we regressed each variable on the log of real per capita GDP from the
Penn World Tables. For the quality of government and Pisa scores, we then we estracted
the first principal component from the residuals of each variable.

21

III.A

Discussion

The finding of institutional convergence in product market regulation since
1998 is in line with it having been a deliberate policy goal delegated to EU
institutions. The evidence of convergence in PISA scores since 2000 is less
obvious. The finding of divergence in the quality of government and of legal institutions is surprising. The process of European integration devoted
considerable eﬀort to the diﬀusion of best practices, particularly with the
so called Lisbon Strategy, which was not very successful.30 A conjecture
is that trade integration and the single currency aﬀected the structure of
production and the allocation of resources of European countries. Member
states that enjoyed an institutional comparative advantage accentuated their
specialization in sectors where these advantages were relevant for productivity. Those with a comparative disadvantage moved in the opposite direction.
The single currency reinforced this tendency, because it led to exchange rate
appreciation in Southern Europe, pushing more resources in the nontradable sectors (where institutions are less important determinants of aggregate
productivity).31 These changes in the structure of production and in the resulting allocation of resources, in turn, could have altered political incentives
and individual cultural traits in opposite directions in these two groups of
countries. This is an interesting direction for future research.

IV

Within and Cross-Country Cultural Heterogeneity in the EU

The previous sections showed that Europeans have not become more similar
in several deep and important features of their cultural beliefs. Does this
mean that Europeans cannot form a political union? The answer to this
question depends on the level of heterogeneity and not just on whether it is
decreasing or increasing over time. To assess the level of heterogeneity, in
this section we compare the variance between EU countries to the variance
30

See Alesina and Perotti (2004).
Work by Calligaris et al. (2016) highlights that a similar phenomenon may have
occurred even within countries. In Italy for instance the eﬀect of the common currency
increased the diﬀerence between modern sectors and firms which took advantage of the
progress of European integration and other sectors and firms which fell further behind.
The diﬀerence is quantitatively striking. See also Gopinath et al. (2015).
31

22

within each country. Take an individual country in Europe, say France.
This country is a well functioning democracy and manages to accommodate a
certain cultural variance among the French. How much larger is heterogeneity
between EU countries, compared to what we observe within each country,
say France? If Europe as a whole is not much more heterogeneous compared
to each country in isolation, then what prevents further political integration
in the EU may not be cultural diﬀerences per se. Throughout this section
we use all the cultural variables described in Table 3.1, with and without an
asterisk, focusing on wave 4 only.

IV.A

Cultural Distances Between Europeans

Figure 5.1 shows the distribution of cultural distance between pairs ( ) of
individuals sampled within the same country (dotted line) and in any pair
of diﬀerent countries (solid line). The left-hand-side figure highlights that
there is a slightly lower average and median distance within country than
across countries, but the diﬀerences are quantitatively small. The righthand-side picture shows the same result using the residuals of the regression
of cultural distances on socio-economic distances. There is only a slightly
larger uniformity within countries.
Figure 5.1 here
These results emphasize an overlooked prominence of within-country heterogeneity. They are consistent, although in a diﬀerent context, with those by
Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg (2016), who find that in ethnic groups
in 76 countries which they study “within-group variation in culture trumps
between-group variation”. They suggest that even relatively small diﬀerences
in between countries cultural attitudes may become important precisely because they are associated with a feeling of belonging to separate entities
(ethnic groups in Desmet et al. (2016) or countries in our case).
Could these results be driven by measurement error, as pairwise distances
are the result of aggregation over many noisy answers at the individual
level? In particular, can the observed variation of within-country cultural
distances be merely the mechanical outcome of idiosyncratic shocks to individual survey answers? If the within-country individual cultural distance
is observed with noise, such noise may inflate the observed within-country
variance, making it artificially larger than the observed cross-country variance. In Appendix we formalize this assessment. We show that, in order
23

to produce a within-country variance that is misleadingly larger than the
cross-country variance of the country distance means, the variance of the individual measurement error shocks must be more than 9 times larger (about
an order of magnitude) than the true cross-country variance of the average
cultural distance. In essence, saying that this result is driven by measurement error is equivalent to implying that the individual EVS survey answers
are essentially uninformative (roughly, a 110 signal to noise ratio), which
seems implausible.
In order to reassure that this methodology can capture diﬀerences between countries, we repeat this exercise focusing on Turkey, a possible candidate member state, but one with substantially diﬀerent religious, economic,
and historical background than many EU countries. In Figure 5.2, the left
graph displays the distribution of cultural distances between Turkey and
overall EU (solid line) and within Turkey (dotted line). On the right we
show the same for the distribution of cultural residuals.32 This graph looks
starkly diﬀerent from Figure 5.1, and here we clearly observe much more heterogeneity between Turkish citizens and EU respondents than within Turkey.
Taking into account socio-economic characteristics does not reduce the between country distance by much.
Figure 5.2 here

IV.B

Cultural, Socio-economic, and Geographic Distance

How does cultural distance between two individuals depend on the distance
between their socio-economic features, or on their geographic distance, for
individuals belonging to the same or to diﬀerent countries? If regions at the
border of the political area are far not only culturally, but also geographically, disintegration is more likely (or integration is more diﬃcult). Similar
considerations apply to socio-economic distance. In order to address these
questions, we estimate the following linear regression:
 =  + 
 + 

(1)

32
Because of data availability the individual observations used for Turkey are much less
than for the other countries, but still we get a reasonable amount of pairs of Turkish with
non Turkish individuals. In total the pairs of individuals where one is Turkish are more
than 7,000.

24

where  indicates the cultural distance between individuals  and  (in wave
4), 
 their socio-economic distance,  is an unobserved error term, and
 and  can belong to the same or to diﬀerent countries depending on the
sample specification. Below we will also estimate equation (1) but on the

right hand side we replace 
 with geographic distance,  , based on the
(NUTS3) region of residence of the respondents.33
Socio-economic Distance Figure 5.3 plots the estimated regression line,
with 
 referring to socio-economic distance, for individuals in the same
country (the dashed line) and in diﬀerent countries (the solid line). Confidence intervals are adjusted for two-way clustering at the country of origin
of each individual.
Cultural distance is positively related to socio-economic distance, as expected, and the slope coeﬃcient  is about the same within and across countries (i.e. the correlation between cultural and socio-economic distance does
not depend on sharing nationality). Although  and 
 are roughly of
the same size, the magnitude of the estimated intercept  is about ten times
larger than the slope coeﬃcient  The intercept  of this regression gives us
the average cultural distance for two individuals of the same socio-economic
status, 
 = 0 (belonging to the same or to diﬀerent countries depending on
the sample). Two individuals socio-economically identical that come from
the same country diﬀer on average 052 units in terms of cultural beliefs distance, while two socio-economically identical individuals from two diﬀerent
countries diﬀer approximately 058 on average. This confirms two properties of the data. First, socio-economic distance explains only a very small
portion of cultural distance. And second, diﬀerent countries do diﬀer in cultural traits, but such a diﬀerence looks small when compared to the average
within-country cultural distance.
Figure 5.3 here
Estimating the same regression line for citizens of diﬀerent pairs of countries, or for the same country, we can estimate average bilateral distances
between countries or within each country. This is what we show in Table 5.1,
that reports the estimated values of the intercept , for all countries in our
sample and for the EU as a whole (we omit standard errors and the estimates
are always highly significant). The diagonal elements restrict the sample to
33

Geographic distances are computed using the Haversine formula.

25

individuals  and  belonging to the same country. The oﬀ-diagonal elements
are estimated for  in the row country and  in the column country. Thus,
the first row in the Table tells us how large the average distance between two
Austrians with the same socio-economic features is, between an Austrian and
a Belgian with the same features, and so on. The average distances between
countries vary between 052 and 064. The average distance of individuals
in the same country (on the diagonal) varies between 05 and 06, and are
not much smaller than the oﬀ-diagonal elements. Thus, as we knew already,
distances within countries are only marginally smaller than distances across
countries. In addition, by looking at the diagonal entries we do not observe
countries which are much more homogeneous than others. This second observation is not at all obvious, since a priori one may have in mind a view of
smaller and more homogeneous countries (say Denmark) and larger and less
homogenous one, say France. We do observe that Scandinavian countries
tend to be homogeneous, but the patterns are not very precise.34
Table 5.1 here
Geographic Distance Next, we estimate the same regression line (1) , but

replacing 
 with geographic distance  . Again, we estimate the regression
for individuals belonging to the same or two diﬀerent countries and two-way
cluster our standard errors. Figure 5.4 displays the estimated regression lines.
Again, the slope is positive and significant (and of about the same size as for
the between countries regression), but its value is negligible compared to the
intercept (i.e. compared to average distance among individuals living in the
same region). Note that the order of magnitude of  and 
 is about the
same.
In all cases, geographic distance is positively correlated in a statistically
significant way to cultural distance. This positive correlation may appear in
line with the view of “two Europes”, North and South. Nevertheless, even
if this relationship is precisely measured (confidence intervals are tight), it
explains only a small portion of the variation in cultural distances. The 2
of the regressions are small. Two individuals from very geographically far regions in diﬀerent countries diﬀer between them not more than 002 in cultural
distance units. Thus geographic distance, like socio-economic distance, does
34

We also compared the standard deviations of the within and cross-country distributions of bilateral distances, and they are approximately of the same order of magnitude,
suggesting that the dispersion in cultural distances is similar within and across countries.

26

not explain much of the observed cultural heterogeneity. Moreover, one has
to remember that, for instance, Athens is about equidistant to Madrid and to
Berlin. Thus, perhaps “distance” in Europe is bidimensional, North-South
and East-West.
Figure 5.4 here

IV.C

The Cultural Center of Europe

Knowing the region of residence of each respondent, we can compute the
cultural distance of each region from the average cultural traits in Europe as
a whole. This would tell us how diﬀerent are the regional residents from the
overall European average. In other words, we can locate the cultural core of
Europe and its cultural periphery. This is what we do in this subsection.
Consider the ( × 1) vector  of cultural attitudes for individual  defined in Section II (again we refer here to wave 4 only). Who is the hypothetical “central” individual? We use the notion of geometric center or centroid
of a set of points. The centroid of a set of vectors is their vector mean, ̄ .
It can be computed as the solution of the following problem
X
(|| −  ||)2 ,
̄ = arg min




where || || is the Euclidean distance, as in Section II. The vector ̄ can then
be thought of as the “cultural center” of Europe. We can then compute the
distance of any individual  from the vector
¡ ̄ in the
¢2 same way described

in Section II, namely as  = 1 − exp[− || − ̄ || ]. Since we know the
region of residence of each respondent , we can then compute the average
cultural distance of each region from the centroid ̄ .
We illustrate our findings in Figure 5.5. Lighter colors denote smaller
cultural distances from the cultural center. The closest countries to the centroid are Germany and Austria. But Belgium, the Netherlands, and some
regions in Spain and Portugal are also relatively close. Much more distant
are France, Italy (particularly Southern Italy), Greece, and Ireland. The
sharp distance of France from the centroid (and from Germany) is consistent
with the point raised by Brunnermeier et al. (2015) about a France versus
Germany conflict, which many see as keeping Europe from forming a federal
union. Figure 5.5 also shows much regional variation within countries. For
27

instance, Northern Italy is much closer to the centroid than Southern Italy.
There is vast heterogeneity in the UK as well, which is consistent with vast
regional variation evident in the 2016 vote for Brexit.
Figure 5.5 here
Summing up: First, the cultural core of Europe is not so diﬀerent from its
economic core, as Germany is at the heart of both. Second, the cultural periphery does not coincide with the economic periphery. Spain and Portugal,
in particular, are closer to the EU centroid than France. In other words, the
standard North-South cleavage that we observe in Europe for economic issues
is not really there in the cultural space. Third, the regional within-country
variation is large.
A natural conjecture here would be that individuals closer to the European cultural centroid are generally more pro-Europe. To explore this, we
exploit a question in the EVS that asks whether the respondent is afraid of
possibly adverse consequences of European integration in a number of policy areas.35 We extract the first principal components of all these fears and
regress it on cultural distance from the centroid of Europe in the full sample of our individuals, controlling for socio-economic covariates. The results
are displayed in Table 5.2. To facilitate the interpretation, the dependent
variable (fear of European integration) is normalized to lie between 0 and 1.
Distance from the cultural centroid is always highly significant (also when
controlling for individual socioeconomic covariates and regional or country
fixed eﬀects) and with the expected sign: being more afraid of European
integration is positively correlated with distance from the cultural centroid.
Nevertheless, the magnitude of the estimated coeﬃcient is not large. The
estimated value of −00652 in column (4) implies that reducing cultural distance from its average value of about 062 to its minimum of about 026
would reduce fear of European integration by about 6% of its average value
- recall that fear of European integration has been normalized to lie between
0 and 1.
Thus, not only Europeans are very similar to each other, but cultural
heterogeneity does not seem to be so important for attitudes in favor or
against Europe. This is a further indication that cultural heterogeneity per
35

The fears associated with the building of the EU listed in the questions are: loss of
social security; loss of national identity; our country paying more to the EU; a loss of
power in the world; the loss of jobs.

28

se does not seem to be the main stumbling block preventing further European
integration.
Table 5.2 here

IV.D

Discussion

In this section we have shown that within-country heterogeneity in cultural
diﬀerences swamps cross-country heterogeneity. Cultural heterogeneity is
also related to geographic and socio-economic dimensions, but most of it
is unexplained. The European countries we considered are well functioning
democracies, despite the large internal variance in cultural traits we highlight.
These findings thus suggest that, in theory, the extent of cultural diﬀerences
across European citizens living in diﬀerent countries should not be a major
obstacle to further European political integration. This inference is further
reinforced by the finding that cultural distance, although correlated with
attitudes against European integration, only explains a small fraction of these
attitudes.

V

Comparing the US and the EU

Other well functioning federations operate with levels of cultural heterogeneity comparable to the EU. Here we explore the case of the US.

V.A

Data

For the US we use the General Social Survey (GSS). In line with Winston
Churchill’s conception of a “United States of Europe”, one could equate US
states with EU member states, but available data from the GSS are not
suﬃciently rich. For many (small) states the number of respondents from
the GSS is not suﬃcient to perform our pairwise distance procedure and
derive balanced state-level samples. We consider only nine (large) states in
the US for which we have enough observations form the GSS. The states
are California, Florida, Illinois, Michigan, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and Texas.36 As an alternative, we also aggregate all states
36

The 9 states we selected reach 60 observationsin most of the waves. In a few cases
they do not (the lower bound is Illinois in wave 2, that has 39 surveyed individuals who

29

into five macro regions of the US and all our results are very similar (results
available upon request).
A second problem we faced is that the question asked in the GSS are not
identical to (and are fewer than) those in the EVS. In the online Appendix
we describe exactly how we did the matching between GSS and EVS, with
detailed explanation of all the judgement calls The GSS questions we use are
listed in Table 6.1. They are a subset of the questions listed in Table 3.1.
These questions cover the same five sets of issues included in the analysis
of Europe, although in some cases fewer questions are included under some
topics. In the static analysis of within versus between US states heterogeneity, and where we compare the US to the EU, a total of 15 questions are
available.37 An asterisk denotes the 6 questions that were not available in
wave 1, and that thus are not used in the analysis of cultural convergence.38
Finally, Table A.2 of the Appendix lists the socio-economic covariates we use
in the analysis of GSS data.
Table 6.1 here

V.B

Economic and Cultural Convergence in the US

Let us begin with economic convergence. Barro and Sala-i-Martín (1992)
study a long-term panel on personal income that goes back to 1840. They
show that some Beta convergence across US states took place. As Ganong
and Shoag (2012) note, average per capita income in Connecticut was 437
times larger than income in Mississippi in 1940. This ratio had reduced to
228 in 1960 and was down to 176 in 1980. Over the same period, the authors
also show evidence of Sigma convergence except for some temporary shock
replied to all the questions).
37
In the GSS the questions of approval of abortion, approval of homosexuality, feeling
of control over one’s own life, belief in God, are asked in subsamples of individuals for
whom other questions we use are not available. For this reason we exclude them from our
analysis. See Appendix for details.
38
Notice that in the GSS there are much more than 4 waves from the 1980s to today.
For practicality here we refer to GSS waves in the sense of the EVS periods. We have
grouped GSS years in the following way: the surveys of 1984 and 1986 are put toghether
in wave 1, those of 1990, 1991, 1993 in wave 2, those of 1998 and 2000 in wave 3, and
those of 2006, 2008 and 2010 are in wave 4.

30

(e.g. the Civil War).39 During the last 30 years the convergence process has
slowed down. The slope of the convergence relationship has fallen by more
than 50% if we compare the subperiods 1940-1960 and 1990-2010 (Ganong
and Shoag, 2012). The Connecticut to Mississippi income ratio in 2012
was 177, the same as in 1980. Ganong and Shoag (2012) argue that labor
mobility played a central role in income convergence. During the period of
strongest convergence, until 1980, population flowed from poor to rich states,
and initial income could well predict changes in population. In present days,
this pattern has largely disappeared. From the work of many scholars (e.g.
Piketty and Saez, 2003; Piketty, 2014) we also know that income inequality
in the US has increased significantly in the last few decades (contrary to our
findings for the EU countries reviewed above).
What about cultural convergence? Figures 6.1.a and 6.1.b show that it
has increased both across and within US states, as in Europe. The left-hand
panel of Figure 6.1a compares the distribution of cultural distances across
individuals in diﬀerent states in the US using the first and the last wave of
the GSS, with the same methodology discussed in Section II for Europe. The
right-hand side of Figure 6.1.a shows the results conditional on the usual set
of socio-economic covariates. In Figure 6.1.b we plot the same distributions
for distances of individuals within the same state. In all cases, cultural
distance has increased.
Figure 6.1 here
We have also looked at convergence or divergence in specific cultural
traits.40 Distance has not increased for all cultural dimensions, but there is
some variability. Dispersion increased over time in attitudes towards the role
of the state, sexual morality, and gender equality. Individuals seem to have
become more similar in their religious beliefs and cultural capital.
In Table A.5 of the Online Appendix we show the same exercise performed
in Table A.3. Average distance between individuals in diﬀerent countries has
increased between wave 1 and wave 4 in a statistically significant way, both
39

The initial results obtained by Barro and Sala-i-Martín, based on panel data estimations, have been subsequently confirmed by other researchers that adopted diﬀerent
empirical approaches or theoretical frameworks. For instance, Carlino and Mills (1993)
tests the time series properties of per capita income, showing that shocks to relative income are temporary (stochastic convergence) and initially poor regions caught up with
the richer ones over the period 1929-1990.
40
These results are available from the authors upon request.

31

conditionally and unconditionally on socio-economic covariates, by about
10%, approximately the same magnitude as for Europe.
Notice that even if our results on economic and cultural convergence are
similar in the EU and US, the underlying mechanisms need not be the same.
In the US, the increase in cultural dispersion is consistent with the increase in
political polarization among voters and political parties (e.g. McCarty, Poole
and Rosenthal, 2016) which, in turn, may be related to the increase in income
inequality. In the EU the explanations may be related to specialization and
institutional divergence. Further research on this point is warranted.

V.C

Cultural Distance Within and Across US States

We now compute the cultural distance within and across US states and compare it with those in the EU presented above, using the latest waves of GSS
and EVS. For the US we now use all questions in Table 6.1. When directly
comparing the EU to the US, we use the subset of questions in the EVS in
Table 3.1 corresponding to those available in the US. The left hand side of
Figure 6.2.a, which is the analog of Figure 5.1, shows the distribution of the
distance between pairs of individuals in the US within and across states. The
right hand side reproduces the same picture for the distance in the residuals
of culture on a set of socio-economic controls identical to the one used for
the Europe. These two figures do not show any diﬀerence in the distribution
within and across states. Thus, unlike in Europe, there is no more heterogeneity between states compared to within states. As shown below, however,
this is because inside US states there is more heterogeneity than inside individual EU member states. The between-states diﬀerences are about the
same in Europe and the US.
Specifically, Figures 6.2.b-6.2.c compare the distribution of cultural distances in the US and Europe. The left hand side of Figure 6.2.b depicts the
distribution of (unconditional) cultural distance between individuals living in
diﬀerent US states (dotted line) and diﬀerent European countries (solid line).
The right hand side refers to the distribution of cultural distances within US
states and European countries (dotted and solid lines respectively). Figure
6.2.c does the same for the distributions of distances in the residuals (i.e.
conditioning on socio-economic covariates). These figures reveal that there
is more diversity within a US state than within a EU country - the US distribution of cultural distance is shifted to the right compared to the European
distribution. Instead, we do not observe more diversity across US states than
32

across EU countries (average distance between US states is about the same
as between European countries). These pictures thus reinforce the inference
that it is not cultural heterogeneity per se that prevents more political integration in Europe. Europe as a whole does not appear to be culturally more
heterogeneous than the US.
Figure 6.2.a-c here

V.D

Cultural, Socio-economic and Geographic Distance:
US versus Europe

Socio-economic Distance We regress cultural distance  on socio-economic
distance 
 , following equation (1). Figure 6.3 depicts the regression lines
for individuals living in the same US state and in two diﬀerent ones. The two
regression lines almost overlap, in accordance with the finding in the previous subsection that the distribution of cultural distance is the same within
and between states. As in Europe (Figure 5.3), the slope is positive, but
small relative to the intercept (recall however that in Europe we found small,
but significant diﬀerences in the intercepts). Cultural distance is related to
socio-economic distance (within and across states), but most of the cultural
distance between individuals is unexplained by their observed socio-economic
status.
Figure 6.3 here
As in Table 5.1 for Europe, we have estimated this same regression for
individuals belonging to diﬀerent pairs of US states. The intercepts are
shown in Table A.6 in Appendix, which reports the average cultural distance
between pairs of individuals of identical socio-economic level coming one
from the row state and the other from the column state. First, the average
distance between individuals of the same socio-economic level does not vary
much across pairs of states (from a minimum of 054 to a maximum of 063
across diﬀerent states, a similar order of magnitude as between European
countries). Second, individuals of New York and California are on average
more similar to each other than when compared to individuals of other states.
This highlights the cultural similarity between two states on the opposite
coasts.

33

Geographic Distance In Europe geographic distance, 
 , slightly con
tributes to explaining cultural distance,  . This is not the case in the US.
We find no correlation between geographical distance and cultural distance
within the US as shown in Figure A.13 in Appendix. In the US geography
does not explain cultural distance, in contrast to Europe. The reason may be
greater mobility of people within the US than within Europe. As noted with
reference to Table A.6 in Appendix, this may also be due to greater similarity
between the two US coasts, than between each coast and the center states.
This geographic pattern may facilitate political integration compared to Europe, where we see a North-South divide in economics, institutional quality
and, to a smaller extent, also in culture.

V.E

Discussion

A comparison between the EU and the US suggests that fundamental cultural
diﬀerences among Americans are not bigger than that amongst Europeans.
Along this dimension, if Americans can share a well functioning federal union,
so could Europeans. Needless to say, the United States had 250 years of
nation building and 150 years have gone by from the Civil War. Europe
has had a much shorter common history and only 70 years have gone by
since the last inter-European war. Americans share a common language and
geographic mobility in the US has been much higher than within Europe,
or even within individual European countries. Mobility helped creating a
melting pot and thus a common identity, but apparently did not dampen
cultural heterogeneity.

VI

Concluding Remarks

Europe is at a crossroads. As emphasized by the European Commission
(2017), EU citizens are becoming impatient with their institutions and some
major decisions have to be taken. The Commission believes that either the
European project is scaled down to a single market and free trade agreement, or it is pushed forward to deeper integration. “Muddling through” the
current diﬃculties might be the easier solution in the short run, but it risks
aggravating long-run prospects and further alienating European citizens who
perceive the current situation as unsatisfactory. But does Europe have the
required fundamentals to become a viable political union, perhaps in the very
34

long run?
In addressing this fundamental question, the EU faces a trade-oﬀ. On
the one side, are the benefits of economies of scale and scope in public good
provision. On the other side are the costs of more diﬃcult conflict resolution
due to cultural heterogeneity and national identities. In this paper we reach
two main conclusions. First, despite decades of economic integration and
convergence, Europeans have not become more similar in their deep cultural
traits. Nevertheless, (and this is the second point) cultural heterogeneity in
Europe remains governable anyway, compared to both the US and within
country heterogeneity, and does not explain much of the observed variation
in attitudes pro or against Europe.
What does this imply about the future of European political integration?
The answer depends on the assessment of the other potential elements of
the trade-oﬀ. Casual observation suggests that in many areas the benefits of
European public good provision are large and increasing over time. Environmental protection, control of immigration, defense against terrorism, foreign
policy, promoting research and innovation are all best addressed at the European rather than at the national level, and more so today than thirty years
ago. Europeans are aware of these advantages from scale and scope. In the
2016 Eurobarometer survey, a very large fraction of respondents favored more
EU level decision making in areas such as fighting terrorism (80% in favor),
promoting peace and democracy (80% in favor), protecting the environment
(77% in favor), dealing with migration from outside the EU (71% in favor),
securing energy supply (69% in favor) - Eurobarometer (2016). Thus Europeans in principle believe that Europe has a role to play in many areas, but
they seem dissatisfied by “how” EU policies are actually implemented and
disagree along national lines.
If the perceived benefits of integration are high, and cultural heterogeneity is relatively small and plays only a minor role, what prevents further
steps towards a political union? We think that the answer is the heritage of
nationalism. Europeans retain strong national identities, amplified by diﬀerent languages, and the memories of past violent conflict are still too strong
and recent to overcome mutual distrust (see Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales,
2009). Nationalist sentiments are on the rise, and this was true even before
the financial crisis, which probably reinforced this extant tendency. This is
documented in Table 7.1. Although there is much variation among countries,
between 1980 and 2009 most Europeans have become more proud of their
national identities: on average the percentage of respondents who are proud
35

of their nationality has increased from 37% in the early 1980s to almost 50%
in 2008-09.
Table 7.1 here
Can something be done to dampen nationalism and increase European
identification?41 In the long run, mutual distrust among Europeans can be
reduced by expanding European educational initiatives. In the history of
nation building, public education always played a major role (see Aghion,
Persson and Rouzet 2012; Alesina, Giuliano and Reich, 2017). The Erasmus
program of student exchange works well, but the evidence suggests that it
has not had a large impact in shaping European identities, probably because
self-selected participants are already very pro-Europe (Sigalas, 2010; Wilson,
2011; Mitchell, 2011). This program could be expanded to reach more young
people in high school or in technical institutions, and not just primarily
university students. Moreover, school programs could be designed to include
a more extensive curriculum covering European institutions and citizenship.
The feasibility of European political integration also depends on how it is
achieved. One issue concerns the policy areas over which it takes place. As
mentioned above, Europeans seem ready to accept a transfer of sovereignty
to the center in the provision of some global public goods like security, border
control, environment protection. A political union should also be resilient to
economic shocks like the recent financial crisis, however, and this presupposes
agreement on a (possibly minimalist) set of principles of risk sharing and
solidarity. It is uncertain when and whether Europeans will be ready to agree
on such principles. Redistribution is a sensitive issue, and replicating the
welfare state at the European rather than at the national level seems beyond
reach for now. While Europeans are very sensitive to inequality within their
own countries (relative to Americans, for instance42 ), redistribution across
national borders is perceived as much less politically viable. Nonetheless, it
is hard to imagine a federal Europe without some cross-border redistribution
and risk-sharing scheme.
41

Despite the rise of nationalism, there is also evidence that European identity has not
weakened. According to Eurobarometer surveys reported in European Parliament (2016),
51% of respondents say that they feel both national and Europeans in 2016, against 39%
that feel only national. These numbers are not very diﬀerent from those in the distant
past.
42
See Alesina and Glaeser (2004).

36

A second important issue concerns the institutional foundations of the
transfer of sovereignty. Intergovernmental decision making in the Council
inevitably increases perceived international conflicts and breeds mistrust,
because national political delegation forces politicians to show to their respective constituency that they have “won” and brought home a good deal.
Having a European policymaking institution in charge, instead, accountable
to all European citizens either directly, or indirectly through the European
Parliament, is more likely to encourage compromise. It can also accelerate
the formation of European identities and the emergence of a European (as
opposed to national) public forum, where European policy issues are discussed with a European perspective. Still, transferring political power from
the Council to European institutions requires the consent of national governments, who may be jealous of their own prerogatives and may not accept
the emergence of powerful European political actors. Exploring these institutional design aspects of how to achieve further European integration (or
prevent disintegration) is an important challenge for future analysis and policy discussion.

VII

References

• Aghion P., Persson T. and Rouzet, D. (2012). Education and military rivalry. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers,
w18049.
• Alesina, A. and Giuliano, P. (2014). Family Ties. In Agion, P. and
Durlauf, S. N. (Eds.) Handbook of Economic Growth, 2A, pp. 177—
215. The Netherlands: North Holland.
• Alesina, A. and Giuliano, P. (2015). Culture and institutions. Journal
of Economic Literature, 53(4):898—944.
• Alesina A., P Giuliano and B. Reich (2017). Nation Building and
Education. Mimeo, Harvard University
• Alesina A. and Glaeser, E. (2004). Fighting Poverty in the US and
Europe: A World of Diﬀerences Oxford University Press: Oxford UK

37

• Alesina, A. and Perotti, R. (2004). The European Union: A Politically
Incorrect View The Journal of Economic Perspectives , Fall, 27—48.
• Alesina, A. and Spolaore, E. (1997). On the number and size of nations.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4):1027—1056.
• Alesina, A. and Spolaore, E. (2005). The size of nations. MIT Press.
• Alesina, A., Stancheva S. and Teso, E. (2016). Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers, w23027.
• Atkinson, A. B. (2015). Inequality. Harvard University Press.
• Backus, D., F. Kydland and P. Kehoe. (1992). International Real
Business Cycles, Journal of Political Economy, 100(4):745—775.
• Barro, R. J. and Sala-i Martin, X. (1992). Convergence. Journal of
Political Economy, 100(2):223—251.
• Beck T. and G. Underhill (eds.) (2017). Quo Vadis? Indentiy, Policy
and the Future of the European Union Vox Eu Org Book CEPR Press
• Berry, C. R. and Glaeser, E. L. (2005). The divergence of human capital
levels across cities. Papers in Regional Science, 84(3):407—444.
• Buera, Francisco J., Alexander Monge-Naranjo and Giorgio E. Primiceri (2011). Learning the Wealth of Nations, Econometrica, 79(1):1—45.
• Boldrin, M. and Canova, F. (2001). Inequality and convergence in
Europe’s regions: Reconsidering european regional policies. Economic
Policy, 16(32):206—253.
• Brandolini, A. (2009). On synthetic indices of multidimensional wellbeing: Health and income inequalities in France, Germany, Italy and
the United Kingdom. In Reiko Gotoh & Paul Dumouchel (Eds.),
Against Injustice: The New Economics of Amartya Sen. pp. 221—251.
Cambridge University Press.
• Brunnermeier, M. K., James, H., and Landau, J.-P. (2016). The Euro
and the battle of ideas. Princeton University Press.
38

• Calligaris, S., Del Gatto, M., Hassan, F., Ottaviano, G., Schivardi, F.,
et al. (2016). Italy’s productivity conundrum. a study on resource
misallocation in Italy. Technical report, Directorate General Economic
and Financial Aﬀairs (DG ECFIN), European Commission.
• Carlino, G. A. and Mills, L. O. (1993). Are us regional incomes converging? A time series analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics,
32(2):335—346.
• Coppedge, M., Gerring, J., Lindberg, S. I., Skaaning, S.-E., Teorell, J.,
Altman, D., Bernhard, M., Fish, M. S., Glynn, A., Hicken, A., et al.
(2015). V-dem [country-year/country-date] dataset v5. Varieties of
Democracy (V-Dem) Project.
• Desmet, K., Ortuño-Ortín, I., and Wacziarg, R. (2016). Culture, ethnicity and diversity. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Papers, w20989.
• Do, Q.-T. and Levchenko, A. A. (2009). Trade, inequality, and the political economy of institutions. Journal of Economic Theory, 144(4):1489—
1520.
• European Central Bank (2008). The EURO at Ten — lessons and challenges. Proceedings of the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference
• Eurobarometer (2016). Special Eurobarometer 451, Future of Europe,
December.
• European Central Bank (2015). Real convergence in the euro area: evidence, theory and policy implications. ECB Economic Bulletin, (5):30—
45.
• European Commission (2017) White Paper on the Future of Europe,
March
• European Parliament (2016). Major changes in European public opinion regarding the European Union exploratory study. European Parliament Research Service.
• Falk, A. et al. (2015) The Nature and Predictive Power of Preferences.
Global Evidence, IZA Discussion Papers, No. 9504
39

• Feenstra, R. C., Inklaar, R., and Timmer, M. P. (2015). The next
generation of the Penn world table. The American Economic Review,
105(10):3150—3182.
• Feldstein, M. (1997). The Political Economy of the European Economic
and Monetary Union: Political Sources of an Economic Liability. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(4), 23-42.
• Fouka, V. and Voth, H.-J. (20136). Reprisals remembered: GermanGreek conflict and car sales during the Euro crisis. Stanford Center for
International Development Working Paper, No. 587
• Frankel, Jeﬀrey A. and Andrew K. (1998) The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria Economic Journal July
• Gancia, G., Ponzetto, G. A., and Ventura, J. (2016). Globalization and
political structure. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Papers, w22046.
• Ganong, P. and Shoag, D. (2012). Why has regional income convergence in the us stopped? Social Science Research Network.
• Giavazzi, F., Petrov, I., and Schiantarelli, F. (2014). Culture: Persistence and evolution. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Papers, w20174.
• Gil-Pareja, S., Llorca-Vivero, R., and Martínez-Serrano, J. A. (2008).
Trade eﬀects of monetary agreements: evidence for oecd countries. European Economic Review, 52(4):733—755.
• Gogas, P. (2013). Business cycle synchronisation in the european union.
OECD Journal: Journal of Business Cycle Measurement and Analysis,
1.
• Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Karabarbounis, L., and VillegasSanchez, C. (2015). Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers, w21453.
• Guiso, L., Herrera, H., and Morelli, M. (2016). Cultural diﬀerences and
institutional integration. Journal of International Economics, 99:S97—
S113.
40

• Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture aﬀect
economic outcomes? The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2):23—
48.
• Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2009). Cultural biases in
economic exchange? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3).
• Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2015). The value of corporate
culture. Journal of Financial Economics, 117(1):60—76.
• Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2016). Monnet’s error? Economic Policy, 31(86):247—297.
• Hainmueller, J. and Hazlett, C. (2014). Kernel regularized least squares:
Reducing misspecification bias with a flexible and interpretable machine learning approach. Political Analysis, 22(2):143—168.
• Howell, L. D. (2011). International country risk guide methodology.
East Syracuse, NY: PRS Group.
• Inglehart, R. (1997). Modernization and postmodernization: Cultural,
economic, and political change in 43 societies. Princeton University
Press.
• Jappelli, T. and Pagano, M. (2010). Financial market integration under
EMU. In Buti, M., Deroose, S., Gaspar, V. and Nogueira Martins,
J. (Eds.) The Euro — The First Decade, chapter 9 (pp. 315-353).
Cambridge University Press.
• Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Papaioannou, Elias and Peydrò, José Luis
(2103) Financial Regulation, Financial Globalization, and the Synchronization of Economic Activity Authors, Journal of Finance: 20, May
• Koske, I., Wanner, I., Bitetti, R., and Barbiero, O. (2015). The 2013
update of the OECD product market regulation indicators: policy insights for oecd and non-oecd countries. OECD Economics Department
Working Papers.
• Kunčič, A. (2014). Institutional quality dataset. Journal of Institutional Economics, 10(01):135—161.

41

• Kuran, T. and Sandholm, W. H. (2008). Cultural integration and its
discontents. The Review of Economic Studies, 75(1):201—228.
• Kutan, A. M. and Yigit, T. M. (2009). European integration, productivity growth and real convergence: Evidence from the new member
states. Economic Systems, 33(2):127—137.
• Levchenko, A. A. (2007). Institutional quality and international trade.
The Review of Economic Studies, 74(3):791—819.
• Luxembourg Income Study Database (LIS), multiple countries, 19802009.
• Mardia, K. V., Kent, J. T., and Bibby, J. M. (1979). Multivariate
Analysis. San Diego: Academic Press.
• Mitchell , K. (2011). Rethinking the ‘Erasmus Eﬀect’ on European
Identity. Journal of Common Market Studies, 53(2): 330—48.
• McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2016). Polarized America: The dance of ideology and unequal riches. MIT Press.
• Norris, P. and Inglehart, R. (2009). Cosmopolitan communications:
Cultural diversity in a globalized world. Cambridge University Press.
• Nunn, N. (2007). Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and
the pattern of trade. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2):569—
600.
• OECD (2004). Learning for Tomorrow’s World: First Results from
PISA 2003. OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2007). PISA 2006: Science Competencies for Tomorrow’s
World: Volume 1: Analysis. OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2010). PISA 2009 Results: What Students Know and Can Do:
Student Performance in Reading, Mathematics and Science, volume 1.
OECD Publishin, Paris.
• OECD (2014). PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do:
Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science, volume 1
- Revised edition. OECD Publishing, Paris.
42

• OECD/UNESCO (2003). Literacy skills for the world of tomorrow:
Further results from PISA 2000. OECD Publishing.
• Olivier, J., Thoenig, M., and Verdier, T. (2008). Globalization and
the dynamics of cultural identity. Journal of International Economics,
76(2):356—370.
• Papaioannou E. (2016) Needed: A European Institutional Union Vox
EU, February
• Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the 21st Century. Harvard University
Press.
• Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2003). Income inequality in the United States,
1913—1998. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):1—41.
• Portes, J. (2015). Labour mobility in the European Union. In Durlauf,
S. N. and Blume L. E. (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Online Edition. Palgrave Macmillan.
• Sigalas, E. (2010). Cross-border mobility and European identity: the
eﬀectiveness of intergroup contact during the ERASMUS Year Abroad.
European Union Politics, 11(2):241—65.
• Spolaore, E. (2013). What is european integration really about? A
political guide for economists. The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
27(3):125—144.
• Stokes, B. (2016). Euroskepticism beyond brexit. Pew Research Center, 7.
• Tabellini, G. (2008). Presidential address: Institutions and Culture.
Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 255-294.
• Trebbi, F. and Weese, E. (2015). Insurgency and small wars: Estimation of unobserved coalition structures. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers, w21202.
• Villaverde, J. and Maza, A. (2008). Productivity convergence in the
European regions, 1980—2003: a sectoral and spatial approach. Applied
Economics, 40(10):1299—1313.
43

• Weese, E. (2015). Political mergers as coalition formation: an analysis of the heisei municipal amalgamations. Quantitative Economics,
6(2):257—307.
• Wilson, I. (2011). What should we expect of the “Erasmus Generations”? Journal of Common Market Studies, 49(5):1113—40.
• Williams, A. (2015). A global index of information transparency and
accountability. Journal of Comparative Economics, 43(3):804—824.

VIII

Appendix: Measurement Error

Let  the observed cultural measure in country  for individual (or pair
of individuals) . Let the observed  be a mismeasured proxy for the true
∗
latent cultural measure 
. Particularly assume the presence of idiosyncratic
measurement error  and country-specific mismeasurement   . We posit
∗
 = 
+  +  

(2)

with  i.i.d. classic measurement errors and orthogonal to the (also i.i.d.
and mean zero)   
Let us first derive the mean and variance of  within country  based on
(2) -so taken relative to individuals  in country , hence the subscript   
used below. We obtain:
∗
 ( ) =  (
) +  

(3)

∗
 ( ) =  (
) +  ( )

(4)

and
We can further compute the variance of country-specific means across diﬀerent ’s:
∗
 ( ( )) =  ( (
)) +  (  )
(5)
Ad absurdum let us take the extreme case in which the measurement error
is so large to potentially mask a within-country true variance of the latent
∗
cultural measure  (
) that is less or equal to the observed cross-country
∗
variance in country means  ( (
)) or
∗
∗
 ( (
)) ≥  (
)

44

Then, consider that the measured within-country variance has to satisfy:
∗
 ( ) =  (
) +  ( ) ≤
∗
 ( ( )) +  ( ) =  ( ( )) −  ( ) +  ( )

Rearranging this inequality yields:
 ( ) −  ( ( )) +  ( ) ≤  ( )
which implies that
 ( ) À  ( ) −  ( ( ))
However, we already know from our empirical estimates that  ( ) ' 10 ∗
 ( ( )). Hence,  ( ) À 9 ∗  ( ( )). Notice that  ( ) ( ( ))
can be read as the noise to signal ratio of the individual country survey
relative to the benchmark of the (arguably better measured) cross-country
dispersion of the culture measure  ( ( )).  ( ) ( ( )) À 9 would
appear an implausibly large amount of idiosyncratic measurement error other
than for the most extreme critics of the value surveys we employ.

45

Figures and Tables
Figures 2.1 – 2.2

Figure 2.3.a – Figure 2.3.b

Figure 2.4

Figures 2.5

Figure 2.6

Figure 3.1

Figures 4.1.a – 4.1.b

Figures 4.1.c – 4.1.d

Figure 5.1

Figure 5.2

Figure 5.3

Figure 5.4

Figure 5.5

Figures 6.1.a – 6.1.b

Figures 6.2.a – 6.2.c

Figure 6.3

Table 3.1 – Description of variables used in Section 3
Question
A. Religiosity
And how important is God in your life? Please use this card to indicate - 10
means very important and 1 means not at all important.
Independently of whether you go to church or not, would you say you are ...
Do you justify: euthanasia (terminating the life of the incurably sick)
Do you justifiy: suicide
B. Sexual Morality
Do you justifiy: abortion
Do you justify: divorce
Do you justifiy: homosexuality
C. Gender Equality
* A working mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her
children as a mother who does not work
* A preschool child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works.
* Both the husband and wife should contribute to household income
D. Role of the State
* Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you
place your views on this scale? [incomes should be made more equal]
* Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you place
your views on this scale? [Private ownership of business should be increased]
* Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you place
your views on this scale? [people should take more responsibility for providing
for themselves]
In political matters, people talk of 'the left' and 'the right'. How would you place
your views on this scale generally speaking?

Scale
(0) Not important - (4) Very Important (a)
Dummy for being religious (a)
Dummy for justifying euthanasia (a)
Dummy for justifying suicide (a)

Dummy for justifying abortion (a)
(0) Always - (2) Absolutely not (a)
(0) Absolutely not - (3) always (a)

(1) Agree strongly - (4) Disagree strongly
(1) Agree strongly - (4) Disagree strongly
(1) Disgree strongly - (4) Agree strongly (a)

(0) Income should be made more equal - (6)
We need larger income differences as incentives (a)
(0) government ownership of business should
be increased - (4) Private ownership of business should be increased (a)
(0) the government should take more responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided
for - (4) people should take more responsibility for providing for themselves (a)
(0) Left - (6) right (a)

E. Cultural Capital
Here is a list of qualities which children can be encouraged to learn at home.
Dummy equal to one if considered important
Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important? Please choose up to
five: obedience
Some people feel they have completely free choice and control over their lives,
(0) Great Control - (2) None at all (a)
and other people feel that what they do has no real effect on what happens to
them. Please use the scale to indicate how much freedom of choice and control
you feel you have over the way your life turns out?
Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you
(1) Most people can be trusted - (2) Cannot
can't be too careful in dealing with people?
be too careful (a)
Here is a list of qualities which children can be encouraged to learn at home.
Dummy equal to one if considered important
Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important? Please choose up to
five: hard work
Here is a list of qualities which children can be encouraged to learn at home.
Dummy equal to one if considered important
Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important? Please choose up to
five: unselfishness
Note: (a) variable rescaled from the original to ensure comparability with the General Value Survey

Table 4.1 – Description of variables used in Section 4

Description

Original Source

A. Quality of Government and of public administration
Transparency Index
Williams (2015)
ICRG Indicator of Quality of Gov- Howell (2011)
ernment
Political corruption
Coppedge et al. (2015)
B. Governance Indicator
Corruption
Government Effectiveness
Political Stability
Rule of Law
Political Accountability

Period

1984 - 2010
1984 - 2010
1984 - 2010

World Bank - Worldwide Governance Indicators

1996 - 2015

C. Quality of Legal Institutions
Legal Institutional Quality

Kuncic (2014)

1990 - 2010

D. Education
Pisa Scores (math, reading, science)

OECD/UNESCO (2003), OECD (2004,
2007, 2010, 2014)

2000 - 2012

Koske, Wanner, Bitetti and Barbiero
(2015)

1998 - 2013

E. Regulatory Environment
Product Market Regulation

Table 5.1 - Avg. cultural distance between row & column individuals of identical socioeconomic level.
AT

BE

DE

DK

ES

AT

0.56

BE

0.59

0.55

DE

0.58

0.60

0.57

DK

0.62

0.57

0.63

0.50

ES

0.58

0.57

0.58

0.57

0.52

FI

FR

GB

GR

IE

IT

LU

NL

NO

PT

SE

All
EU
0.59
0.57
0.59
0.57
0.57

FI

0.58

0.56

0.59

0.57

0.56

0.55

FR

0.60

0.55

0.60

0.58

0.57

0.57

0.55

0.56

GB

0.59

0.58

0.59

0.59

0.59

0.59

0.58

0.56

GR

0.57

0.60

0.60

0.62

0.59

0.57

0.60

0.59

0.52

IE

0.62

0.62

0.61

0.61

0.63

0.58

0.60

0.60

0.58

0.60

0.57
0.58
0.59
0.61

IT

0.59

0.59

0.60

0.62

0.64

0.58

0.60

0.57

0.56

0.60

0.52

LU

0.61

0.58

0.62

0.59

0.58

0.58

0.56

0.58

0.60

0.62

0.60

0.58

0.60
0.59

NL

0.59

0.57

0.59

0.53

0.56

0.54

0.57

0.56

0.61

0.60

0.60

0.58

0.52

NO

0.59

0.55

0.59

0.54

0.54

0.53

0.55

0.58

0.59

0.60

0.61

0.58

0.53

0.50

PT

0.57

0.57

0.57

0.60

0.57

0.55

0.55

0.54

0.53

0.56

0.54

0.57

0.57

0.57

0.50

SE

0.59

0.56

0.59

0.54

0.56

0.55

0.57

0.58

0.61

0.61

0.63

0.58

0.52

0.52

0.57

Table 5.2 – Fear of EU and nationalism
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Fear of EU
Cultural Distance

0.1031***

0.0900***

0.0804***

0.0652**

(0.029)

(0.028)

(0.028)

(0.028)

Controls

X

Fixed Effects

X

X

Country

Region

Observations

6,555

6,555

6,555

6,550

R-squared

0.002

0.080

0.142

0.201

0.56
0.55
0.56
0.50

0.55

Table 6.1 - Questions used in the GSS
Question

Scale

A. Religiosity
What is your religious preference? Is it Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, some other religion, or no religion?

Dummy for being religious (a)

When a person has a disease that cannot be cured, do you think doctors should be allowed by law to end the
patient's life by some painless means if the patient and his family request it?

Dummy for justifying euthanasia
(a)

Do you think a person has the right to end his or her own life if this person . . .Has an incurable disease? Has
gone bankrupt? Has dishonored his or her family? Is tired of living and ready to die?

Dummy for justifying suicide (a)

B. Sexual Morality
Should divorce in this country be easier or more difficult to obtain than it is now?

(0) more difficult- (2) easier (a)

C. Gender Equality
* A working mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a mother who
does not work

(1) Disagree strongly-(4) Agree
strongly

* A preschool child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works.
* It is much better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care
of the home and family.
D. Role of the State
* Some people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the
rich and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance to the poor.
Others think that the government should not concern itself with reducing this income difference between the
rich and the poor.
* Some people think that the government in Washington is trying to do too many things that
should be left to individuals and private businesses. Others disagree and think that the government should do
even
more to solve our country's problems. Still others have opinions somewhere in between.
* Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything possible to improve the standard
of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point 1 on this card. Other people think it is not the government's
responsibility, and that each person should take care of himself; they are at Point 5.
We hear a lot of talk these days about liberals and conservatives. I'm going to show you a seven-point scale on
which the political views that people might hold are arranged from extremely liberal--point 1--to extremely
conservative-- point 7. Where would you place yourself on this scale?

(1) Agree strongly - (4) Disagree
strongly
(1) Disgree strongly - (4) Agree
strongly

(0) government should not - (6)
government should do (a)

(0) government should do more (4) government does too much (a)

(0) the government - (4) the people (a)
(0) Left - (6) right (a)

E. Cultural Capital
If you had to choose, which thing on this list would you pick as the most important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life? [obedience]

Dummy equal to one if considered
important (a)

Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing
with people?
If you had to choose, which thing on this list would you pick as the most important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life? [hard work]

(1) Most people can be trusted (0) Cannot be too careful (a)
Dummy equal to one if considered
important (a)

If you had to choose, which thing on this list would you pick as the most important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life? [helping others]

Dummy equal to one if considered
important (a)

Note: (a) variable rescaled from the original to ensure comparability with the European Value Survey

Table 7.1 – Country Pride

Country
AT
BE
DE
DK
ES
FI
FR
GB
GR
IE
IT
LU
NL
NO
PT
SE
Mean

Wave 1
0.29
0.21
0.30
0.51
0.31
0.52
0.68
0.40
0.18
0.43
0.30
0.37

Wave 2
0.53
0.31
0.23
0.42
0.46
0.38
0.35
0.53
0.77
0.40
0.23
0.45
0.42
0.41
0.42

Wave 3
0.54
0.24
0.22
0.48
0.44
0.55
0.40
0.49
0.55
0.74
0.39
0.48
0.20
0.78
0.41
0.46

Wave 4
0.48
0.29
0.20
0.49
0.57
0.56
0.37
0.54
0.67
0.77
0.46
0.52
0.28
0.60
0.65
0.45
0.49

ONLINE APPENDIX
Appendix A
Figure A.1

Figure A.2

Figures A.3.a – A.3.e

Figure A.4

Figure A.5

Figure A.6

Figure A.7

Figure A.8

Figure A.9

Figure A.10

Figure A.11

Figure A.12

Figure A.13

Table A.1 – Description of variables used in Section 2

Variable
GDP per capita

Description
Original Source
Period
Log of Expenditure–side real
Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) 1980 – 2009
GDP at chained PPP (in 2011
USD)
Disposable Income Total monetary and non–moneLuxembourg Income Study (LIS)
1985 – 2010
tary current income net of income Database
taxes and social security contributions, at PPP (in 2010 USD)
Regional GDP

Gross Domestic Product
Cambridge Econometrics
(€2005bn) NUTS3 disaggregation

1980 – 2012

Table A.2 – Controls in the EVS and GSS

Variable
Age
Gender
Marital status
Employment status

Education

Family income
Note: (a) recoded to match EVS

Description
Respondent age (years)
Dummy equal one for male
Dummies for being: (1) married, (2) divorced, (3)
separated, (4) widowed, (5) single
Dummies for being employed: (1) full time or self–
employed, (2) part time, (3) retired/pensioned, (4)
housewife (not otherwise employed), (5) student,
(6) unemployed, (7) other. (a)
Dummies for: (1) incomplete elementary education,
(2) completed elementary education, (3) incomplete
secondary school (any type), (4) completed secondary school (any type), (5) Some university (w/o degree), (6) University with degree, upper level tertiary (a)
Dummy for: (1) low income, (2) medium income,
(3) high income (a)

Table A.3 - Avg. change between wave 4 and wave 1 in cultural distance between each country citizen & EU citizens from
other countries

BE

Between Countries
Unconditional Conditional
0.06***
0.06***
(0.00028)
(0.00027)

Within Country
Unconditional Conditional
0.08***
0.07***
(0.0012)
(0.0012)

DE

0.05***
(0.00028)

0.05***
(0.00027)

0.02***
(0.0013)

0.03***
(0.0013)

DK

0.01***
(0.00027)

0.02***
(0.00026)

-0.05***
(0.0013)

-0.03***
(0.0012)

ES

0.05***
(0.00028)

0.05***
(0.00027)

0.05***
(0.0013)

0.04***
(0.0012)

FR

0.05***
(0.00027)

0.06***
(0.00026)

0.06***
(0.0012)

0.06***
(0.0012)

IE

0.06***
(0.00036)

0.06***
(0.00034)

0.10***
(0.002)

0.09***
(0.002)

IT

0.08***
(0.00029)

0.08***
(0.00028)

0.08***
(0.0014)

0.08***
(0.0013)

NL

0.03***
(0.00028)

0.04***
(0.00027)

0.02***
(0.0013)

0.02***
(0.0013)

NO

0.04***
(0.00028)

0.04***
(0.00027)

0.02***
(0.0013)

0.02***
(0.0013)

SE

0.05***
(0.00028)

0.05***
(0.00027)

0.02***
(0.0013)

0.03***
(0.0012)

GB

0.06***
(0.00027)

0.06***
(0.00026)

0.07***
(0.0012)

0.07***
(0.0012)

All Countries

0.05***
(0.00012)
0.57

0.05***
(0.00012)
0.55

0.04***
(0.0004)
0.53

0.04***
(0.00039)
0.52

Mean distance (wave 1)

Table A.4 – Correlation between factors of Section 3 and their components

Importance of God
Religious
Euthanasia
Suicide

Religiosity
0.83
0.79
–0.56
–0.6

Abortion
Divorce
Homosexuality

Sexual Morality
0.79
0.85
0.79

Working Mother
Preschool Mother
Career Female

Gender Equality
0.84
0.77
0.46

Income equalization
Private ownership
Individual Responsibility
Ideology (right)
Control over life
Obedience
Trust
Hardwork

Role of the State
(a)
–0.53
0.72
0.63
0.64
Cultural Capital
–0.54
0.46
–0.71
0.51

Note: (a) Higher values of the factors are associated with a
weaker role of the State

Table A.5 – Avg. change between wave 4 and wave 1 in cultural distance between each states citizen & US citizens from other
states. Unconditional and conditional on socio–economic covariates.

Between states
Unconditional Conditional
California

Texas

Illinois

Michigan

Florida

Ohio

North_Carolina

Pennsylvania

New_York

All 9 States W1–W4

All 9 States W1

Within state
Unconditional Conditional

0.02***

0.01**

0.01

–0.00

(0.0015)

(0.0015)

(0.0127)

(0.0229)

0.05***

0.01***

0.06***

0.01

(0.0014)

(0.0012)

(0.0140)

(0.0221)

0.05***

0.07***

0.08***

0.13***

(0.0015)

(0.0014)

(0.0160)

(0.0200)

0.05***

0.03***

0.06***

0.01

(0.0013)

(00013)

(0.0185)

(0.0245)

0.04***

0.03***

0.04***

0.04**

(0.0016)

(0.0019)

(0.0174)

(0.0190)

0.05***

0.02***

0.06***

0.01

(0.0012)

(0.0014)

(0.0182)

(0.0193)

0.03***

0.04***

0.01

0.07***

(0.0019)

(0.0021)

(0.0052)

(0.0235)

0.04***

0.00

0.05***

0.01

(0.0016)

(0.0015)

(0.0167)

(0.0222)

0.03***

–0.03***

0.02***

–0.10**

(0.0012)

(0.0013)

(0.0099)

(0.0186)

0.04***

0.02***

0.04***

0.03***

(0.0013)

(0.0015)

(0.0141)

(0.0136)

0.56

0.54

0.56

0.53

Table A.6 – Avg. cultural distance between row & column individuals of identical socioeconomic level.

California

California
0.53

Texas

Illinois

Michigan

Florida

Ohio

North Carolina

Pennsylvania

Texas

0.57

0.60

Illinois

0.61

0.63

0.63

Michigan

0.61

0.62

0.63

0.61

Florida

0.56

0.57

0.60

0.58

0.59

Ohio
North Carolina
Pennsylvania
New York

0.54

0.59

0.61

0.57

0.56

0.55

0.58

0.61

0.61

0.60

0.60

0.59

0.57

0.56

0.59

0.61

0.60

0.57

0.56

0.60

0.60

0.52

0.57

0.59

0.58

0.53

0.54

0.58

0.55

New
York

All
States
0.57
0.59
0.61
0.60
0.57
0.57
0.59
0.58

0.55

0.56

Appendix B. Recoding of cultural variables and controls in EVS and GSS for
Sections 3, 5, 6.
EVS QUESTION
Independently of whether
you go to church or not,
would you say you are ...
Do you justify: divorce

Answer–WORD
Religious

1

Not religious

2

Convinced atheist

3

absolutely not

1

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
always

2

Do you justify: Euthanasia absolutely not
(terminating the life of the
.
incurably sick)

Do you justify: Suicide

Here is a list of qualities
which children can be encouraged to learn at
home. Which, if any, do
you consider to be especially important? Please
choose up to five: unsel-

fishness

ANSWER–CODE

1
0

0

3
4
5
6

1

7
8
9

2

10
1
2

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
always

3

absolutely not
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
always

1

important

NEW ANSWER

4

0

5
6
7
8
9

1

10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

0
1
2
3
4

1

1

0

0

not mentioned

EVS QUESTION

Answer–WORD

important
Here is a list of qualities which children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to
be especially important? Please choose up to five: hard
not mentioned
work
important
Here is a list of qualities which children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to
be especially important? Please choose up to five: obenot mentioned

dience

Generally speaking, would you say that most people
can be trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing
with people?

most people
cannot be too careful

In political matters, people talk of 'the left' and 'the right'. left
How would you place your views on this scale generally .
speaking?
.

Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues.
How would you place your views on this scale?

Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues.
How would you place your views on this scale?

ANSWER– NEW ANSWER
CODE
1

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

1

1

2

0

1

0

2

1

3

2

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

right

10

incomes more equal

1

6

.

2

5

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

incentives to individual
private

10
1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

government

10

3
4
5
6

4
3
2
1
0

4
3
2
1
0

EVS QUESTION
Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues.
How would you place your views on this scale?

A working mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a mother who
does not work

Both the husband and wife should contribute to household income

A preschool child is likely to suffer if his or her mother
works.

ANSWER–
CODE

Answer–WORD
provide themselves

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

govt should

10

Agree strongly

1

4

.

2

3

.

3

2

Disagree strongly

4

1

Agree strongly

1

4

.

2

3

.

3

2

Disagree strongly

4

1

from 1=agree strongly
to 4=disagree strongly

And how important is God in your life? Please use this
absolutely not
card to indicate – 10 means very important and 1 means
not at all important.

4
3
2
1
0

unchanged
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Do you justify: abortion

NEW
ANSWER

always

10

absolutely not

1

0

1

2

3

4

2
3
4

0

5
6
7
8
9

always

10

1

EVS QUESTION
Do you justify: homosexuality

Some people feel they have completely free choice and
control over their lives, and other people feel that what
they do has no real
effect on what happens to them. Please use the scale to
indicate how much freedom of choice and control you
feel you have over the way your life turns out?

NEW
ANSWER

ANSWER–
CODE

Answer–WORD
absolutely not

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

always

10

0

1

2

3

none at all

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

.

7

.

8

.

9

a great deal

10

0

1

2

GSS QUESTION
Religion

If you had to choose, which thing on
this list would you pick as the most
important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life?

NEW ANSWER

Protestant

1

Catholic

2

Jewish

3

Other

5

,,,

6

,,,

7

,,,

8

,,,

9

,,,

10

,,,

11

None

4

0

1

2

3

1

2

0

No

2

0

Yes

1

Should divorce in this country be eas- Easier
ier or more difficult to obtain than it is stay as it is
now?
more difficult
When a person has a disease that
cannot be cured, do you think doctors
should be allowed by law to end the
patient's
life by some painless means if the patient and his family request it?
Do you think a person has the right to
end his or her own life if this person .
. .Has an incurable disease? Has
gone bankrupt? Has dishonored his
or her family? Is tired of living and
ready to die?

ANSWER–
CODE

Answer–WORD

1

1

Yes

1

1

No

2

0

Yes

1

1

No

2

0

Yes

1

1

No

2

0

Yes

1

1

No

2

0

position of "help others"
in a ranking of 5 alternatives

1
2

1

3
4

0

5
If you had to choose, which thing on
this list would you pick as the most
important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life?

position of "hard work" in 1
a ranking of 5 alternatives 2

1

3
4

0

5
If you had to choose, which thing on
this list would you pick as the most
important for a child to learn to prepare him or her for life?

position of obedience in a 1
ranking of 5 alternatives
2

1

3
4

0

5
Generally speaking, would you say
that most people can be trusted or
that you can't be too careful in
dealing with people?

most people

1

1

cannot be careful

2

0

Depends

3

.dk

GSS QUESTION
We hear a lot of talk these days about
liberals and conservatives. I'm going
to show you a seven–point scale on
which
the political views that people might
hold are arranged from extremely liberal––point 1––to extremely conservative––
point 7. Where would you place yourself on this scale?

Some people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce
the income differences between the
rich and the poor, perhaps by raising
the taxes of wealthy families or by
giving income assistance to the poor.
Others think that the government
should not concern itself with reducing this income difference between
the rich and the poor.

Some people think that the government in Washington is trying to do too
many things that
should be left to individuals and private businesses. Others disagree and
think that the government should do
even
more to solve our country's problems.
Still others have opinions somewhere
in between.

Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything possible to improve the standard of living of all poor Americans;
they are at Point 1 on this card. Other
people think it is not the government's
responsibility, and that each
person should take care of himself;
they are at Point 5.

ANSWER–
CODE

Answer–WORD

NEW ANSWER

extremely liberal

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

.

5

.

6

extremely conservative

7

govt should reduce

1

6

.

2

5

.

3

4

.

4

3

.

5

2

.

6

1

people themselves

7

0

govt do more

1

.

2

agree with both

3

.

4

govt do too much

5

govt should

1

.

2

.

3

.

4

people themselves

5

0
1
2
3
4
5
6

0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4

GSS QUESTION

Answer–WORD

A working mother can establish just strongly agree
as warm and secure a relationship
with her children as a mother who
does not work.
strongly disagree
It is much better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever
outside the home and the woman
takes care of the home and family.

ANSWER–CODE

NEW ANSWER

1

4

2

3

3

2

4

1

Agree strongly

1

1

.

2

2

.

3

3

Disagree strongly

4

4

A preschool child is likely to suffer if from 1=strongly agree to
his or her mother works.
4=strongly disagree

unchanged

EVS CONTROL
Sex
Age
What is your current legal marital status?

And what age did you (will you)
complete your full–time education?

What is the highest level you
have reached in your education?

Answer–WORD

ANSWER–CODE

male

1

female

0

NEW ANSWER
1
0
unchanged

married

1

1

divorced

3

3

separated

4

4

widowed

5

5

single/never married

6

living as married

2

<12 years

1

13 years

2

14 years

3

15 years

4

16 years

5

17 years

6

18 years

7

19 years

8

20 years

9

>21 years

10

Inadequately completed elementary
education
Completed (compulsory) elementary
education
Incomplete secondary school: technical/vocational type
Incomplete secondary: university–preparatory type/secondary,
Complete secondary school: technical/vocational type/secondary

1

1

2

2

Complete secondary: university–preparatory type/full secondary
Some university without degree/higher
education – lower–level tertiary

6

University with degree/higher education – upper–level tertiary
full time (30h a week or more)

8

self employed

3

part time (less then 30 hours a week)

2

2

retired/pensioned

4

4

housewife (not otherwise employed)

5

5

student

6

6

unemployed

7

7

other

8

8

low

1

1

medium

2

2

high

3

3

<=2000

1

1

2000–5000

2

2

5000–10000

3

3

10000–20000

4

4

20000–50000

5

5

50000–100000

6

6

100000–500000

7

7

>=500000

8

8

6

Recoded in "none,
primary, lower secondary, upper secondary, university"
according to country
specific schooling
rules.

3
5

3

4
4

Are you, yourself, employed
now? If Yes: About how many
hours a week?

income (recoded)

size of town

7

1

5
6
1

GSS CONTROL
sex
age
marital status

education

Answer–WORD
1
0

Married
Divorced

1
3
4
2
5
0
1

Separated
Widowed
Never Married
no formal schooling
1st grade
2nd grade
3rd grade
4th grade
5th grade
6th grade
7th grade
8th grade
9th grade
10th grade
11th grade
12th grade
1 year of college
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years

Last week were you working
full time, part time, going to
school, keeping house, or
what?

In which of these groups did your
total family income, from all
sources, fall last year before
taxes, that is? Just tell me the letter.

8 years
Full time
Part time
With job, but not at work
Retired
Keeping house
In School
Unemployed, laid off, looking for work
Other
<1000
1000–2999
3000–3999
4000–4999
5000–5999
6000–6999
7000–7999
8000–9999
10000–14999
15000–19999
20000–24999
>=25000

population of town in thousands

ANSWER–CODE

male
female

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
2
3
5

NEW ANSWER
1
0
unchanged
1
3
4
5
6

1

2

3

4
5

6

1*
2*
4

7
6
4
8
1
2
3
4

5
6
7
8

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
<=2
2–5

1

2
3
1
2

5–10
3
10–20
4
20–50
5
50–100
6
100–500
7
>=500
8
*Full time and part time is determined by the two variables hrs1 hrs2. If either of the two is greater or equal than 30, the answer is coded as 1. If one of the two is lower than 30 or missing, the answer is 2

33

