                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ESTIMATING THE GAINS FROM NEW RAIL TRANSIT INVESTMENT: A MACHINE
                       LEARNING TREE APPROACH

                                       Seungwoo Chin
                                       Matthew E. Kahn
                                     Hyungsik Roger Moon

                                       Working Paper 23326
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23326


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Seungwoo Chin, Matthew E. Kahn, and Hyungsik Roger Moon. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Gains from New Rail Transit Investment: A Machine Learning Tree Approach
Seungwoo Chin, Matthew E. Kahn, and Hyungsik Roger Moon
NBER Working Paper No. 23326
April 2017
JEL No. R21,R4

                                           ABSTRACT

Urban rail transit investments are expensive and irreversible. Since people differ with respect to
their demand for trips, their value of time, and the types of real estate they live in, such projects
are likely to offer heterogeneous benefits to residents of a city. Using the opening of a major new
subway in Seoul, we contrast hedonic estimates based on multivariate hedonic methods with a
machine learning approach that allows us to estimate these heterogeneous effects. While a
majority of the "treated" apartment types appreciate in value, other types decline in value. We
explore potential mechanisms. We also cross-validate our estimates by studying what types of
new housing units developers build in the treated areas close to the new train lines.


Seungwoo Chin                                     Hyungsik Roger Moon
USC                                               USC
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Los Angeles,CA 90089                              Los Angeles,CA 90089
chinseun@usc.edu                                  moonr@usc.edu

Matthew E. Kahn
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
KAP
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kahnme@usc.edu
1    Introduction
Major urban rail transportation projects increase travel speeds in cities and thus facilitate
shorter commutes, labor market matching and consumer shopping and leisure opportuni-
ties. Land close to new transport nodes often increases in value as the demand to live close
to fast public transit increases local demand to live there. Real estate developers will seek
to build new housing units close to these new stations.
    In recent decades, Asia’s major cities have made major investments in new subways
(Gonzalez-Navarro and Turner (2016)). Cities ranging from Beijing, to Shanghai to Singa-
pore have invested billions in subways. In this paper, we study how the real estate market
in Seoul has been affected by the construction of a major new subway. The line num-
ber 9 (hereafter LINE9) subway connects the Southern part of the city with the Gangnam
District. This is one of the richest parts of the city.
    Our methodological approach builds on past hedonic studies that use panel estimation
strategies to recover estimates of the causal effects of new transit access (Kahn (2007),
Billings (2011), Zheng and Kahn (2013) and Gibbons and Machin (2005)). A distinguish-
ing feature of our study is to use machine learning to pare down the possible non-linearities
in the hedonic pricing function. Consider a hedonic regression that includes eleven ex-
planatory variables that each takes on at least two discrete values. For example, one of
such variables could be the apartment’s size or an indicator for whether the apartment unit
is located close to a new transit station. A researcher who seeks to flexibly estimate such
a hedonic pricing gradient would need to include more than 211 interaction terms. This
is clearly infeasible but if the researcher does not pursue this strategy then the underlying
pricing function may be misspecified.
    Our solution to this challenge is to use the regression tree approach from machine
learning (ML) (e.g., Breiman et al. (1984) and Friedman et al. (2001)). Building on Athey


                                                3
and Imbens (2015), we apply ML methods in a difference-in-difference setting to estimate
conditional average treatment effects. This approach imposes only light computational
burdens. In our tree approach, we create dummy variables indicating whether the treatment
has occurred or not and whether the housing unit is in the treatment area (i.e close to the
new transit stations). The ML algorithm splits the sample on these attributes as well as on
the physical attributes of the housing unit. This approach allows us to test how housing
price appreciation differs for treated units versus control units while allowing these effects
to vary by housing unit and community attributes. Earlier ML research has focused on
predicting outcome variables using high-dimensional explanatory variables. A more recent
literature has sought to use ML methods to estimate causal effects. These studies include,
Zeileis et al. (2008), Beygelzimer and Langford (2009), Su et al. (2009), Foster et al.
(2010), Dudı́k et al. (2011), Imai et al. (2013), Athey and Imbens (2015), and Taddy et al.
(2016).
   Based on our ML approach, we document that there is considerable variation in the
conditional average treatment effect (the CATE). Some types of apartments experience
greater price appreciation. For example, one ”winner” from the treatment is an apartment
in the upper 25% of the apartment size distribution featuring 3 rooms, 2 baths that is
less than five years old and is located within one kilometer of old transit in the Seocho
county. We contrast our ML estimates with the linear regression approach featuring a
triple interaction term between a dummy for whether the treatment has taken place, and
another dummy indicating whether the apartment is located in the treatment area. We then
interact this paif or dummies with indicators for the apartment’s physical attributes.
   As a validation test of our estimates, we study whether developers of new apartments
are building units with the features that our ML estimates predict yield the highest marginal
revenue. We document a positive correlation between our estimates of the real estate price
appreciation gains from train network proximity and the specific type of new housing

                                              4
built by a developer. These findings support our claim that we have recovered key non-
linearities of the true underlying pricing gradient and how they change over time.



2        Background

2.1        The New Subway Construction and Financing

Seoul’s first subway line was built in 1974. Over the last four decades, the subway system
expanded to cover five lines. In a continuing effort to mitigate congestion and to reduce
commuting time, Seoul’s government has built three additional subway lines since 2000
(the line number 6, 7 and 8). This expansion of the subway lines has contributed to an
increase in the subway and rail utilization rates to 34.6% and 36.2% in 2002 and in 2010,
respectively. The last subway expansion plan is the introduction of the LINE9. LINE9
was first designed in 1997. The detailed blueprint was released in 2000, and the ground-
breaking construction ceremony took place in 2002. It began its service on July 24th in
2009. As of 2014, 39% of trips in Seoul use subways or railways. Baum-Snow and Kahn
(2000) study the effects of sixteen different U.S cities’ investments in new rail transit. The
largest ridership gains are achieved when the new train is fast and connects to a city center
where people want to go for work or consumption opportunities. Figure 1 and 2 display
the network of earlier lines and LINE9. Figure 3 provides a chronology of the construction
of this subway. A key assumption in a difference-in-difference approach is identifying the
treatment date. The LINE9 was announced in the year 2000 but it was only completed
years later. In section 5.1, we test and reject the hypothesis that the subway construction
plant had an ex-ante capitalization effect.
        The total cost of this project is US$818 millions1 . 46.7% percent of the total costs are
    1
        The construction costs are based on an exchange rate of 1100won/ US$1.



                                                      5
subsidized by the Seoul metropolitan government, and the METRO9, a private company,
covered the rest. The METRO9 will operate the number 9 for three decades without paying
any rental fees while the Seoul metropolitan government owns it. The Seoul metropolitan
government guarantees a minimum profit levels for the first fifteen years of the project.2 In
2005, the Korea Transport Institute predicted that 243,196 riders per a day in 2014 would
use LINE9. However, the actual ridership has been 384,423 riders a day. This prediction
stands in contrast to the U.S literature that argues that transit agencies routinely over-state
the ridership of a new subway before it is built (Kain (1990)). Such strategic predictions
increase the likelihood that the project is funded.


2.2       The Demand for Housing Close to Transit

Seoul’s residents rely on public transit. In 2014, cars accounted for 22.8% and buses
accounted for 27%, while subway and light rail take 39%. The share of trips by taxi is
6.8%.
       Standard network logic suggests that the value of subway access increases in the set of
potential destinations one can reach in a short time. A fast train that connects to a desirable
city sub-center should lead to gentrification along its nodes, and transit improvements
(McMillen and McDonald (1998),Glaeser and Kahn (2001) and Baum-Snow et al. (2005)).
If such a train is fast enough then it could reduce the demand to live very close to the
destination because people can decentralize while still having access to the destination
area. Glaeser et al. (2008) documents that poor people live close to slow public transit,
while rich people are attracted to fast public transit in centralized cities such as Boston
and New York City.
       LINE9 significantly reduces travel times within Seoul. To document this fact, we
   2
     The Seoul metropolitan government promised this private company 90 percent of the expected profits
for the first five years, 80 percent for the next five years, and 70 percent for the last five years.


                                                  6
calculate the travel time between each apartment unit to twenty major destinations before
and after it is built, based on the average train’s speed of 50km/hour and a walking speed
of 4km/hour. Table 1 presents the one way reduction in travel time (measured in hours) to
20 major destinations in Seoul.3 For example, across our sample, the average apartment
resident experienced a reduction in travel time to Gangnam by roughly 5 minutes each way.
Those living within a 1 kilometer radius of new transit enjoyed a 14.4 minute reduction in
one way travel time to Gangnam. This is a 35% reduction.
       While the new train reduces commute times, we do not believe that its effects are large
enough to cause important general equilibrium shifts in the entire Seoul housing market.
Starting with the work of Sieg et al. (2004) there has been a growing appreciation that
local public goods improvements can have general equilibrium effects on a given city.
They studied how Clean Air Act regulations sharply reduced pollution in major sections
of Los Angeles and this caused a reshuffling of the population such that richer people
moved to previously poorer polluted areas of the city. A hedonic researcher who ignores
this migration effect would likely over-state the role of clean air improvements as the sole
cause of real estate price appreciation. In our setting, we believe that such GE effects are
a second order concern. As we discuss in the next section, the new train’s treatment area
is only a small portion of Seoul.


2.3       The Supply of Housing Close to the New Transit Stations

When the LINE9 was completed, there were 322 residential apartment complexes within
a kilometer of the new transit stations. Since the LINE9 opened the owners of these prop-
erties began enjoying a capitalization effect that we will estimate below. As we will doc-
ument in section 5.1, we do not find evidence of a capitalization effect caused by the
   3
    Estimated traveling time is based on the assumption that travelers walk to the closest subway station
and take a subway. We assume that the walking speed is 4km/hour and the subway speed is 50km/hour.


                                                   7
announcement of the LINE9 construction. Once the new subway opens, nearby land be-
comes more valuable in these “treated” areas. Thus, real estate developers have incentives
to upgrade existing structures and to build new structures. But, Seoul features stringent
construction regulation. It takes an average of 33.3 months to build a new apartment com-
plex (Jeon et al, 2010). Redeveloping existing housing entails overcoming many regula-
tory burdens. For example, each urban housing redevelopment project proposal in Seoul
undergoes a nine stage process that includes a strict safety investigation. For the typical
redevelopment project completed between the years 2000 and 2015, it took an average of
8.7 years to complete the reconstruction process. Seoul’s regulations also require devel-
opers to supply a certain proportion of small apartment types. A U.S literature has studied
how regulations limits housing supply (see Glaeser et al. (2005)). The same issues arise in
South Korea.
   While developers face many restrictions in building, they will have a greater incentive
to do so if the marginal revenue from building an apartment is higher. The total revenue
a developer collects from producing apartments of certain type in a given location is the
price per unit multiplied by the units sold. Our ML estimates will provide an estimate of
the former. If each developer is a price taker, then facing the non-linear hedonic pricing
function (their revenue curve) they will have an incentive to supply new housing that of-
fers greater revenue. Below, we will use data on the new housing supply by developers
combined with our CATE estimates to study this.




                                            8
3     The Empirical Approach

3.1    The OLS Model

Following Kahn (2007), Billings (2011), Zheng and Kahn (2013) and Gibbons and Machin
(2005), we begin by estimating average treatment effects of the number 9 on apartment
prices using the difference-in-difference framework. For the apartment type i in district j
at time t, its price is expressed as follows:


    Log(P riceijt ) = β1 Line9i + β2 Line9i × AF T ERt + β3 Xijt + µj + λt + εijt ,       (1)


where Line9i is distance between the apartment type i and the closest LINE9 station and
AF T ERt takes one if time period is after the number 9 opened, and 0 otherwise. Xijt
is a set of the apartment characteristics except proximity to the number 9, and µj and λt
are the district fixed effect and the quarter fixed effect, respectively. εijt is unobservable
disturbance.
    To specify the treatment area we split the area with G groups, G = {1, ..., G}, based
on the distance between the LINE9 station and the apartment. For apartment i in district j
at time t, its price is expressed as follows:

                          G
                          X                          G
                                                     X
      Log(P riceijt ) =         αg I{Groupi = g} +         βg I{Groupi = g} × AF T ERt
                          g=1                        g=1

                      + γXijt + µj + λt + εijt ,                                          (2)


where Groupi is the group dummy of apartment i that takes a value in G = {1, ..., G}. In
the empirical analysis in Section 5, we consider three groups (G = 3), where the first group
includes the apartments within 1km of transit stations, the second group includes between


                                                9
1km and 2km from a transit station, and the third group includes all other apartments. For
both econometric specifications, we allow serial correlation in εijt within the district of
“Dong”.
       For OLS to yield consistent estimates of the average treatment effects, the unobserved
error term (ij1 , ..., ijT ) must be uncorrelated with the ”treatment” variables even after
we control the observed apartment characteristics and the two sets of fixed effects. If
β2 measured the ”average” benefit (in terms of the apartment price) of the travel time
reduction by LINE9, this exogeneity assumption would be problematic in the case where
the development within the district changes because of LINE9. For example, suppose
that as the new stations open, this triggers the opening of new restaurants and stores close
to the new stations. In this case, the LINE9 causes both a reduction of commute times,
say, to Gangnam and an improvement in local restaurants. Hence, the OLS estimates
recovers a total effect, not the partial effect - the local price appreciation associated with
the new transit line that is due to the reduction in travel times. We will return to this
point and explore suggestive mechanisms under which the new transit stations occur price
appreciation in Section 5.5.
       We recognize that home prices reflect future expectations of local amenity changes.
If home buyers anticipated that the new train would raise future rents, then they may bid
more aggressively for houses before the LINE9 opens. In section 5.1 below, we will
study trends in real estate prices in the treatment areas and the control areas before the
actual opening of the line. We will show that there is little evidence of an anticipation
effect in the treated areas 4 . Given that our main interest is in the local amenity value of
improved transit, in the Appendix we will present rent regressions that mirror our main
   4
      McDonald and Osuji (1995) and Knaap et al. (2001) provide empirical evidences that housing or land
price started reacting in advance of when new transit lines opened. However, Gibbons and Machin (2008) ar-
gue that impacts of transport improvements are heavily dependent on economic contexts, and that if housing
is treated as consumption goods rather than assets, then anticipation effects can be marginal.


                                                   10
parametric specifications. These rent regressions allow us to focus on the annual service
flow generated by the LINE9.


3.2       The Machine Learning Approach

Our Machine Learning approach has important economic content. It allows us to disag-
gregate the average treatment effect associated with new transit access along a high di-
mensional set of observed attributes. In the presence of significant heterogeneity, the ML
approach offers a much more nuanced approach than the conventional hedonic. For those
interested in the economic incidence of public policies, this ML approach provides more
precise estimates of exactly which incumbent apartment owners are the biggest winners
from the city’s public goods investment.
       Following Rubin (1974), Heckman (1990) and Abadie (2005), we define Y 0 (i, t) as
the potential outcome that apartment i attains in period t if untreated, and define Y 1 (i, t)
as the potential outcome that apartment i attains in period t if treated. The treatment effect
is Y 1 (i, t) − Y 0 (i, t). The fundamental problem is that econometrician cannot observe
Y 1 (i, t) and Y 0 (i, t) at the same time. Econometricians observe the realized outcome,
Y (i, t) = Y 0 (i, t) · (1 − D(i, t)) + Y 1 (i, t) · D(i, t), where D(i, t) takes one if treated,
and zero otherwise. Due to the missing data problem, it is impossible to identify individ-
ual treatment effects, which leads researcher to focus on average treatment effects on the
treated under the assumption that the average outcomes conditional on X for the treated
and the untreated would have followed similar trends if not exposed to any treatment.5
As in Heckman et al. (1997), the conditional average treatment effect on the treated is
   5
       In the next section, we will present evidence that the treated and the untreated follow a parallel path.




                                                        11
expressed as follows.


  E[Y 1 (i, 1) − Y 0 (i, 1)|X, D(i, 1) = 1] =

                            {E[Y (i, 1)|X, D(i, 1) = 1] − E[Y (i, 1)|X, D(i, 1) = 0]}              (3)

                            − {E[Y (i, 0)|X, D(i, 1) = 1] − E[Y (i, 0)|X, D(i, 1) = 0]}

As noted by Abadie (2005), the estimation process is burdensome; four conditional expec-
tations need to be estimated nonparametrically, and the number of observations may not
be large enough to estimate conditional expectation when X is high dimensional. To ad-
dress the innate limitations of DID estimator Abadie (2005) suggests the semiparametric
approach, and Athey and Imbens (2006) proposed the generalized identification method
that provides entire counterfactual distribution of outcomes that would have been realized
both for the treated and the untreated, respectively. In an empirical application, Bajari and
Kahn (2005) estimate a hedonic model non-parametrically. However, recent development
of supervised machine learning enables researchers to estimate conditional expectations
using the regression tree. Athey and Imbens (2015) propose the conditional average treat-
ment effect approach in a context where the unconfoundedness assumption holds. We
extend this model to the DID context by incorporating the treatment dummy along with
the time dummy as splitting variables in the process of growing a regression tree.
       We follow the general supervised machine learning approach to grow our regression
tree. (Friedman et al. (2001), Breiman et al. (1984) and Athey and Imbens (2015)6 ). Let
first Qis (τ̂ ; α, X, Y obs ) and Qos (τ̂ ; α, X, Y obs ) denote in-sample goodness-of-fit measure
   6
    Athey and Imbens (2015) develop five supervised machine learning algorithms for the cases where the
unconfoundedness assumption is met. Our approach is based on the single tree with the observed outcome
among the five.




                                                  12
and out-of-sample goodness-of-fit measure, respectively, as follows.

                                                        N
                     is                    obs       1 X obs
                   Q (τ̂ ; α, X, Y               )=−      (Y − τ̂ (Xi ))2 − α · K
                                                     N i=1 i
                                            N
                                                                                                       (4)
                    os            obs    1 X obs
                   Q (τ̂ ; α, X, Y ) = −      (Y − τ̂ (Xi ))2 ,
                                         N i=1 i

where K is the number of leafs in the tree, and α is penalty term to avoid an extremely
large tree. τ̂ (Xi ) is a sample average of Yi in leaf. The regularization parameter α is
chosen by cross validation, minimizing Qos (τ̂ ; α, X, Y obs ). Let TM denote a tree with M
nodes: R1 , R2 , . . . , RM . We model the response as a constant τ̂ (·; Tm ) in each node and
consider the splitting variable j among J explanatory variables and threshold j thr for each
region. Using j and j thr , we split parent node(m) into two child nodes(2m and 2m+1).


            R2t (j, j thr ) = {X|xj ≤ j thr } and R2t+1 (j, j thr ) = {X|xj > j thr }                  (5)


For each j = 1, . . . , J, we fix α and find the value j thr,∗ that solves

                                                         xthr
                               max Qis (τ̂ (·; TMj ); α, X, Y obs )                                    (6)
                                   j thr


         xthr
where TMj is a new candidate tree generated by splitting the parent node into the children
nodes with the threshold of j thr . The following stopping rule is applied;

                              xthr,∗
    • If maxJj=1 Qis (τ̂ (·; TMj       ); α, X, Y obs ) ≤ Qis (τ̂ (·; TM ); α, X, Y obs ), then stop split-
      ting and Rm becomes a terminal node
                              xthr,∗
    • If maxJj=1 Qis (τ̂ (·; TMj       ); α, X, Y obs ) > Qis (τ̂ (·; TM ); α, X, Y obs ), then we follow
      the steps described below.


                                                        13
         – If NR2m < 10 or NR2m+1 < 10 , stop splitting and then parent node Rm be-
            comes a terminal node where NR2m and NR2m+1 are the number of observations
            in the child node are R2m and R2m , respectively. A very large tree may overfit
            the data, and it is difficult to interpret average treatment effect within leafs that
            contain only a single unit (Athey and Imbens (2015))

         – If NR2m ≥ 10 and NR2m+1 ≥ 10, split the node, using variable j ∗ = argmaxj
                         xthr,∗
            Qis (τ̂ (·; TMj       ); α, X, Y obs ) with the threshold of j thr,∗

    • We iterate this process until all of the nodes become terminal nodes and then define
      T α as the tree based on the final iteration for a given α, .

    In order to choose the optimal penalty parameter, α, we utilize 10-fold cross-validation,
minimizing Qos (τ̂ ; α, X, Y obs ). Breiman et al. (1984) prove that a finite number of relative
α exist, though possible ‘α’s are a set of continuous values. This implies that there is the
unique Ti that minimizes Qos (τ̂ (·; α); X te , Y te,obs ) within the interval [αi , αi+1 ). Taking
advantage of the algorithm Breiman et al. (1984) proposed, we construct a sequence of the
optimal trees T (α) =< T0 , T1 , . . . , Tn >, corresponding to each relative αi (See Breiman
et al. (1984) for more details). We partition the entire sample into ten subsamples. With
only k-1 the training subsamples except the kth subsample, we generate a sequence of
tree, T k (α), using the method described above. With the kth test sample, we estimate the
prediction error, using Qos (τ̂(k) (·; α); X te , Y te,obs ). For each k, we iterate using the same
procedure and find the optimal α∗ that solves

                            K
                         1 X os
            arg max            Q (τ̂(k) (·; α); X te , Y te,obs ),     where       K = 10.     (7)
                     α   K k=1

                                           ∗        ∗
With the optimal α∗ , we define T α and τ̂ α (x) to be the optimal tree and the final estima-
tor, respectively.

                                                        14
       In the process of growing the regression tree we include the treatment dummy (D)
along with the time dummy (T) and other covariates (X) as splitting variables as we did
in the linear specification. The treatment dummy equals one if the distance between the
apartment and the LINE9 station is less than one kilometer, zero otherwise. Likewise,
the time dummy equals one if the year is after the opening of the line and equals zero
otherwise. The outcome variable of interest is the log of apartment price (Y), and the
covariate vector X includes the apartment size(m2 )7 , the number of rooms, the number
of baths, years of depreciation8 , distance to other existing subway transit station9 and
each district dummy. We take advantage of the constructed regression tree, and calculate
E(Y |X = x, D = d, T = t) as the conditional expectation. Building on Athey and Imbens
(2015), we estimate the conditional average treatment effect(CATE) in DID context as


          CAT E ={E[Y |X = x, D = 1, T = 1] − E[Y |X = x, D = 0, T = 1]}
                                                                                                             (8)
                       − {E[Y |X = x, D = 1, T = 0] − E[Y |X = x, D = 0, T = 0]}

According to Athey and Imbens (2015), our approach represents a single tree model be-
cause the treatment dummy, the time dummy and all covariates are included in the single
tree. We can extend our approach to the two tree model or the four tree model, based
on how splitting variables are included when the tree grows. If the post-treatment effects
and the pre-treatment effects are estimated separately from two different trees with sub-
sample of T = 1 and T = 0, respectively, then it is referred to as the two tree model.
In implementing our machine learning approach, the main assumption we are making is
   7
      We construct a categorical variable, using 25%, 50% and 75% quantile. One represents the smallest
group and four is the largest group
    8
      We use a categorical variable that takes on the value of one if less than five years have passed and equals
two if between five and ten years have passed, and three otherwise.
    9
      We use a dummy that equals one if the distance between the apartment and the existing other station is
less than 1km, and equals zero otherwise.



                                                      15
that both the treated and controls would follow a similar trajectory in the absence of the
intervention. We discuss pre-trends below to address the issue.
    We recognize that the LINE9’s geographic placement was not randomly determined.
Thus, we are conducting a conditional analysis. Given the line that was built how has it
affected real estate pricing? This approach is relevant for an ex-post evaluation of who are
the winners and losers of this investment. Our approach cannot be used to predict what
will be the future impact of a new Seoul subway in another location.



4     Data
In this section, we describe the data and the summary statistics.


4.1    Apartment Data

We use apartment price data provided by the Ministry of Strategy and Finance of South
Korea. This covers more than 90% of entire apartments in South Korea since 2000 and
contains a rich set of apartment characteristics, including size, the number of rooms and
bath and parking spaces. Since our goal is to investigate the effects of LINE9 on apartment
prices, we restrict our sample to the locations where LINE9 passes. In figures 1 and 2,
the light green area represents our districts of interest. These data restrictions result in our
sample that includes 1,102 apartment complexes and 4,161 apartment types. Market prices
are surveyed based on an apartment type rather than at the apartment level. This means
that the price data represents the average price of all apartment types that share the same
characteristics within the same complex. For example, 84 square meter apartment units
with two beds and a bath within the same complex are considered to be the same product




                                              16
and thus have an identical price in our data.10 Our data has a panel structure such that the
price for each apartment type has been surveyed on a weekly basis. We use the quarterly
average price for our analysis. As shown in Table 1, the average apartment has three beds
and 1.7 baths, and it is as old as 8.2 years.


4.2     Geographic Information Data

Geographical information data are obtained from the Seoul Metropolitan Government. It
provides administrative borders, locations of bus stops and hospital, and all subway sys-
tems including LINE9. Figure 2 shows the locations of LINE9 subway stations. Using
ArcGIS, we measure the distance between center of each apartment complex and the clos-
est LINE9 station. This is a key variable in our analysis. Our control group consists of
apartments more than one kilometer away from the new transit.11
    As shown in table 2, the mean distance between an apartment and the closest LINE9
station is 1.92 kilometers, and each apartment has other subway station, excluding LINE9,
within 0.7 kilometers on average. Our sample of apartments consists of those in districts
where the number 9 passes through.
    The largest fraction of Seoul residents live in apartments (42.36%, 2014), followed by
single-family houses (37.5%). Apartments in Seoul are organized into complexes. The
“complex” is composed of several apartment buildings. In our sample, each “complex”
   10
      We are interested in the value of a certain apartment type, not individual apartments. An apartment com-
plex has a limited number of apartment types. Under a certain apartment type, there are many homogeneous
units. For example, an apartment complex has 600 units, but they can be categorized into four different
types, meaning that each type has 150 units on average. We cannot observe transaction prices of individual
units but we observe an appraisal of the type. The appraisal process uses each property’s selling price and
then an averaging takes place. Though our price data has some measurement error due to this process, this
is classical error.
   11
      In order to control for the direct impact of buses and hospitals on apartment price from benefits from the
new subway, we also construct one kilometer buffers for each apartment to count the number of bus stops
and hospitals within 1km. These are utilized as controls along with the apartment characteristics.



                                                      17
features an average of 5.5 apartment buildings. Each apartment building contains many
apartment units where households reside in. All “apartment units” can be classified into
a few number of “apartment type” that share the same apartment characteristics e.g. size,
the number of rooms and baths to name but a few. Within the same “apartment type”,
it is reasonable to assume that apartment units are homogenous. Table 2 shows that each
complex has 435 “apartment units” in our sample, meaning that each “apartment building”
contains more than 80 “apartment units’”.
    The Seoul housing stock is quite young. The average age of a Seoul apartment in
our data is eight years. It is worth noting that the supply of apartments in Seoul has
been expanding since the mid 1970s. The city’s growing population and rapid economic
development since the 1970s catalyzed the need for high-density residential structures,
The development plan for Gangnam caused a massive apartment supply increase in the
1980s. Our data shows the oldest apartment building is 46-year-old, but a large fraction
of apartment were built between 1997 and 2007. The recent economic development in the
southern part of the city explains why the average age of the housing stock is eight years.



5     Results

5.1    The Pre-Treatment Trend

In conducting a difference in difference study it is important to demonstrate that the pre-
trends for the treatment and control groups are not statistically different. In Figure 4, we
define the treatment group as the set of apartments within 1 kilometer of LINE9 transit
station and the control group is the set of those apartments located more than 2 kilometers
away. In figure 5, the treatment group we further refine this set to represent the apartments
located within 1/2 of a kilometer of the closest LIEN9 station while the controls are the


                                             18
same as in figure 4. These figures are based on apartments located in districts where the
new number 9 passes through. Both figure 4 and figure 5 show that the pre-trends are
parallel, which implies that both the treated and the controls would have followed the
similar path in the absence of the intervention. Figure 5 shows that the gap between the
treated and controls has been decreasing significantly after LINE9 opened.
       Each bar in figure 6 represents the coefficient for interaction between the dummy of
within 1 kilometer and the estimated year dummy along with a 90 percent confidence
            12
interval.        This shows when the LINE9 started affecting apartment prices, and the new
transit station effects becomes statistically significant at 10% after 2009 when the LINE9
opened. This implies that the treated and the untreated had experienced a similar path prior
to the LINE9, meaning that they would have followed the same trajectory in the absence of
the LINE9 even though detailed blueprint was announced at the early period. All pre-trend
analyses indicates that the difference in difference approach is suitable to for estimating
the impact of the LINE9 on apartment prices.


5.2       OLS Results

Our first set of results builds on earlier work studying the consequences of Seoul’s invest-
ment in transit infrastructure (see Kim et al. (2005), Cervero and Kang (2011), Bae et al.
(2003), Agostini and Palmucci (2008) and Ahlfeldt (2013)).
       Table 3 reports results from a standard linear hedonic pricing regression. Controlling
for standard structure attributes, the double difference approach indicates that an extra kilo-
meter of distance from LINE9 station is associated with a 1.7% reduction in the home’s
  12
                                                           P2015
     We estimate Log(P riceijt ) = β1 W ithin1kmi + Y =2000 βY W ithin1kmi × Y EARY + β3 Xijt +
µj + λt + εijt where W ithin1kmi takes one if an apartment type i has the new station within 1km, and
zero otherwise. Y EARY is a year dummy and Xijt is a set of apartment type i’s characteristics in district j
at time t. µj and λt are a district fixed effect and a quarter fixed effect, respectively.




                                                    19
price. We further explore these results by including distance to transit dummies. All else
equal, properties within 1 kilometer of the transit experience a 4% price appreciation com-
pared to those more than 2km away from the transit (see column 3). Column 4 documents
that there is significant heterogeneity in the treatment effects. The district geographic des-
ignation called “Dong” is the smallest administrative level, and Seoul has 424 “Dong”s.


5.3    Machine Learning Results

The ML approach yields 142 estimates of the treatment effect. In Figure 9, we present
a histogram of these estimates. Based on our estimates, we find that 89 are positive and
53 are negative. One plausible way to interpret the results is that demands for a certain
apartment type is low, meaning that there is an apartment type that consumer would like to
buy nearby the transit. One explanation is sub-urbanization. Negative leafs are associated
with many apartments in Gangnam according to table7 and table 9, which means some
residents move out to find a bigger apartment with less congested environment. Table
8 shows that big apartments in suburb area(Gangseo) benefited, while table 9 shows rela-
tively small apartments in Gangnam lost out on LINE9. This suggests that the new subway
catalyzes residents to move out to the suburb because traveling costs became smaller due
to LINE9. These findings are in accord with urban economics theory that the ability to
move at higher speeds encourages suburbanization(Baum-Snow (2007)).
   To simplify the presentation of our finding, we sort our estimates of the 142 treatment
effects and report the ten largest and smallest CATE estimates. These results are reported
in Table 6.




                                             20
5.4       Developer Responses to the Shifting Real Estate Price Gradient

If we have recovered the true underlying gradient, then the non-linear pricing function
sketches out the developer’s revenue function for producing different new housing units.
Assuming smooth cost functions with respect to apartment size, if developers can earn
a large marginal revenue for bundling certain features then they have a profit incentive
to build these in. To be specific, developer i supplies apartment type j to maximize the
following profit function.


                                     max Πij = πij + ij
                                      j∈J

                                            πij = Rij − Cij (L, P, B)                    (9)

                                            B = B(size)

where Rij represents revenue of apartment type j and Cij is a cost function of constructing
apartment type j. L indicates required amounts of land, and P is costs related to attaining
permits. B denotes building costs that hinge mainly on size, and ij is a random compo-
nent. The probability that developer i supplies apartment type j is


                           P r{Yi = j} = P r{max(Πi1 , . . . , ΠiJ ) = Πij }            (10)


where Yi indicates an apartment type chosen by developer i. If ij is independent and iden-
tically distributed with Gumbel (type 1 extreme value) distributions13 , then the probability
that type j is chosen by developer i is as follows (McFadden et al. (1973)).

                                                     exp(πij )
                                     P r{Yi = j} = PJ                                   (11)
                                                    j=1 exp(πij )

  13
       Its cumulative density function is F (ij ) = exp(−exp(−ij))



                                                     21
We do not have any cost of construction data, but our ML estimates provide information
on the shape of the revenue function. We test whether new construction is positively
correlates with our estimates of the revenue function. Potential buyers are more willing
to pay for more attractive apartment types. Our CATE estimates provide a proxy for the
revenue a developer will receive from selling a given type of apartment. This suggests that
the flow of new construction’s attributes should be positively correlated with our CATE
estimates.
   We study this by constructing three histograms. These histograms are based on prop-
erties built at three points in time; before 2002, between 2002 and 2012, and after 2012.
These three stages can be thought of as the before, middle period and after the construction
of LINE9.
   The histograms display the share of all housing units as a function of their CATE. We
find that units built before 2002 (when developers at that time were unaware of what the
future treatment effects of LINE9 would be) build housing units that are symmetrically
distributed around zero. In the post-period, the new units built are clustered in the positive
CATE estimates. We interpret this as evidence that developers are focusing their efforts on
constructing what the market signals is scarce and valued.


5.5    Testing Two Explanations for the Price Appreciation Effects

In this section, we explore two potential reasons for why transit access is associated with
rising real estate prices. One explanation is reduced travel time to popular destinations
and the other is that new “consumer city” retail and restaurants co-agglomerate near the
new train stations. We test each of these by augmenting our linear hedonic regression to
include additional explanatory variables and then we test if the capitalization of transit
effect changes.


                                             22
       In Table 6, we report results where we return to the parametric hedonic specification
reported in equation (1). Across the eight regressions reported in Table 6, we include dif-
ferent combinations of extra control variables to test if the treatment effect shrinks as we
control for these variables. We use the distance between each apartment and the LINE9
station in column (1) to (4), and we use the dummy variable that indicates whether an
apartment locates within a kilometer from the LINE9 station. We add travel times to 20
key destinations in column (2) and (6), while we control a measure of the new restaurants
and the retails co-agglomerated near the new transit lines in column (3) and (7).14 All
controls are included in column (4) and (8). The first four columns do not show that the
treatment effect shrinks much as the travel times and the the counts of restaurants and
retails are included separately. However, column (4) indicates that the treatment effect
shrinks around 20% and becomes no longer statistically different from zero at 10%. This
implies that the travel time saving and the “consumer city” rising are leading mechanisms.
Column (5) to (8) provides another prospective that reductions in travel time is more in-
fluential mechanism behind price appreciation. Apartments within a kilometer from the
LINE9 station experience a price premium of 3.36%. Controlling for travel times makes
the treatment effect not statistically different from zero at the 10% significance level, while
the treatment effect is still statistically significant with controls for retails and restaurants.
The findings suggest that the price appreciation is mainly caused by travel time savings
rather than by a “consumer city” effect.
       We also take our panel CATE estimates from the ML procedure and we compare these
leaf specific estimates to those obtained when we conduct a “long difference” ML esti-
mation. In this second case, we only keep the data for the first year and the last year
  14
     We use counts of restaurants and retail establishments and the number of employees in those industries at
the “Dong” level. “Dong” is the smallest administrative level. The data is drawn from the Seoul metropolitan
government




                                                     23
of our sample and we rerun the ML estimator. In Figure 10, we graph the relationship
between the long run CATE and the short run CATE. The slope is 0.42. This suggests
that the CATE effects shrinks over time. The first possible explanation is that the local
“consumer city” effect is small as time passes, which is consistent with what we found
in table 6. Another explanation is that there is a general equilibrium effect as developers
build new desirable housing units (as revealed by the CATE responses by developers). As
the developers engage in this activity, increase in supply lowers the equilibrium prices.


5.6       Estimating the Value of Time

We study what is the implied value of time for different Seoul residents if all of the ob-
served capitalization effect is due to time savings. To study this, we first regress the rent for
apartment i in district j at time t on each travel time to twenty major destinations presented
in table 1 with apartment type fixed effect as follows.

                                 20
                                 X
                     Rentijt =         βg Hoursigt + Xjt + µi + λt + εijt ,                 (12)
                                 g=1

where Hoursigt represents travel time between apartment i and destination g at time t, and
Xjt includes counts of restaurants and retail shops and the number of employees in those
industries in district j at time t. µi is apartment type fixed effect and λt is quarter fixed
effect.
    The main reason we use the rent data is to rule out any speculative demand that may
affect the property price, and focusing on instant benefits. Though an apartment is not
located in the vicinity of the transit station, travel time from the apartment to each destina-
tion changed because riders might use a faster route after LINE9 opened. This reveals the
correlation between an hour reduction to each destination and rent. We find that tenants
are likely to pay US$ 1,454,545 more rent as one travels to Kangnam(CBD) an hour ear-

                                                24
lier (Table 7, A). Note again that rent is not monthly payments but two-year deposit unlike
the U.S. and many countries. This suggests that willingness to pay to be an hour closer to
Kangnam is not the amount of deposit per-se, but foregone interest that tenants would have
eared if they live in their own apartment. Assuming an interest rate of 2%, the opportunity
cost for two years is US$ 29,090(Table 7, B), which means tenants that sacrifice US$ 39
everyday (Table 7, C).
    We compare our estimated value of saving an hour in commute time to Gangnam and
the taxi fare in Seoul to cross-validate our estimates. Based on the current taxi fares, riders
pay US$ 2,73 for first 2km, even though they travel less than 2km. After 2km, riders pay
US$ 0.09 for every 142m. With an average speed of 35.4km in Seoul (The Korea Transport
Institute, 2011), the estimated taxi fare to travel for an hour is US$ 24.11, which implies
that riders pay US$ 48.22 for a round-trip. If one commuted only by a taxi, she would
save US$ 48.22 everyday by moving to the region where she is able to travel to Gangnam
an hour faster.



6    Conclusion
Over the years 2000 to 2009, US$818 millions were spent to build a new subway in Seoul,
South Korea. Such place based investments offer the opportunity to explore how a city’s
urban form and real estate pricing are affected by such an investment. This paper has used
ML methods to contribute to the urban transit infrastructure effects literature.
    Our paper implements a difference in difference empirical design. We find that the
introduction of the train is associated with apartment price appreciation for certain leafs
but actually lowered apartment price growth in other neighborhoods. We posit that the
fast train is most likely to reduce prices for apartments in the destination area of Gangnam
because people can now decentralize and still access this location by using the fast train.

                                              25
The notable feature of our study is our ability to document significant heterogeneity on
observable dimensions. The payoff for urban research from ML methods is the ability to
search across a large number of dimensions of heterogeneity at low cost. Such conditional
average treatment effects disaggregate the overall average treatment effect that has been the
typical object of interest in earlier real estate studies. By estimating the CATEs our work
has new implications for estimating the economic incidence of public transit improvement
projects.
   In addition to presenting new ML estimates, we have also studied the causes of the
positive treatment effects. We find that both commute time reductions to desirable loca-
tions and the opening of new stores and restaurants close to the new stations contribute to
the price premium. Finally, we have explored how developers of new housing respond to
the shifting pricing gradient. Developers produce new units featuring the highest CATE
values.




                                             26
References
Abadie, A. (2005). Semiparametric difference-in-differences estimators. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 72(1):1–19.

Agostini, C. A. and Palmucci, G. A. (2008). The anticipated capitalisation effect of a new
  metro line on housing prices. Fiscal studies, 29(2):233–256.

Ahlfeldt, G. M. (2013). If we build it, will they pay? predicting property price effects of
  transport innovations. Environment and Planning A, 45(8):1977–1994.

Athey, S. and Imbens, G. W. (2006). Identification and inference in nonlinear difference-
  in-differences models. Econometrica, 74(2):431–497.

Athey, S. and Imbens, G. W. (2015). Machine learning methods for estimating heteroge-
  neous causal effects. stat, 1050:5.

Bae, C.-H. C., Jun, M.-J., and Park, H. (2003). The impact of seoul’s subway line 5 on
  residential property values. Transport policy, 10(2):85–94.

Bajari, P. and Kahn, M. E. (2005). Estimating housing demand with an application
  to explaining racial segregation in cities. Journal of business & economic statistics,
  23(1):20–33.

Baum-Snow, N. (2007). Did highways cause suburbanization? The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(2):775–805.

Baum-Snow, N. and Kahn, M. E. (2000). The effects of new public projects to expand
  urban rail transit. Journal of Public Economics, 77(2):241–263.




                                            27
Baum-Snow, N., Kahn, M. E., and Voith, R. (2005). Effects of urban rail transit expan-
  sions: Evidence from sixteen cities, 1970-2000 [with comment]. Brookings-Wharton
  papers on urban affairs, pages 147–206.

Beygelzimer, A. and Langford, J. (2009). The offset tree for learning with partial labels.
  In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis-
  covery and data mining, pages 129–138. ACM.

Billings, S. B. (2011). Estimating the value of a new transit option. Regional Science and
  Urban Economics, 41(6):525–536.

Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Stone, C. J., and Olshen, R. A. (1984). Classification and
  regression trees. CRC press.

Cervero, R. and Kang, C. D. (2011). Bus rapid transit impacts on land uses and land values
  in seoul, korea. Transport Policy, 18(1):102–116.

Dudı́k, M., Langford, J., and Li, L. (2011). Doubly robust policy evaluation and learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.4601.

Foster, J., Taylor, J., and Ruberg, S. (2010). Subgroup identification from randomized
  clinical data. Statistics in Medicine, 30:2867–2880.

Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2001). The elements of statistical learning,
  volume 1. Springer series in statistics Springer, Berlin.

Gibbons, S. and Machin, S. (2005). Valuing rail access using transport innovations. Jour-
  nal of urban Economics, 57(1):148–169.

Gibbons, S. and Machin, S. (2008). Valuing school quality, better transport, and lower
  crime: evidence from house prices. oxford review of Economic Policy, 24(1):99–119.

                                            28
Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J., and Saks, R. (2005). Why is manhattan so expensive? regula-
  tion and the rise in housing prices. The Journal of Law and Economics, 48(2):331–369.

Glaeser, E. L. and Kahn, M. E. (2001). Decentralized employment and the transformation
  of the american city. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E., and Rappaport, J. (2008). Why do the poor live in cities? the
  role of public transportation. Journal of urban Economics, 63(1):1–24.

Gonzalez-Navarro, M. and Turner, M. A. (2016). Subways and urban growth: evidence
  from earth.

Heckman, J. (1990).      Varieties of selection bias.    The American Economic Review,
  80(2):313–318.

Heckman, J. J., Ichimura, H., and Todd, P. E. (1997). Matching as an econometric eval-
  uation estimator: Evidence from evaluating a job training programme. The review of
  economic studies, 64(4):605–654.

Imai, K., Ratkovic, M., et al. (2013). Estimating treatment effect heterogeneity in random-
  ized program evaluation. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 7(1):443–470.

Kahn, M. E. (2007). Gentrification trends in new transit-oriented communities: Evidence
  from 14 cities that expanded and built rail transit systems. Real Estate Economics,
  35(2):155–182.

Kain, J. F. (1990). Deception in dallas: Strategic misrepresentation in rail transit promotion
  and evaluation. Journal of the American Planning Association, 56(2):184–196.

Kanemoto, Y. (1988). Hedonic prices and the benefits of public projects. Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 981–989.

                                             29
Kim, J., Zhang, M., et al. (2005). Determining transit’s impact on seoul commercial
  land values: An application of spatial econometrics. International Real Estate Review,
  8(1):1–26.

Knaap, G. J., Ding, C., and Hopkins, L. D. (2001). Do plans matter? the effects of light
  rail plans on land values in station areas. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
  21(1):32–39.

McDonald, J. F. and Osuji, C. I. (1995). The effect of anticipated transportation improve-
  ment on residential land values. Regional science and urban economics, 25(3):261–278.

McFadden, D. et al. (1973). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior.

McMillen, D. P. and McDonald, J. F. (1998). Suburban subcenters and employment den-
  sity in metropolitan chicago. Journal of Urban Economics, 43(2):157–180.

Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonran-
  domized studies. Journal of educational Psychology, 66(5):688.

Sieg, H., Smith, V. K., Banzhaf, H. S., and Walsh, R. (2004). Estimating the general
  equilibrium benefits of large changes in spatially delineated public goods. International
  Economic Review, 45(4):1047–1077.

Su, X., Tsai, C.-L., Wang, H., Nickerson, D. M., and Li, B. (2009). Subgroup analysis via
  recursive partitioning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(Feb):141–158.

Taddy, M., Gardner, M., Chen, L., and Draper, D. (2016). A nonparametric bayesian anal-
  ysis of heterogenous treatment effects in digital experimentation. Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics, 34(4):661–672.



                                            30
Zeileis, A., Hothorn, T., and Hornik, K. (2008). Model-based recursive partitioning. Jour-
  nal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 17(2):492–514.

Zheng, S. and Kahn, M. E. (2013). Does government investment in local public goods
  spur gentrification? evidence from beijing. Real Estate Economics, 41(1):1–28.




                                           31
Figure 1: Map of Seoul




   Figure 2: Line 9




          32
                                           Figure 3: Time line


      2000                                                                           2015



      2000                       2005                                2012
4Q, Plan Announced     3Q, Contractor Designated             1Q, Three Years Later

                2002                                 2009
    2Q, Ground-breaking Ceremony              3Q, Service Began




                                                   33
                                            Table 1: Travel Time to Major Destination in Seoul

                                                            Whole Sample                                     Within 1km
         Destinations        Category        Traveling Time   Traveling Time Difference    Traveling Time     Traveling Time Difference
                                            before the LINE9 after the LINE9              before the LINE9    after the LINE9
                                                 (Hours)          (Hours)     (Hours)          (Hours)             (Hours)    (Hours)

     Kangnam                    CBD              0.514             0.42          0.094           0.669            0.429         0.24
     Yeouido                  Business           0.459             0.356         0.103           0.499            0.289         0.21
     Myungdong                Business           0.525             0.468         0.057           0.563             0.46         0.103
     Hongik University      Entertainment        0.462             0.428         0.034           0.502            0.435         0.067
     Express Bus Terminal   Bus Terminal         0.507             0.359         0.148            0.65             0.38          0.27
     Shinchon               Entertainment         0.48             0.432         0.048           0.511            0.435         0.076
     Sadang                 Entertainment        0.674             0.462         0.212            0.71            0.423         0.287
     Gimpo Airport             Airport           0.911              0.46         0.451           0.928            0.358          0.57




34
     Incheon Airport           Airport           1.655             1.606         0.049           1.672            1.594         0.078
     Seoul Zoo              Entertainment        0.774             0.568         0.206           0.813            0.529         0.284
     Gwanghwamun              Business           0.517             0.462         0.055           0.558            0.456         0.102
     Kungook University     Entertainment        0.577             0.543         0.034           0.667            0.561         0.106
     Nambu Bus Terminal     Bus Terminal         0.511             0.427         0.084            0.67             0.44          0.23
     Kangbyun               Bus Terminal         0.593             0.544         0.049           0.701            0.557         0.144
     Jongro                   Old CBD            0.536             0.483         0.053           0.578            0.478           0.1
     Apgujeong              Entertainment        0.534             0.474          0.06           0.654            0.484          0.17
     Yeoungdeungpo          Train Station        0.422             0.403         0.019           0.472            0.407         0.065
     Seoul Train Station    Train Station         0.49             0.427         0.063           0.528            0.418          0.11
     Dongdaemun             Entertainment        0.493             0.466         0.027           0.573            0.485         0.088
     Korea University       Entertainment        0.622             0.592          0.03           0.705             0.61         0.095
     Notes: Estimated traveling time is based on the assumption that travelers walks to the closest subway station and take a
     subway, with walking speed of 4km/hour and subway running at 50km/hour.
                           Table 2: Summary Statistics

                    Variable                        Mean     Std. Dev.     N
Subway

Distance to line9 (km)                              1.915     1.244      265600
Distance to closest other line (km)                 0.702     0.560      265600

Apt Characteristics

Area (m2 )                                         94.976    39.501      265600
Room                                                 3.131     0.959     265344
Bath                                                 1.744     0.507     260381
Age, in Years                                        8.205     9.946     265600
Parking spaces within Complex                      546.053   777.993     265600
Number of Apartment units within Complex           435.59    558.62      265600
Number of Apartment buildings within Complex        5.597     9.057      265600
Bus stops within 1km                                62.863    19.662     265600
Hospitals within 1km                                 2.452     1.772     265600




                                       35
Figure 4: The Pre-Treatment Trend: 1km vs 2km (Lowess Graph)




Notes: Vertical line represents when the LINE9 opened.




                              36
Figure 5: The Pre-Treatment Trend: 0.5km vs 2km (Lowess Graph)




 Notes: Vertical line represents when the LINE9 opened.




                               37
              Figure 6: Treatment Effect Estimates Over Time




Notes: Each circle indicates the coefficient on the interaction between a
”within 1km dummy”and the calendar year. Each bar represents a 90 percent
confident interval.




                                    38
                      Table 3: OLS Estimates of the Value of Rail Access

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
VARIABLES                                        Log(Price)    Log(Price)    Log(Price)    Log(Price)

Distance (km)                                     0.0339*
                                                  (0.0193)
Distance (km) × AFTER                            -0.0174**
                                                  (0.0078)
Log(Distance, km)                                                 0.0138
                                                                 (0.0181)
Log(Distance, km) × AFTER                                       -0.0246**
                                                                 (0.0103)
Within 1km                                                                   -0.0785**     -0.0641**
                                                                              (0.0367)      (0.0254)
Between 1 ∼ 2km                                                                -0.0253
                                                                              (0.0400)
Within 1km × AFTER                                                            0.0392*
                                                                              (0.0205)
Between 1 ∼ 2km × AFTER                                                        0.0224
                                                                              (0.0214)
Within 1km × AFTER                                                                         0.4073***
                                                                                            (0.0970)
Within 1km × AFTER × Size (m2 ) (1)                                                        -0.0017**
                                                                                            (0.0006)
Within 1km × AFTER × Other Line (km) (2)                                                     0.0092
                                                                                            (0.0101)
Within 1km × AFTER × Room (3)                                                               -0.0178
                                                                                            (0.0285)
Within 1km × AFTER × Bath (4)                                                               -0.0269
                                                                                            (0.0233)
Within 1km × AFTER × Age (5)                                                               -0.0117**
                                                                                            (0.0051)
Within 1km × AFTER × Age2 (6)                                                                0.0001
                                                                                            (0.0001)

Joint F-value (1) ∼ (6)                                                                         11.19
(P-value)                                                                                     (0.000)
Observations                                       201,985         201,985     201,985        201,985
R-squared                                           0.9079          0.9076      0.9078         0.9102
  Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors
  are clustered at the district(“Dong”) level. Controls include size, the number of room and bath,
  parking spaces, age, age squared, distance to other closest station, the number of bus stops within
  1km, the number of hospitals within 1km, whether it has named brand, the number of households
  within complex and the number of apartment building within complex. District fixed effect and
  quarter fixed effect are included
                                                 39
Figure 7: The Regression Tree Result




                 40
Figure 8: The CATE Distribution




              41
         Table 4: Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATE)

     CATE       N     Size   Room    Bath    Old   Near          County

Bottom 10

1    -.5619    470     4      4          2    3     1        Kangseo
2    -.5024    120     4      5          2    2     1      Youngdeungpo
3    -.4321    833     1      3          1    3     1        Dongjak
4    -.4003    132     1      2          1    2     0        Yangchun
5    -.3865    784     1      3          1    3     0        Yangchun
6    -.3075    1463    3      3          2    1     1        Kangnam
7    -.3031    628     1      2          1    2     1        Kangnam
8    -.3010    1155    2      3          2    1     1        Kangnam
9    -.2802    282     3      4          2    3     1        Kangseo
10   -.2755    1244    4      4          2    3     1        Dongjak

Top 10

1    1.0573     201    4      3          2    1     1         Seocho
2     .9023     360    1      1          1    3     1      Youngdeungpo
3     .8203      96    4      5          2    2     0        Yangchun
4     .6403     208    2      3          1    2     1         Seocho
5     .5959    1179    2      3          2    1     1         Seocho
6     .5524     536    3      4          2    1     1         Seocho
7     .5453     787    3      4          2    2     1        Kangnam
8     .5011    1530    2      3          2    2     0        Kangseo
9     .4972     628    4      4          2    2     0        Kangseo
10   .4637      532    1      2          1    2     1        Kangseo

Average                                                   0.08
Number of types with positive impacts                      89
Number of types with negative impacts                      53

Observations                                            201,530




                                    42
                                   Table 5: Composition

     Variables                     Top 10%    Top 25%     Bottom 10%   Bottom 25%

     Apartment Characteristics

     Size 25                        0.178       0.154       0.343        0.347
     Size 50                        0.323       0.216       0.137        0.214
     Size 75                        0.286       0.345       0.260        0.236
     Size 100                       0.213       0.286       0.260        0.203
     Room                           3.132       3.175       3.288        3.225
     Bath                            1.80       1.822       1.671        1.700
     Less than 5 years              0.273       0.269       0.387        0.274




43
     Between 5 ∼ 10 years           0.662       0.611       0.208        0.275
     More than 10 years             0.065       0.120       0.405        0.451
     Nearby Station (within 1km)    0.555       0.76        0.893        0.982

     Districts

     Youngdeunpo                    0.065       0.093       0.120        0.162
     Dongjak                          0         0.063       0.225        0.177
     Kangnam                        0.086       0.160       0.368        0.276
     Kangseo                        0.470       0.302       0.135        0.166
     Seocho                         0.291       0.337       0.046        0.096
     Yangchun                       0.088       0.045       0.107        0.123
Figure 9: The Empirical Distribution of New Construction as a Function of the CATE


                                   (a) Before 2002




       (b) Between 2002 and 2012                               (c) After 2012




                                         44
                Table 6: Rail Transit Capitalization: The Role of Travel Time Savings and the Local Consumer City


                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
     VARIABLES                 Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)

     Distance (km)               0.0256      0.0181       0.0251        0.0182
                                (0.0189)    (0.0185)     (0.0187)      (0.0185)
     Distance (km) × AFTER     -0.0172**    -0.0156*     -0.0153*      -0.0138
                                (0.0078)    (0.0090)     (0.0077)      (0.0087)
     Within 1km                                                                    -0.0478*       -0.0328    -0.0447*       -0.0314
                                                                                   (0.0244)      (0.0253)    (0.0244)      (0.0254)
     Within 1km × AFTER                                                             0.0336*        0.0248     0.0284*       0.0225




45
                                                                                   (0.0173)      (0.0256)    (0.0166)      (0.0256)

     Travel Times                 No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
     Retails and Restaurants      No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes

     Observations               185,745      185,745      180,569      180,569      185,745      185,745      180,569      180,569
     Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors are clustered at the
     district(“Dong”) level. Controls include size, the number of room and bath, parking spaces, age, age squared, distance to
     other closest station, the number of bus stops within 1km, the number of hospitals within 1km, whether it has named brand,
     the number of households within complex and the number of apartment building within complex. District fixed effect and
     quarter fixed effect are included
Figure 10: Long Difference Result




               46
                          Table 7: Estimates of the Value of Time

The Estimated Value of an Hour

Correlation b/w An hour reduction in travel time to CBD
and 2-year rent deposit                                              US$ 1,454,545 (A)

Interests for two years
(Interest rate 2 %)                                           US$ 29,090 (B = A × 0.02)

Daily opportunity costs
(1 year = 730 days)                                                 US$ 39 (C = B / 730)

Estimate Taxi Fare for an hour

Basic Fare (First 2km)                                                   US$ 2.73

Extra Fare                                                           US$0.09 per 142m

Estimated Driving Distance in an Hour
(With an average speed of 35.4km/hour, 2011)                              35.4km

Estimated Taxi Fare for One-way                                          US$ 24.11
Estimated Taxi Fare for a Roundtrip                                      US$ 48.22




                                            47
                                        APPENDIX


   Appendix
   This section reports an effect of the LINE9 on rent price. Note that the rent here is
not monthly payments but two-year deposit unlike the U.S. and many countries. If an
anticipation effect or a speculative demand had played a major role in price appreciation
due to the LINE9, prices would have experienced a bigger premium than rents. This is
because rents are less subject to an anticipation effect. Empirical strategy for the rents
are the same as equation (1) and (2), but we replace Log(P riceijt ) with Log(Rentijt ). In
comparison to table 3, table A1 reports bigger treatment effects. For every a kilometer
closer to the LINE9 station, an apartment experiences of 2.03% premium . If an apart-
ment locates within 1km from the LINE9 station, rents are 6.26% higher than those more
than two kilometers away from the new station. Both of them imply that the treatment
effect comes from direct benefits like travel time savings or growing retail activities rather
than an anticipation of future price hike. Assuming heterogeneous buyers, some who are
patient enough to wait for a long time may buy properties in advance and expect a price
appreciation later. However, our results show that such cases are not big enough. This
justifies that we define the date of opening as a treatment.




                                             48
                          Table A1: Impacts of the LINE9 on Rent

                                              (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
VARIABLES                                  Log(Rent)      Log(Rent)     Log(Rent)     Log(Rent)

Distance (km)                                 0.0117
                                             (0.0181)
Distance (km) × AFTER                      -0.0203***
                                             (0.0060)
Log(Distance, km)                                           0.0120
                                                           (0.0138)
Log(Distance, km) × AFTER                                -0.0365***
                                                           (0.0084)
Within 1km                                                               -0.0619*      -0.0516*
                                                                         (0.0326)      (0.0278)
Between 1 ∼ 2km                                                           -0.0042
                                                                         (0.0282)
Within 1km × AFTER                                                      0.0626***
                                                                         (0.0194)
Between 1 ∼ 2km × AFTER                                                    0.0108
                                                                         (0.0197)
Within 1km × AFTER                                                                    0.2555***
                                                                                       (0.0896)
Within 1km × AFTER × Size (m2 )                                                      -0.0020***
                                                                                       (0.0005)
Within 1km × AFTER × Other Line (km)                                                  0.0426***
                                                                                       (0.0127)
Within 1km × AFTER × Room                                                               0.0081
                                                                                       (0.0208)
Within 1km × AFTER × Bath                                                               0.0024
                                                                                       (0.0202)
Within 1km × AFTER × Age                                                               -0.0102*
                                                                                       (0.0053)
Within 1km × AFTER × Age2                                                              0.0002*
                                                                                       (0.0001)

Observations                                199,742        199,742       199,742       199,742
R-squared                                   0.9102         0.9105        0.9105        0.9124
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The standard
errors are clustered at the district level. Controls include size, the number of room and bath,
parking spaces, age, age squared, distance to other closest station, the number of bus stops
within 1km, the number of hospitals within 1km, whether it has named brand, the number of
households within complex and the number of apartment building within complex. District
fixed effect and quarter fixed effect are included

                                              49
