                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               POPULATION AND CIVIL WAR

                                        Daron Acemoglu
                                       Leopoldo Fergusson
                                         Simon Johnson

                                       Working Paper 23322
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23322


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




We thank seminar participants at MIT's development lunch, the University of Chicago, the XXII
Annual Conference of the European Society for Population Economics at UCL, 2017 AEA
Annual Meetings, Universidad de los Andes, and Universidad del Rosario. Ioannis Tokatlidis
provided superb research assistance in the early stages of this project. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Daron Acemoglu, Leopoldo Fergusson, and Simon Johnson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Population and Civil War
Daron Acemoglu, Leopoldo Fergusson, and Simon Johnson
NBER Working Paper No. 23322
April 2017
JEL No. J01,O11,O15,Q56

                                          ABSTRACT

Medical and public health innovations in the 1940s quickly resulted in significant health
improvements around the world. Countries with initially higher mortality from infectious diseases
experienced greater increases in life expectancy, population, and - over the following 40 years -
social conflict. This result is robust across alternative measures of conflict and is not driven by
differential trends between countries with varying baseline characteristics. At least during this
time period, a faster increase in population made social conflict more likely, probably because it
increased competition for scarce resources in low income countries.


Daron Acemoglu                                   Simon Johnson
Department of Economics, E52-446                 MIT Sloan School of Management
MIT                                              100 Main Street, E52-562
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          Cambridge, MA 02142
Cambridge, MA 02139                              and NBER
and CIFAR                                        sjohnson@mit.edu
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Leopoldo Fergusson
Universidad de los Andes
Department of Economics
Cra 1 No 18A - 12
Bogotá, Colombia
lfergusson@uniandes.edu.co
1        Introduction

The world’s population is forecast to rise from its current level of around 7.35 billion to over 11.2
billion by 2100. Today’s “more developed regions,” as classified by the UN, had population of 1.25
billion in 2015 and are expected to have roughly the same number of inhabitants – 1.28 billion –
in 2100. In contrast, “least developed countries” had population of 954 million in 2010 and are
projected to reach over 3.1 billion in 2100. The UN expects that the population of Africa will rise
from its current level of just over 1.1 billion to over 4.3 billion within a century.1 These baseline
population projections may be on the low side, as a further major global push to improve public
health in low income countries is now under way.2 What is the likely impact of a population increase
on this scale?
        There are some potential lessons from the 20th century, during which some countries experienced
major improvements in health and longevity. Specifically, beginning in the 1940s, there was an
international epidemiological transition driven by the introduction of new chemicals, drugs, and
public health measures (Acemoglu and Johnson 2007). The effect on life expectancy – and on
population – was greater in countries previously more affected by infectious disease.
        In this paper, we exploit this major episode to shed light on whether changes in population
have an impact on civil wars. We focus on the period between 1940 (when global health technol-
ogy improved dramatically) and 1980 (just before HIV-AIDS spread as a global disease), and we
instrument for population growth based on the initial (1940) distribution of mortality from various
diseases around the world and the dates of global interventions that brought down mortality from
those diseases. Most of the medical and public health breakthroughs in this period originated in a
few industrialized countries and can reasonably be seen as exogenous to development prospects in
    1
      The data in this paragraph are from the UN’s 2015 long-term population projections using the medium fertility
scenario (United Nations, 2015). Mid-year world population in 2015 was estimated as 7.349 billion, forecast to rise
to 9.725 billion by 2050 and 11.213 billion by 2100. The population of Africa was, in these estimates, 1.186 billion in
2015; it will be 2.477 billion in 2050 and 4.387 billion in 2100 (of whom 3.934 billion will be in sub-Saharan Africa).
Most of the potential forecast error around these estimates is due to uncertainty about what will happen in low
income countries. In the UN’s high fertility scenario, world population reaches 16.6 billion in 2100, of which nearly
1.9 billion are in today’s high income countries and 14.7 billion are in today’s low income countries. In the low fertility
scenario, world population is 7.2 billion in 2100, of which 842 million are in today’s rich countries and just under 6.5
billion in today’s poor countries. Even in the low fertility scenario, the population of sub-Saharan Africa rises from
962 million in 2015 to 2.75 billion in 2100.
    2
      For example, in laying out their most recent goals for global health, philanthropists Bill and Melinda Gates (2015)
argue, “In 1990, one in ten children in the world died before age 5. Today, it’s one in 20. By 2030, that number
will be one in 40. Almost all countries will include vaccines for diarrhea and pneumonia, two of the biggest killers
of children, in their immunization programs. Better sanitation — through simple actions like hand-washing as well
as innovations like new toilets designed especially for poor places — will cut the spread of disease dramatically” (p.
5) And, “In 15 years, we’ll be poised to send malaria the way of smallpox and polio” (p.8). The worldwide under-5
mortality rate fell from 9% in 1990 to 4.6% in the latest data; they predict it will fall to 2.3% by 2030.



                                                            1
the rest of the world. Our instrument also does not depend on when a particular country adopted
better public health measures or how effectively these measures were applied.3
       We control for other potential determinants of civil war both directly by including country
fixed effects and differential trends based on various country characteristics. Our results indicate
that countries with higher exogenous increases in population experienced more social conflict in
the post-1940 period. Across alternative definitions of civil war and social conflict, instrumented
changes in population have a robust significant positive effect on the share of years per decade in
which a country experienced civil war or other forms of violent social conflict.
       The magnitude of our estimates indicate that the effect of population on social conflict is large.
A rise in log population of about 0.68 from 1940 to 1980, corresponding to the average change
in population in our sample of countries, caused roughly 4.2 additional years of full-blown civil
war in the 1980s relative to the 1940s (or 1950s). When considering lower intensity conflicts, the
corresponding effect is similar – about 3.9 more years in conflict in 1980 as a result of the increase
in population from 1940.4
       The 1940s was of course a decade of global war. To take this into account we run panel
regressions that exploit decade-by-decade changes in population from 1940 to 1980. We verify that
our results hold when excluding the countries that were demographically most affected by World
War II, or when entirely ignoring the World War II years. In all cases, we find similar results. We
also create a new definition of civil war, based on a relative threshold of violence, to verify that
differences in the likelihood of conflicts in countries with different populations to be recorded in
international databases cannot explain our results. Our findings are substantially robust across
this set of specification checks as well.
       The effect of population growth on civil conflict can help explain a puzzling fact in the literature
on long-run growth after 1940, documented in the four panels of Figure 1. The international epi-
demiological transition produced large increases in population, especially for initially poor countries
   3
      This analysis is relevant to understanding the population pressures that may now develop around the world,
but because our study requires detailed death-by-disease data, our base sample contains some but by no means all
countries that were low income in 1940. In particular, we do not have data on many sub-Saharan countries, and we
should be cautious about the extent to which these places may be on a different trajectory.
    4
      Our sample contains 59 non-Eastern Europe countries (16 countries in Asia, 17 in Europe, 17 in Latin America,
five in Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the US), and 6 Eastern European countries. Of these 65 countries,
13 countries lack population data and/or had not yet been created in 1940 (five in Africa, seven in Asia, and Russia).
Also, Austria is excluded in 1940 when the dependent variables are from COW since it enters the COW state system
in the 1950s.
   Our sample has good coverage for most regions in the world, with the exception of Africa. Given the incidence of
violent civil conflict in Africa, this is an important limitation, but one that we cannot overcome with the available
data. In particular, most sub-Saharan African countries lack reliable data on causes of death disaggregated by disease
dating back to the 1940s, and this is essential for our identification strategy.



                                                          2
(Figures 1a and 1b), and significant convergence in health conditions around the world (Figure 1c).
By the year 2000, the gap in average life expectancy at birth between initially rich and initially
poor countries was reduced to about a half of its 1930 level, measured in absolute terms. How-
ever, in spite of an extensive microeconomic literature showing that improving health can improve
individual economic outcomes and potentially accelerate economic growth, no such convergence
is apparent when examining output per capita (Figure 1d). While average log GDP per capita
for initially poor, middle-income, and rich countries has trended upwards since the 1930s, poorer
countries have not been able to catch-up with richer countries.
       It remains to be seen if this form of economic convergence will be stronger over the next half
century, but Figure 2 suggests increased social conflict may be one reason behind the lack of
convergence to date. Since 1940, conflict incidence increased especially in poor countries, which
experienced the largest increases in life expectancy and population. This is clear whether we
measure the fraction of the decade with internal conflict using each of our alternative data sources
(COW in Figure 2a, UCDP/PRIO in Figure 2b, or Fearon and Laitin in Figure 2c; all data sources
are explained in Section 3 below) or if we look at the (log of) total deaths per year (2d).
       This paper is related to several other strands of research. Following contributions such as
those of Collier and Hoeffler (1998; 2004) and Fearon and Laitin (2003), scholars have emphasized
poverty, inequality, weak institutions, political grievances, and ethnic divisions as explanations for
the outbreak and persistence of civil war. With a few notable exceptions, however, this literature
does not fully address the possibility that reverse causality, or omitted variables bias, drives the
observed correlations.5 Blattman and Miguel (2010) conclude in their survey of the literature
that “further cross-country regressions will only be useful if they distinguish between competing
explanations using more credible econometric methods for establishing causality” (p. 8).
       Population has not been a prime focus in the economics of conflict literature (see the survey
by Garfinkel and Skaperdas, 2007).6 However, there has been a lively debate on the effects of pop-
ulation pressure on violent conflict in other disciplines, including political science.7 For example,
   5
     Exceptions include Miguel, Shanker Satyanath and Sergenti (2004), who use annual rainfall growth as an in-
strument for income growth in sub-Saharan Africa; Besley and Persson (2008), who rely on plausibly exogenous
international commodity price movements.
   6
     In most of the empirical economics literature on conflict, population is a control variable (often with a positive
sign), but it is rarely the prime focus and there is no attempt to control for its endogeneity. For instance, in Sambanis
(2002) review of this research, the role of population is hardly mentioned. Collier and Hoeffler (2004) report a positive
coefficient on population, which the authors interpret as consistent with either a greed or grievance story for conflict,
but their regressions for a panel of countries do not control for country fixed-effects and thus may well be driven by
omitted country-specific characteristics. In Fearon and Laitin’s (2003) study of conflict onset, the positive coefficient
on population disappears once fixed effects are included in the regression. Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004)
also report a positive coefficient, but their focus is on the effect of income on conflict.
   7
     The connection between population and conflict has also received significant public attention, as testified by


                                                           3
Homer-Dixon (1991, 1999) studies the connection between population growth, pressure on envi-
ronmental resources, and conflict – finding that poor countries are in general more vulnerable to
environmentally-induced conflicts. However, other authors – such as Richards (1996) – push back
against this view. Overall, that debate has not been conclusive.8 Also, to the best of our knowledge
only Brückner (2010) attempts to establish the causal impact of population size on conflict, using
randomly occurring droughts as an instrument for population to address endogeneity. However,
this study focuses on Africa, where the effect of drought may be different than in other settings.
    In Section 2 we present a simple motivating theory capturing Malthusian mechanisms that may
lead from population to conflict. Section 3 describes our data, and Section 3.3 presents ordinary
least square (OLS) results. Section 4 discusses our identification strategy, and Section 5 shows our
main results from two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates. Section 6 presents a series of robustness
checks on our estimates. Section 7 concludes.


2     Malthusian Mechanisms

In this section, we present a simple framework capturing the Malthusian idea that population
growth may lead to social conflict (Malthus, 1798). The basic idea is that higher population
generates greater rents for a fixed factor relative to labor, and this form of scarcity makes conflict
more likely. For less-developed economies in 1940 or today, it makes sense to think of land as the
scarce factor.
    One point of this framework is to emphasize that population growth does not necessarily lead
to conflict. Indeed, it is not necessarily true with constant returns to scale to variable factors
of production. However, we show that when greater population increases scarcity, it also makes
conflict more likely.
    Suppose that aggregate output is given by a constant returns to scale production function with
Robert Kaplan’s famous 1994 essay “The Coming Anarchy,” in turn heavily influenced by Homer-Dixon.
   8
     Tir and Diehl (1998) examine the Correlates of War dataset to evaluate the impact of population growth and
density on international conflict involvement, initiation, and escalation over the period 1930-89. They find that
population growth pressures have a significant impact on military conflict involvement, especially in poor countries,
but no correlation with conflict initiation or escalation, or between population density and conflict. Hauge and
Ellingsen (1998) find that factors like deforestation, land degradation, and scarce supply of freshwater, alone and in
combination with high population density, increase the risk of domestic armed conflict, especially low-level conflict,
in the period 1980-92. However, economic and political variables prove more decisive than environmental scarcity
in predicting the incidence of domestic armed conflict. Urdal (2005) finds no strong correlation between population
growth and conflict risk, though this risk increases when high population growth combines with land scarcity. For
more studies along these lines, see the special 1998 issue of the Journal of Peace Research and Diehl and Gleditsch
(2001).




                                                          4
land (or other slowly-changing factor of production), Z, labor, N , and technology, A:

                                       Y = F (Z, N, A) ≡ f (N ) ,                                  (1)

where F (·) exhibits constant returns to scale in (Z, N ) and f gives output as a function of labor,
holding technology and Z constant. Thus, if N increases with A constant, output per worker,
f (N ) /N , declines. However, if increases in labor – which we use as a synonym for population – are
accompanied by increases in the technology parameter A, output per worker can remain constant,
thus avoiding scarcity.
   We assume the following simple allocation of resources. Each individual i in society supplies one
unit of labor inelastically and also owns a fraction θi of land. For simplicity, we also suppose that
markets are competitive, though this is not important for our analysis. With these assumptions,
individual income and consumption is given by

                             ci (N, θi ) = f 0 (N ) + θi f (N ) − N f 0 (N ) .
                                                                           
                                                                                                   (2)

The key observation from equation (2) is that the marginal increase in an individual’s consumption
from an increase in his landholdings is larger when population increases,

                                        ∂ 2 ci
                                               = −N f 00 (N ) > 0.
                                       ∂N ∂θi

Land shares matter more for consumption when population is larger. The intuition is simple: with
higher N, land rents are more important relative to wages due to the diminishing marginal product
of labor. This implies a Malthusian channel to conflict when control over land can be contested
with violence.
   To explore this channel, imagine the society consists of two groups, 1 and 2. All members
within a group are identical. To simplify the discussion we suppose both groups are of size N/2
and population growth leaves relative shares unchanged. To capture the disruption costs of conflict,
assume that if a group initiates conflict, then this reduces total output to a fraction (1 − ρ) of what
it would have been without conflict.
   Group j has probability pj of winning the conflict and if it does win, it captures a fraction λ−j
of the land of the other group, where λ is loosely an inverse measure of the “specificity of assets” to
groups (or to individuals within a group). With probability p−j = 1 − pj , group j loses the conflict
and a fraction λj of its land. Also for simplicity, any advantage of being the first mover is ignored
and there are no deaths from any conflict. Also, as discussed below, voluntary concessions to avoid



                                                    5
civil war are ignored. Finally, assume that all agents are risk neutral. Then the expected benefits
to conflict, πj (N, θ, λ, ρ) , for group j are given by,

                  πj (N, θ, λ, ρ) = −ρ F 0 (N ) + θj f (N ) − N f 0 (N )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                    (3)

                                    + (1 − ρ) [pj λ−j θ−j − p−j λj θj ] f (N ) − N f 0 (N ) .
                                                                                          


       The first line of this expression captures the deadweight destructive costs of conflict. The second
line captures potential benefits, amounting to the undestroyed expected additional land rents that
will be expropriated with violence. For there to exist equilibrium conflict, a necessary (but not
sufficient condition) is for:
                                             pj λ−j θ−j − p−j λj θj 6= 0.

If this holds, one of the groups will have potential gains from conflict—e.g., group j. But even in
this case πj (N, θ, λ, ρ) < 0 is possible for both groups because of the first term in (3) — the cost
of disruption.
       The same reasoning as in our discussion of equation (2) implies that whenever πj (N, θ, λ, ρ) = 0,

                                                ∂πj (N, θ, λ, ρ)
                                                                 > 0.
                                                     ∂N

Therefore, an increase in population makes the group that is more likely to initiate civil war more
“pro civil war.” As noted before, this result does not apply when N increases in tandem with A.
This observation is important, in the sense that the Malthusian mechanism says nothing about
increases in population per se. Rather, the predictions are about the level of population for given
A or for increases in population that are unusually large relative to the technological and other
processes that tend to increase A.
       This simple framework generates other intuitive comparative static results. Greater share of
resources accruing to the weaker group (θ) makes conflict more likely. Lower disruption costs
(lower ρ) and lower asset specificity (higher λ), makes conflict more likely.9 The point about asset
specificity is linked to the importance of natural resources and agriculture relative to human capital
and industry. In particular, a market economy depends on production processes – such as factories
and long supply chains – that can be easily disrupted with violence. When traditional production
methods are prevalent, for instance when the main form of capital is land, the costs of violence are
relatively smaller. Presumably, the productivity of land is harder to destroy than the productivity
   9
     The relationship between inequality and conflict is non-monotonic. Suppose j is the group considering an attack.
If θj = θ−j = 1/2, an increase in θ−j increases both inequality in the likelihood of conflict. But if θ−j < θj , then an
increase in θ−j reduces economic inequality but still makes conflict more likely.



                                                           6
of a factory. Also, human capital is hard to expropriate through violence and, unlike land, can
move to other regions or countries when there is an outbreak of violence (Acemoglu and Robinson,
2006).
    Finally, a central question that we have ignored is why is conflict not prevented by more ef-
ficient ways of redistributing resources. A plausible explanation concerns commitment problems
(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001, 2006; Fearon, 1998, 2004; Powell, 2006; Acemoglu, Egorov and
Sonin, 2012). To see this, consider the same environment in a dynamic setting, but in each pe-
riod there is a probability q < 1 that either group can initiate civil war. Assume all agents have
discount factor β ∈ (0, 1). To simplify the discussion, assume as well that, after civil war, there
is a permanent redistribution of resources and never any social conflict again, and that only cash
transfers (and no asset transfers) are feasible.
    Suppose that it is group 1 that is considering to initiate a civil war. In this context, the benefits
from civil war for group 1 are proportional to 1/ (1 − β) because of discounting. If the group is
sufficiently patient (β is high enough), then cash transfers in a given period are not sufficient to
offset this gain. But group 2 cannot make a credible promise to make the cash transfers in the future
once the window of opportunity for civil war disappears. In this setting, civil wars arise along the
equilibrium path even though more efficient ways of dealing with conflict exist. In particular, fix
β ∈ (0, 1), then there exists q̄ such that for all q < q̄, the Markov Perfect Equilibrium will involve
equilibrium civil war. Also, there exists q̂ < q̄, so that for all q < q̂, all Subgame Perfect Equilibria
involve civil war.


3     Data

In our baseline analysis, we measure conflict as the ratio of number of years in conflict to total years
for a period around a reference date t (where, typically, t = 1940, 1950, ..., 1980) and the conflict
occurs in the decade that followed that date.10 This measure captures conflict incidence, rather
than the precise timing of a conflict – this is appealing because we are interested in a relatively
long-term phenomenon: increases in population over a period of several decades, and the potential
response in terms of greater social conflict. Relatedly, datasets sometimes disagree on the exact
year when a conflict began, but there are typically fewer differences regarding the incidence of
conflict within a decade.
    Our baseline dataset is version 4 of the Correlates of War (henceforth COW) dataset (Sarkees
  10
     Here we describe our main dependent and independent variables, and a full description of all variables and sources
including all controls and baseline characteristics can be found in Appendix Table A-1.


                                                          7
and Wayman, 2010). In these data, a civil war is defined as a war fought within state borders,
between government and non-government forces, where the central government is actively involved
in military action, with effective resistance for both sides, and with at least 1,000 battle-related
deaths during the war.11 This is a relatively high threshold of violence for inclusion compared with
other sources, as we explain below. The main advantage of COW is that it reports civil wars since
1816, and this long data series allows us to run a simple falsification test using pre-existing trends
in conflict. When using COW, we assign the number of years with conflict to the reference dates
as follows: wars from 1940-1949 are assigned to 1940, wars from 1950-1959 are assigned to 1950,
and so on.12
       Our second database, covering dates since 1946, is the Uppsala Conflict Data Project, in con-
junction with International Peace Research Institute (UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Ver-
sion 4, Gleditsch et al, 2002). We assign number of years in conflict to reference dates as follows:
1946-1949 to 1940, 1950-1959 to 1950, 1960-1969 to 1960, etc. In the case of reference year 1940,
we divide the number of years in war by 4 (as the data only start in 1946); for other reference years
we divide by 10. This dataset includes conflicts where at least one of the primary parties is the
government of a state, and where the use of armed force results in at least 25 battle-related deaths
per year. The dataset includes four types of conflicts, and we use the two categories for internal
conflict (“internal armed conflict” and “internationalized internal armed conflict”).
       Our third database is Fearon and Laitin’s (2003) coding of civil war. These data cover the
period 1945-1999, and the criteria are broadly similar to those of COW13 , except that anticolonial
wars are coded as occurring within the empire in question (e.g., Algeria in the 1950s is assigned to
France). As with the other datasets, we count the number of years that have any incidence of war,
and use our usual rule for assignment to reference dates (1940 = 1945 − 1949, 1950 = 1950 − 1959,
etc.).
       To examine effects on the intensity of conflict and as a further robustness check, we use in-
formation on battle deaths from the Center for the Study of Civil War (CSCW)’s Battle Deaths
  11
      To constitute effective resistance, both sides must have been initially organized for violent conflict, or the weaker
side must be able to inflict the opponents at least five percent of the number of fatalities it sustains.
   12
      Criteria for inclusion in the COW dataset include a population threshold of 500,000 and having diplomatic
recognition (prior to 1920, recognition at or above the rank of charge d’affaires with Britain and France and, later,
being a member of the League of Nations or the United Nations, or receiving diplomatic missions from two major
powers). Costa Rica and Australia are not in the dataset for 1900. While it may be seem reasonable to include them
as (peaceful) states in 1900 for our falsification regressions, we avoided making such adjustments to the data, instead
followed the choices made by the authors of this and the other codings of civil war.
   13
      Conflicts are included if they: involved fighting between agents of (or claimants to) a state and organized, nonstate
groups who sought control of a government, region, or change in government policies; killed at least 1,000 over its
course, with a yearly average of at least 100; at least 100 were killed on both sides (including civilians attacked by
rebels).


                                                            8
Dataset (Lacina and Gleditsch, 2005). We use version 3, compatible with the UCDP/PRIO dataset
instead of the COW dataset, since the former has a lower threshold of battle-deaths for inclusion
and includes more conflicts. This also allows us to more specifically check the robustness of our
results in the presence of potential mechanical effects, i.e., to the detection and measurement of
civil wars may increase simply because the population is larger and the number of potential deaths
is higher. We rely on their “best estimate” of annual battle-related deaths (again we assign deaths
to reference years using the rule: 1940 = 1940 − 1949, 1950 = 1950 − 1959, etc.)
       We have at least partial data for the 65 countries listed in Appendix Table A-1 (see “Base
Sample”), although we have complete data from 1940 or earlier for only 52 countries (51 when
using COW since Austria enters the COW state system in the 1950s). As highlighted previously
in footnote 4, we are able to include only five African countries (Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, South
Africa, and Tunisia), and this is an important constraint given the prevalence of civil war in Africa.
Unfortunately, there are no reliable historical data on causes of death for sub-Saharan Africa during
the period under investigation.

3.1      Coding Issues

During the post-1940 time period, some countries became independent, others lost their indepen-
dence, fragmented, or experienced a significant change in borders. For each country, we check when
the respective datasets consider the country as entering or leaving the state system, and adjust our
measures accordingly. Thus, for example, as Algeria enters the COW system membership in 1962,
the measure of conflict for 1960 is the number of years in conflict from 1962-1969 (if any), divided
by 8 (instead of 10). We code as missing (not zero) all observations for Algeria in reference years
prior to 1960.
       As a general rule, for countries that are divided into several states at some point in the sample
(e.g., the USSR or Germany), and these embark in external wars between them, we do not code them
as internal wars of the larger territory. We thus avoid using criteria of our own to define internal
conflicts. We do, however, aggregate internal wars of member states for such larger countries.
Thus, for example, we add USSR internal conflicts while it existed, and aggregate internal conflicts
(if any) of the formerly member states and assign them to the USSR as a whole after 1991.14
       This procedure also minimizes potential mismatches between the level of aggregation of the
  14
     These choices make little difference in practice. The countries in our sample potentially affected are just Czechoslo-
vakia, Germany, the USSR and Vietnam. Also, our main specifications end in 1980, prior to many of these splits.
Finally, in many cases the dependent variable would be the same aggregating the territories or not. For instance,
for the Czech Republic in the 1990s, our dependent conflict variables are always zero with or without aggregating
Slovakia.


                                                            9
population figures from Maddison (2006) and civil conflict/political data. Indeed, in the case of
Czechoslovakia/Czech Republic, Maddison presents data for Czechoslovakia as a whole, even after
the split between Slovakia and the Czech Republic. Similarly, population figures are for Vietnam
as a whole, and for the USSR while it existed and later the total for ex-USSR.
       Maddison’s treatment of Germany is more complicated. He takes the 1870 frontiers until 1918,
the 1936 frontiers for 1919-1945, and present-day frontiers subsequently. Also, it must be noted
that the immediate post-war disease data from the UN are divided into Eastern Germany, Federal
Republic of Germany, Berlin, and West Berlin, and numbers for the Federal Republic were used in
Acemoglu and Johnson (2007). To make sure our results do not depend on any of these choices,
we also dropped Czechoslovakia, Germany, the USSR, and Vietnam and found results similar to
those reported below.
       The construction of our instruments is described fully in Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)15 .
Information on age structure is from the United Nations. We also consider a number of control
variables in our robustness exercises, all of which are described in Appendix Table A-1. These
include measures of institutions, whether countries were independent in 1940 or not, whether the
country was affected by World War II, initial (in 1930) GDP per capita, availability of natural
resources (diamonds, oil, and gas), ethnic and religious fragmentation, and the share of Catholic,
Muslim, and Protestant populations.

3.2      Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics (sample means and standard deviations) for our baseline
sample. We present these summary statistics for the sample as a whole, for groups of countries by
income, as well as dividing them between countries experiencing a change in predicted mortality
above and below the median. The first eight rows of column 2 show a general trend, evident across
all measures, of increasing conflict from the 1940s to the 1980s. Also, columns 3 to 5 show that such
an increase is concentrated in middle-income and, especially, poor countries. More importantly,
comparing the change in our conflict measures from 1940 to 1980 in columns 6 and 7, we observe
that countries above median change in predicted mortality exhibit larger increases in conflict than
those below the median change. For instance, the average years in conflict (per decade) according
to the COW measure increased from 0.98 years to 2.09 years for countries with above median
change in predicted mortality from 1940 to 1980, while it decreased from 0.44 years to 0.25 years
  15
    The main source of the necessary health data on incidence of diseases circa 1940 is the League of Nations (based
on national statistics), but other sources were consulted for consistency.



                                                        10
for those with below-median change. This comparison is suggestive for our hypothesis, and we
examine below if it survives in our regression exercises and robustness checks.
       We measure population in thousands, so an initial population of 1 million is 1,000 in our dataset.
We work with log population in order to minimize the effect of outliers, and because average popu-
lation growth in most countries is better approximated by exponential growth (constant percentage
increases) than linear growth (constant absolute increases).
       In our base sample, the mean value of log population in 1940 was 9.136 (around 9.3 million),
rising to 9.812 in 1980 (i.e., average population doubled to just over 18.2 million).16
       The average change in log population is 0.676.

3.3      Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) Results

We begin with simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of conflict on population. More
specifically, in Table 2 we report regressions of the form,

                                        cit = πxit + ζi + µt + Z0it β + εit ,                                      (4)

where cit is a measure of conflict for country i and reference year t, and xit is the logarithm of
population. ζi denotes a full set of country fixed effects while µt represents a full set of year dummies;
we always include both to remove time-invariant country-specific factors and global trends affecting
population and conflict. Zit is a vector of other controls. For all of our regressions, we calculate
standard errors that are fully robust against serial correlation at the country level (e.g., as in
Wooldridge, 2002, p. 275).17
       In Table 2, as in subsequent tables, we present two types of estimation: long differences (Panels
A and C in Table 2), and panel regressions (Panels B and D). The long differences specifications
use data only from 1940 (i.e., the 1940s, assigned to 1940) and 1980 (i.e., the 1980s, assigned to
1980). In these specifications, equation (4) is equivalent to a regression of the change in conflict
between the two dates on the change in log population between the same two dates, which yields
a particularly simple interpretation. Panel regressions use data for intermediate years with one
observation per decade (i.e., t = 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980), and are unbalanced subject only to
data availability. As noted, our baseline regressions end in the 1980s just before the spread of the
  16
    We use the natural logarithm, i.e., the inverse of exp(x).
  17
    One concern is that these standard errors may be downward biased due to a small number of clusters. Thus,
we also implemented the wild bootstrap procedure suggested by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008). The results,
available upon request, are not sensitive to this alternative, which is consistent with our number of clusters being
somewhat larger than what typically is considered as small (between 5 and 30 clusters). Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2008) also find very similar rejection rates for the cluster robust and wild bootstrap standard errors in their
Monte Carlo simulations with 50 clusters.


                                                          11
HIV-AIDS epidemic, and also before the end of the Cold War and rise of global terrorism which
may influence the nature of conflicts. In section 6.3 we investigate how the response of conflict to
population growth changed over time.
       The OLS results in columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 2 reveal that population is positively correlated
with conflict. The estimated coefficient for log population (0.323) in the long-difference regression
in column 1 of Panel A, measuring conflict using the COW dataset, implies that the average change
in log population in our sample of 0.676 is correlated with about 2.18 more years in conflict in the
1980s relative to the 1940s.18
       The size of this coefficient is fairly stable across different conflict datasets, as seen in columns
2 and 3, which use the Uppsala and Fearon-Laitin datasets respectively. To address concerns
that there may be some mechanical size issue determining what is measured as conflict, column
4 considers log(1+ battle deaths per initial population) as the dependent variable. The resulting
coefficient for population is also positive and significant at the 90 percent confidence level. Panel
B shows similar results from estimating (4) using panel data.
       One possible concern with the results in Panels A and B is that they might by driven by age
composition effects. In particular, rather than larger populations being associated with more civil
conflict, it may be that younger populations are an important causal factor. For instance, Urdal
(2006) finds that exceptionally large youth cohorts, or “youth bulges,” correlate with armed conflict,
terrorism and rioting. He interprets this as occurring both because of greater opportunities for
violence through the abundant supply of youths with low opportunity costs, and stronger motives
for violence in societies that cannot respond youth needs. This idea has received considerable
attention both in academia and in the general public. As Urdal notes, Huntington (1996) claims
that Islam is not any more violent than any other religions, but the demographic factor is key
because a high birth rate in the 60s and 70s created a youth bulge in the Muslim world, and people
who kill other people are young males.
       Panels C and D assess this point with similar regressions as preceding panels, but now with
the share of population from 15 to 34 years of age included as an additional independent variable
(we lose eight countries due to lack of data). Though the share of young people, which is likely
endogenous to population growth, is a ‘bad control’ (Angrist and Pischke, 2008), this specification
is nonetheless a useful to verify whether there is a correlation between population and conflict over
and beyond that which would be predicted by the presence of larger young cohorts. The results are
  18
    This is 0.676 multiplied by 0.323, and then multiplied by 10 (as our dependent variable is the fraction of the
decade that the country is in conflict).



                                                       12
consistent with Panel A and B – the coefficients and significance for log population are similar. The
point estimate on the share of young population is negative, and significant in the panel regressions
of Panel D. At least in this OLS specification, having more young people, once we control for log
population, actually reduces conflict.
         However, these OLS estimates are not necessarily causal, and the true effect of population on
conflict might be larger or smaller than implied by these coefficients. We investigate this issue by
applying a plausible instrumental variable.


4         International Epidemiological Transition

Our identification strategy relies on the International Epidemiological Transition creating large
increases in population. Such increase in populations followed major exogenous (to most countries)
innovations in drugs (e.g., penicillin) and associated effective treatments, and chemicals (e.g., DDT).
International programs to spread best practices followed through, led by international agencies such
as the WHO and UNICEF. This episode provides an instrument for population growth, by using
information on the pre-intervention distribution of mortality from various diseases around the world
– along with the dates of major global interventions affecting mortality from this set of diseases.
         More specifically, we use the predicted mortality instrument from Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)
which adds each country’s initial (in 1940) mortality rate from 15 diseases until there is a global
intervention. After the global intervention, the mortality rate from the disease in question declines
to the frontier mortality rate19 . For country i at time t, the instrument is:
                                        X
                                MitI =     ((1 − Idt )Mdi40 + Idt MdF t ),                                     (5)
                                           d∈D

where: Mdi40 denotes mortality in 1940 (measured as number of deaths per 100 individuals per
annum) for country i, from disease d ∈ D; Idt is a dummy for intervention for disease d that takes
the value of 1 for all dates after the intervention; MdF t is mortality from disease d at the health
frontier of the world at time t; and D is the set of diseases listed above.
         Since Mdi40 is the pre-intervention mortality rate for disease d, and Idt = 1 after a global
intervention, the variation in this variable comes from the interaction of baseline cross-country
disease prevalence with global intervention dates for those specific diseases. Countries that experi-
enced higher mortality than others for a given disease are expected to observe larger increases in
population after the intervention.
    19
    The 15 diseases are (in rough descending order of importance): malaria, pneumonia, and tuberculosis; influenza,
cholera, typhoid, smallpox, shigella dysentery, whooping cough, measles (rubeola), dyphteria, scarlet fever, yellow
fever, plague, typhus.


                                                        13
    The predicted mortality instrument depends on the choice for dating global interventions. An
alternative instrument that is independent of the coding of global interventions assumes each coun-
try’s initial mortality rate decreases at the pace of the global mortality rate for the disease in
question. The formula for this global mortality instrument is given by,
                                                 X Mdt
                                        MitI =          Mdi40 ,                                     (6)
                                                   Md40
                                                 d∈D

where Mdt is global mortality from disease d in year t, and Md40 is global mortality from disease d in
1940, calculated as the unweighted average across countries in the sample of countries in Acemoglu
and Johnson (2007).
    We use these variables as instruments for population. Specifically, we posit the first-stage
relationship for country i at time t,

                                  xit = ϕMitI + ζ̃i + µ̃t + Z0it β̃ + uit ,                         (7)

where: xit is the logarithm of population; MitI the predicted (or global) mortality instrument; ζ̃i
is a full set of country fixed effects; µ̃t are year fixed effects; and Zit represents a vector of other
controls.
    Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) show that changes in predicted mortality led to major improve-
ments in life expectancy and other measures of health. In countries such as India, Pakistan,
Indonesia, Ecuador and El Salvador, where predicted mortality declined by a large amount, there
were large gains in life expectancy. Instead, life expectancy remained comparatively unchanged
in parts of western Europe, Uruguay, Argentina, Korea, and Australia, where predicted mortality
did not decrease as much. The same negative relationship holds without the richest countries, so
it is not driven by the comparison of initially rich countries to initially low- and middle-income
countries.


5     Main Results
5.1   First Stages

Table 3 shows the first-stage relationship, i.e., estimating equation (7). This table shows the strong
negative relationship between log population and predicted mortality is robust across alternative
samples. Panel A reports long-difference specifications, and panel B reports panel regressions.
    Column 1 includes all countries in our sample, and shows an estimate of ϕ equal to −0.782,
which is significant at less than 1 percent. This estimate implies that an improvement in predicted


                                                     14
mortality of 0.469 per 100 (or 469 per 100, 000, which is the mean improvement between 1940 and
1980 in our base sample) leads to an increase of roughly 0.37 in log population – thus close to a 37%
increase in total population. The mean population in our sample in 1940 was about 34.7 million, so
this is an increase of roughly 12.8 million, whereas the actual mean increase in population between
1940 and 1980 was about 23.5 million. This implies that changes in predicted mortality account
for approximately one-half of the increase in population between 1940 and 1980.
   Column 2 repeats the same regression excluding Eastern Europe, and Column 3 looks only at
initially low- and middle-income countries. The estimate of ϕ is similar, and still significant at
less than 1 percent. Column 4 presents results using the global mortality instrument. The results
are also strong and significant, reassuring us that they do not depend on the coding of global
intervention dates. Finally, column 5 excludes the countries most affected by World War II, again
with almost identical results.
   Panel B repeats the same regressions as in Panel A, now using a panel with decadal observations.
The results are still highly significant but the coefficients are smaller, which is reasonable since these
regressions exploit shorter-run responses to changes in predicted mortality.

5.2   Robustness to Differential Trends

The main potential threat to our exclusion restriction would be that the 1940 mortality rates are
somehow correlated with future changes in conflict. We therefore need to examine the robustness
of our IV results to the inclusion of differential trends that are parametrized as functions of various
baseline characteristics. Whether this explains the first-stage relationship is investigated with
regressions of the form,
                                                              1980
                                                              X
                                 xit = ϕMitI + ζ̃i + µ̃t +            κ0i ω̄t + uit ,                 (8)
                                                             t=1940

where ω̄t = 1 in year t and zero otherwise, and κi are “time-invariant” characteristics of country
i. These characteristics include: a measure of the average quality of institutions (average of the
constraints on the executive from the Polity IV data set over 1950-70); a dummy for the country
being independent in 1940; initial (in 1930) GDP per capita, population, and share of young people;
and measures of the availability of natural resources and ethnic polarization/fragmentation, which
are often emphasized in the empirical literature on civil war. These regressions are reported in
Table 4.
   Since equation (8) includes a full set of time interactions with κi , we are controlling for dif-
ferential trends related to these characteristics. In long-difference regressions of panel A, this


                                                     15
specification is equivalent to including an interaction between the 1980 dummy and the various
baseline characteristics.
       The results in both panels show that controlling for these characteristics has little effect on our
results. The coefficient on predicted mortality remains negative and significant across all columns.
Overall, the instrument is strong and its correlation with population is unlikely to be driven by
differential trends due to a third factor.

5.3       Reduced Forms and Falsification

There is no evidence of a negative relationship between pre-existing trends in life expectancy and
subsequent changes in predicted mortality (if anything, the relationship is slightly positive).20 There
is also no clear correlation between prior changes in population and changes in predicted mortality.
This stands in sharp contrast with the correlation between predicted mortality and population
observed after 1940.
       Table 5 (and Figure 3) reports the results of reduced form regressions and falsification tests.
We run the following type of regression,


                                                        I
                                     ∆yit1 ,t0 = α + ϕ∆Mi1980,1940 + εit .                                      (9)

where α is a constant and ∆yit1 ,t0 ≡ yit1 − yit0 is the change in our dependent variable for country
                                                   I
i between reference dates t0 and t1 . Similarly, ∆Mi1980,1940 ≡ yi,1980 − yi,1940 is the change in the
predicted mortality instrument between 1940 and 1980.
       In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the change in the fraction of each decade in conflict
from 1940 to 1980. Notice that this specification is equivalent to a long-difference regression (using
only data for 1940s and 1980s) of conflict on predicted mortality with a full set of country fixed
effects. It is therefore the reduced-form regression for our simplest long-difference specification21 .
These columns, for the base sample and for low- and middle-income countries, show that countries
with a larger decline in predicted mortality experienced a larger increase in years in conflict. Given
the negative relationship between predicted mortality and population shown in the previous section,
this translates into a positive effect of population on conflict in our 2SLS estimates below.
       A useful falsification exercise is to look at changes in predicted mortality, and see whether
they correlate with changes in conflict or population during the pre-period. That is, we consider
  20
      These issues are examined in greater detail in Acemoglu and Johnson (2007). Their results suggest a robust and
significant relationship between predicted mortality and health that is unlikely to be driven by preexisting trends.
   21
      In the Appendix, we show the panel versions of these reduced forms, as well as their robustness to alternative
samples and to the inclusion of differential trends in Tables A-2, A-3 and A-7.


                                                        16
specifications of equation (9) where t1 = 1940 and t0 = 1900. In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5,
we find no relationship between the change in conflict from 1900 to 1940 and change in predicted
mortality from 1940 to 1980, for the base sample and for low- and middle-income countries. Similar
specifications for our first stage (changes in log population from 1900 to 1940 and in predicted
mortality from 1940 to 1980) are shown in columns 5 and 6, again with no sign of such a relationship.
Predicted mortality explains changes in population after 1940, but not before 1940. The coefficient
estimates are insignificant and also very small relative to our reduced forms.
       These results offer further confirmation there were no preexisting trends related to changes
in predicted mortality either in population or in our key conflict outcome variables. This gives
us greater confidence in using predicted mortality as an instrument to investigate the effect of
population on conflict.

5.4       2SLS Results

Table 6 presents our main results, which are the 2SLS estimates of the effect of population on
conflict. More specifically, our second stage regression is given by equation (4), where population is
instrumented by predicted mortality –equation (7). As before, we report long-difference regressions
for 1940 and 1980 in panel A and panel regressions for 1940 − 1980 in panel B. This table shows
that the effect of population on conflict is positive and highly significant in most specifications.22
       In column 1, the dependent variable is the share of years in internal conflict per decade, as
measured by the COW dataset. The size of the effect (π) is estimated to be 0.617, which implies
that the average change (0.676) in log population from 1940 to 1980 leads approximately to 4.17
more years in conflict during the 1980s relative to the 1940s.
       This can be compared to the OLS coefficient in Table 2 (0.323), which implied an effect of
around 2.18 more years in conflict in the 1980s compared to the 1940s. We find similar results in
the case of the panel regressions for 1940-80 presented in panel B (π = 0.61, significant at the 99%
level).
       For a country like El Salvador, experiencing an increase in population from 1.6 to 4.6 million
in this period (a change in log population of 0.46), the OLS estimate predicts roughly 1.5 (0.323 ×
0.46 × 10) more years in conflict per decade while the IV estimate of 0.617 implies an effect of
roughly 2.8 more years in conflict (0.617 × 0.46 × 10).
       Columns 2 through 4 investigate the robustness of this result. The dependent variables in
  22                                                        I
    The exclusion restriction for our IV strategy -Cov(Mit    , εit ) = 0, where εit is the error term in the second-stage
equation, requires that the unique channel for casual effects of predicted mortality on conflict is changes in population.
This does not seem unreasonable.


                                                           17
columns 2 and 3 are the years in internal conflict as a fraction of total years in the reference date
as measured by the UCDP/PRIO and Fearon and Laitin datasets, respectively. All the estimated
coefficients are positive, and typically significant at less than 1 or 5%, with the exception of the
UCDP/PRIO regressions in Panel B.
    Since conventional measures of civil war rely on meeting a battle death threshold, an increase
in total population may mechanically increase the number of “detected” civil wars. We use battle
deaths data to examine whether this may be driving our results. Column 4 considers the (log of)
battle deaths for each reference date, per person, to calculate cit . The coefficient on population is
also positive and significant. Finally, columns 5 through 8 repeat the regressions from columns 1
through 4 but use global mortality as the instrument for population. The results are very similar.
This evidence suggests that our results do not depend on the dating of global health interventions.


6     Robustness Checks
6.1   Controlling for Differential Trends

An important potential threat to our strategy is that our estimated causal effects of population
on conflict could be actually capturing differential trends between countries which happen to have
different levels of baseline mortality rates. We therefore need to examine the robustness of our
results to the inclusion of differential trends, parametrized as functions of various observable baseline
characteristics. In choosing these characteristics, we draw on the extensive literature on civil wars.
    In Table 7, in line with the corresponding first stages in equation (8) and Table 4, our second
stage equations take the following form:
                                                          1980
                                                          X
                                cit = πxit + ζi + µt +            κ0i ω̄t + εit .                   (10)
                                                         t=1940
In column 1, we examine whether the results could be driven by differential trends between countries
with “good” and “bad” institutions. While there are many dimensions of institutions, we choose
to measure the quality of institutions by average constraints on the executive over 1950-1970. This
is a particularly relevant dimension of institutions, since, as noted in Section 2, the commitment
problem is a persuasive explanation for civil war. In column 2, κi is simply a dummy variable
equal to 1 if country i was independent in 1940. Columns 3 to 5 control for differential trends as
a function of initial (1930) log GDP per capita, initial log population, and initial share of young
(population aged 15 to 34), respectively.
    In columns 6 through 9, the country characteristics κi are variables emphasized by other re-
searchers as correlates of civil war. A large literature links conflict to natural-resource abundance,

                                                   18
in particular oil, gas, and diamonds. A commonly used measure is oil exports divided by GDP
or the share of the natural resource sector in GDP (Sachs and Warner, 1999). As Ross (2006)
notes, this measure may be a poor proxy of rents in the economy or potential revenues for the
government since it does not include oil that is produced but consumed domestically, and it does
not account for extraction costs which may vary across countries. Also, even at similar levels of
production, the numerator tends to be larger in poor countries because poor countries consume less
of their own oil. Normalizing by GDP similarly inflates the numbers for poor countries. Motivated
by this reasoning, in columns 6 and 7, κi is, respectively: diamond production per capita (from
Humphreys, 2005), and oil and gas rents per capita (from Ross, 2006).23
       A number of theories also suggest that ethnic (or religious) diversity and polarization may be a
contributing cause to civil war, or at least that they may facilitate surmounting the collective action
problems within groups prone to conflict. Nevertheless, cross-national studies find few differences
between the determinants of civil war in general versus “ethnic” civil wars in particular (see Fearon
(2006) for a review). This may be surprising, yet it could be driven by the fact that ethnic
fragmentation is measured with considerable error. As Blattman and Miguel (2010) point out, the
existing proxies may also be theoretically inappropriate and these indices of ethnic fractionalization
have been questioned as a meaningful proxy for ethnic tensions (e.g., Posner 2004a, 2004b). Esteban
and Ray (1994, 1999) argue that more than fractionalization, a bimodal distribution of preferences
or resources—“polarization”—is linked to greater conflict risk. Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005)
construct measures for polarization and fragmentation and find support for this theory. In columns
8 and 9 we use their measures of ethnic polarization and fragmentation.
       Notice that the coefficient remains significant at conventional confidence levels in every regres-
sion. Similarly, the panel regressions suggest a significant positive effect. Moreover, the coefficient
is quite stable across specifications, ranging from around 0.6 to 0.75 in most long-difference spec-
ifications. The sole exception is column 3, which includes a differential trend by initial GDP per
capita; here the estimated coefficient increases to 1.1. This result suggests our estimated impact of
population on conflict is unlikely to be explained by differential trends in levels of income. Overall,
in fact, Table 7 suggests that it is unlikely that the impact of population on conflict from our 2SLS
is actually driven by any differential trends24 .
  23
    In addition, we found similar results controlling for oil production per capita (also from Humphreys, 2005).
  24
    Moreover, while Table 7 uses the best available measures of resource abundance and the more theoretically-
motivated measures of ethnic diversity, the results do not depend on the exact variable used to measure natural
resource abundance or social diversity. This is verified in Appendix Tables A-5 and A-6, which present the first and
second stages, respectively, for specifications similar to those in Table 7 but where alternative measures are used,
including: the share of the natural resources in GDP, total (instead of per capita) oil and diamond production,



                                                        19
6.2    Alternative Samples, Instrument, and World War II

Table 8 presents additional robustness checks on our main results. To facilitate comparisons,
column 1 reproduces our base sample long-difference and panel regression estimates from Table
6. In column 2, we exclude East European countries, which may have exhibited special behavior
in the context of the Cold War. The estimated value of π remains positive, of similar size and
statistically significant. Column 3 drops initially rich countries to verify that these results are not
driven by the comparison between rich and poor nations, and Column 4 uses the global mortality
instrument.
    Columns 5 through 7 check whether results are driven by events around World War II. Column 5
excludes the countries demographically most affected by that war, namely Austria, China, Finland,
Germany, Italy, and the Russian Federation (Urlanis, 2003). Column 6 assigns instead the level of
conflict of the 1950s to the 1940s. Column 7 simply ignores the war years, and assigns the number
of years in conflict from 1946-49 (as a fraction of the 4 years in these interval) to our dependent
variable in 1940.
    Finally, column 8 controls for the share of young (15-34) population, finding similar effects25 .
Overall, the coefficient is very stable and retains statistical significance at conventional levels. These
robustness checks thus lend credibility to our baseline estimates.

6.3    Timing

Table 9 examines how the response of conflict to population growth changed over time. In particular,
columns 1 to 5 look at different time horizons by estimating long-difference regressions for our
baseline measure of conflict on population (instrumented with predicted mortality), where the
initial time period is t = 1940 and the final date is 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000. Consistent
with the idea that health improvements and population increase have a lagged effect on social
conflict, as the resulting scarcity finally results in violence, results are weaker if we only look only
at 1940-60 or 1940-70, and the effect peaks in 1980. There is also a significant impact when
comparing the 1940s to the 1990s and 2000s, though the size of the effect is about a third and 50
percent smaller, respectively, compared with that of the 1980s. One conjecture is that the nature
of a number of conflicts changed with the fall of the Soviet Union and the wave of democratizations
religious polarization and fragmentation, and share of Catholic, Muslim, and Protestant population.
  25
     We reiterate that this regression must be interpreted with caution since the share of young population is a ‘bad
control’ potentially influenced by the increase in overall population. However, in Appendix Table A-4 we show that
predicted mortality does not influence the growth in the share of young population from the 1940s to the 1980s or
1990s.



                                                         20
of the 1990s. These findings are again not sensitive to the coding of global health interventions, as
Panel B reveals.

6.4    Initial conflict and convergence dynamics

Referring to Acemoglu and Johnson’s (2007) finding of no effects of life expectancy on income,
Bloom, Canning, and Fink (2014) argue that the level of life expectancy in 1940 affected subsequent
growth rates and should be included on the right-hand side. A similar concern could be that initial
conflict affects subsequent changes in violence. In Table 10 we assess Bloom et al.’s concerns by
including the initial level of conflict (fraction of decade in conflict during the 1940s) interacted with
time dummies in our decadal panel, and by allowing for convergence dynamics including lagged
conflict as an additional regressor.26
    For comparison, column 1 reports our baseline panel estimates (as in column 1 in Table 6,
Panel B). Column 2 restricts the sample to countries with available information on initial conflict,
reducing the set of countries from 65 to 58. This has virtually no effect on our key point estimate,
which changes from 0.609 to 0.606 and remains statistically significant at 1%. Column 3 includes
the interaction of initial war with a full set of year dummies. The coefficient on population changes
only slightly, to 0.584 with a standard error of 0.181.
    Columns 4 and 5 add lagged conflict on the right hand side, allowing for convergence effects.
Column 4 uses the standard 2SLS estimator, and column 5 presents Arellano and Bond’s (1991)
optimally weighted two-step generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator, with predicted
mortality as the external instrument. This further reduces the sample by requiring additional
predetermined lags of conflict for estimation. Lagged conflict is not significant in either column,
suggesting convergence effects are not important. While the point estimate for population falls (to
0.266 with a standard error 0.107 and 0.238 with a standard error 0.105, respectively) the results
are again broadly consistent with a positive and significant (at the 5% level) effect of population
on conflict.


7     Conclusions

The large and largely unprecedented population increases that followed the international epidemi-
ological transition of the 1940s contributed to an increase in violent social conflict. At least in this
important historical episode, increasing population without a corresponding increase in resources
   26
      Acemoglu and Johnson (2014) report this and two additional approaches assessing the potential effects of initial
life expectancy on subsequent changes in GDP per capita, finding no evidence of such effects.



                                                         21
and technology, raised the likelihood of civil war – presumably because there was an more intense
competition for scarce resources.
    The international epidemiological transition produced significant convergence in health condi-
tions around the world, but no comparable convergence has been observed in income per capita. At
least in part, this lack of convergence for prosperity can be attributed to the negative consequences
of social conflict.
    The extent to which this historical experience applies to the modern situation remains to be seen.
We should expect significantly higher population in some countries that are currently relatively
low income. In part these increases are driven by health improvements that have already taken
place. Further public health interventions are likely to improve life expectancy and further increase
population.
    The world tendency towards violence in some average sense may have declined, and the potential
for growth in low income countries may now be higher than in the past, for example because of
changes in technology or better policy. Or perhaps outside interventions will increase productivity
and shift people away from having to compete for scarce local resources.
    But experience from the 1940s-1980s period should at least serve as a cautionary tale – en-
couraging policymakers to ensure that economic opportunities increase in line with the number of
people seeking employment and income.




                                                 22
References

Acemoglu, D., Egorov, G., & Sonin, K. (2012). Dynamics and Stability of Constitutions, Coalitions,
and Clubs. American Economic Review, 102(4), 1446-76.
   Acemoglu, D., & Johnson, S. (2007). Disease and development: The effect of life expectancy
on economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 115(6), 925-985.
   Acemoglu, D., & Johnson, S. (2014). Disease and Development: A Reply to Bloom, Canning,
and Fink. Journal of Political Economy, 122(6), 1367-1375.
   Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2001). A theory of political transitions. American Economic
Review, 91(4), 938-963.
   Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2006). Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
   Angrist, J. D. & J.S. Pischke (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Com-
panion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Arellano, M, & Bond. S.R. (1991). Some Specification Tests for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations. Review of Economic Studies, 58(2), 277–
298.
   Besley, T. J., & Persson, T. (2008). The incidence of civil war: Theory and evidence (NBER
Working Papers No. 14585). National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
   Blattman, C., & Miguel, E. (2010). Civil war. Journal of Economic Literature, 48(1), 3-57.
   Bloom, D. E., Canning,D. & Fink, G. (2014). Disease and Development Revisited. Journal of
Political Economy, 122(6), 1355–1366.
   Brückner, M. (2010). Population size and civil conflict risk: Is there a causal link? Economic
Journal, 120(544), 535-550.
   Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., & Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements for
inference with clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414-427.
   Collier, P., & Hoeffler, A. (1998). On economic causes of civil war. Oxford Economic Papers,
50(4), 563-73.
   Collier, P., & Hoeffler, A. (2004). Greed and grievance in civil war. Oxford Economic Papers,
56(4), 563-595.
   Diehl, P. F., & Gleditsch, N. P. (2001). Environmental conflict. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
   Easterly, W., & Levine, R. (1997). Africa’s growth tragedy: Policies and ethnic divisions.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203-1250.


                                                 23
   Esteban, J., and & Ray, D. (1994) On the Measurement of Polarization. Econometrica, 62(4):
819–851.
   Esteban, J., & Ray, D. (1999). Conflict and distribution. Journal of Economic Theory, 87(2),
379-415.
   Fearon, J. D. (1998). Commitment problems and the spread of ethnic conflict. In D. Lake &
D. Rothchild (Eds.), The international spread of ethnic conflict: Fear, diffusion, and escalation.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Fearon, J. D. (2004). Why do some civil wars last so much longer than others? Journal of Peace
Research, 41(3), 275-301.
   Fearon, J. D. (2006). Ethnic mobilization and ethnic violence. In B. R. Weingast & D. A.
Wittman (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy (pp. 852–68). Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press.
   Fearon, J. D., & Laitin, D. D. (2003). Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. The American
Political Science Review, 97(1), pp. 75-90.
   Garfinkel, M. R., & Skaperdas, S. (2007). Economics of conflict: An overview. In K. Hartley
& T. Sandler (Eds.), Handbook of defense economics (Vol. 2, p. 649-709). Elsevier.
   Gates, B. & Gates, M. (2015), “2015 Gates Annual Letter: Our Big Bet for the Future”,
Avaliable at http://www.gatesnotes.com/2015-annual-letter, last accessed March 24 2017.
   Gleditsch, N. P., Wallensteen, P., Eriksson, M., Sollenberg, M., & Strand, H. (2002). Armed
conflict 1946-2001: A new dataset. Journal of Peace Research, 39(5), 615-637.
   Hauge, W., & Ellingsen, T. (1998). Beyond environmental scarcity: Causal pathways to conflict.
Journal of Peace Research, 35(3), 299-317.
   Homer-Dixon, T. F. (1991). On the threshold: Environmental changes as causes of acute
conflict. International Security. (2): 76 - 116.
   Homer-Dixon, T. F. (1999). Environment, scarcity, and violence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
   Humphreys, M. (2005). Natural resources, conflict, and conflict resolution. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 49(4), 508-537.
   Huntington, S. P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
   Kaplan, R. (1994). The coming anarchy. The Atlantic (February).
   Lacina, B., & Gleditsch, N. P. (2005). Monitoring trends in global combat: A new dataset of
battle deaths. European Journal of Population, 21(2-3), 145-166.

                                                   24
   La Porta, R., Silanes, F. Lopez-de, Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. (1999). The quality of government.
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15(1), 222-79.
   Maddison, A. (2006). The world economy. Paris, France: Development Centre of the Organi-
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
   Malthus, T. R. (1798). An essay on the principle of population, as it affects the future im-
provement of society: With remarks on the speculations of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet and other
writers, London: Printed for J. John.
   Miguel, E., Satyanath, S., & Sergenti, E. (2004). Economic shocks and civil conflict: An
instrumental variables approach. Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 725–753.
   Montalvo, J. G., & Reynal-Querol, M. (2005). Ethnic polarization, potential conflict, and civil
wars. American Economic Review, 95(3), 796-816.
   Posner, D. N. (2004a). Measuring ethnic fractionalization in Africa. American Journal of
Political Science, 48(4), 849-863.
   Posner, D. N. (2004b). The political salience of cultural difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas
are allies in Zambia and adversaries in Malawi. The American Political Science Review, 98(4), 529-
545.
   Powell, R. (2006). War as a commitment problem. International Organization , 60 (01), 169-
203.
   Richards, P. (1996). Fighting for the rain forest: War, youth and resources in Sierra Leone.
The International African Institute.
   Ross, M. (2006). A closer look at oil, diamonds, and civil war. Annual Review of Political
Science, 9, 265-300.
   Ross, M. L. (2008). Oil, Islam, and women. American Political Science Review, 102(01),
107-123.
   Sachs, J. D., & Warner, A. M. (1999). The Big Rush, Natural Resource Booms And Growth.
Journal of Development Economics, 59(1), 43-76.
   Sambanis, N. (2002). A review of recent advances and future directions in the quantitative
literature on civil war. Defence and Peace Economics, 13(3), 215-243.
   Sarkees, Meredith Reid and Frank Wayman (2010). Resort to War: 1816 - 2007. Washington
DC: CQ Press.
   Tir, J., & Diehl, P. F. (1998). Demographic pressure and interstate conflict: Linking population
growth and density to militarized disputes and wars, 1930-89. Journal of Peace Research, 35(3),
319-339.

                                                25
   United Nations (1949). 1948 Demographic Yearbook. Lake Success, NY: United Nations.
   United Nations (2015), “World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision. Volume 1, Com-
prehensive Tables,” New York: United Nations. Available at https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/
Publications/Files/WPP2015_Volume-I_Comprehensive-Tables.pdf, last accessed March 24
2017.
   Urdal, H. (2005). People vs. Malthus: population pressures, environmental degradation and
armed conflict revisited, Journal of Peace Research, 42: 417–34.
   Urdal, H. (2006), “A Clash of Generations? Youth Bulges and Political Violence”, International
Studies Quarterly, 50(3): 607–629.
   Urlanis, B. (2003). Wars and population. Honolulu, Hawaii: University Press of the Pacific.
(reprint of 1971 edition)
   Wooldridge, J. (2002), Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.




                                               26
                                                          Figure 1. Population, Life Expectancy and GDP
                                                            Initially Rich, Middle-Income and Poor Countries, Base Sample

                                                 1a. Average Population (millions)                                                    1b. Average Log Population




                                   50
                                                                                               140
                                                                                                                 10.5




                            40
                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                               Initially Poor




                      30
                                                             Initially Rich




                                                                                                                 9.5
                                                                                                                                                Initially Rich




                                                                                                Initially Poor
                                                                                               80 100 120
                                                                                                                 9




               20
                                                             Initially Middle Income                                                            Initially Middle Income




                                                                                               60




      10
                                                             Initially Poor




                                                                                                                 8.5




     Initially Rich and Middle Income
                                        1920      1940         1960           1980      2000                            1920      1940              1960             1980          2000
                                                               year                                                                                 year




27
                                                   1c. Average Log Life Expectancy                                                 1d. Average Log GDP per capita




                                                                                                                 10




      4.4
                                                                                                                                                                 Initially Rich




      4.2
                                                      Initially Rich

                                                                                                                 9




      4
                                          Initially Middle Income                                                8                                               Initially Middle Income




      3.8
                                                                                                                                                                 Initially Poor
                                                      Initially Poor
                                                                                                                 7




      3.6
                            1920                  1940              1960         1980             2000                  1920      1940              1960             1980          2000
                                                                    year                                                                            year



     Notes: See Appendix Table A-1 for variable definition and sources. Initially rich, initially middle and initially poor are the
     top, middle and bottom third set of countries in the base sample by level of income per capita.
                                                        Figure 2. Conflict incidence
                                  Initially Rich, Middle-Income and Poor Countries, Base Sample

                                    2a. Civil War                                                         2b. Internal Conflict
                        Fraction of decade in conflict - COW                                  Fraction of decade in conflict - UCDP/PRIO
                                                                                                                               Initially Poor




     .2
                                                                               .4
                                              Initially Poor




                                                                               .3




     .15
                                                                                                                 Initially Middle Income




     .1
                                                                               .2
                                                                               .1




     .05
                                              Initially Middle Income                                                          Initially Rich




     0
                                                                               0
                             Initially Rich
           1940               1960                  1980                2000        1940               1960                1980                 2000
                                         year                                                                    year




28
                                  2c. Civil Conflict                                                      2d. Battle Deaths
                  Fraction of decade in conflict - Fearon and Laitin                Average of Log (1+ Total Battle Deaths/No. of Years) - Uppsala




                                                                               4




     .4
                                                                                                                          Initially Poor



                                                                               3




     .3
                                                                               2




     .2
                                       Initially Poor
                                                                                                                          Initially Middle Income
                                                                               1




     .1
                         Initially Middle Income                                                                  Initially Rich




     0
                                                                               0




                                       Initially Rich

           1940       1950        1960          1970           1980     1990        1940       1950       1960          1970       1980         1990
                                         year                                                                    year



     Notes: See Appendix Table A-1 for variable definition and sources. Initially rich, initially middle and initially poor are the
     top, middle and bottom third set of countries in the base sample by level of income per capita.
                                                       Figure 3. Reduced form and falsification
              3a. Change in fraction of decade in conflict, 1940-1980                                                      3b. Change in fraction of decade in conflict, 1940-1980
                                   Base Sample                                                                                      Low and Middle Income Countries




     1
                                                                                                                  1
                              PHL
                              SLV                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                                           SLV

                                              PER                           NIC                                                                             PER                          NIC
                                                              LKA                                                                                                          LKA

                                                GTM                                                                                                           GTM




     .5
                                                                                                                  .5
                                                              TUR                                                                                                          TUR

                    IND                 IDN                                       ROM                                            IND                  IDN                                      ROM




     0
                                                                                                                  0
                               BOL
                                ECU            ITA
                                                PAK
                                                 CHL          PRT
                                                              MEX
                                                               HND
                                                                PAN    BRA
                                                                        THA
                                                                         VEN        ESP URY
                                                                                        BGRIRL
                                                                                             CZE
                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                               HUNAUS
                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                    NOR
                                                                                                    NZL
                                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                            CAN                              BOL
                                                                                                                                              ECU            ITA
                                                                                                                                                              PAK
                                                                                                                                                               CHL         PRT
                                                                                                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                                                                                                            HND
                                                                                                                                                                             PAN    BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                                                                                                      VEN        ESP URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BGRIRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HUN FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KOR
                                                        CRI           COL             PRY                                                                            CRI           COL             PRY

                                                              MMR                                                                                                          MMR
                                                                                               CHN                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                   RUS                                                                                                          RUS




     -.5
                                                                                                                  -.5
                                                                                              POL                                                                                                           POL


                                                                                   GRC                                                                                                          GRC




     -1
                                                                                                                  -1
           -1.2            -1        -.8       -.6         -.4                                       -.2                -1.2            -1         -.8        -.6          -.4                                     -.2
                          Change in predicted mortality, 1940-1980                                                                     Change in predicted mortality, 1940-1980


                  3c. Change in fraction of decade in conflict 1900-1940                                                       3d. Change in fraction of decade in conflict 1900-1940




29
                                       Base Sample                                                                                      Low and Middle Income Countries




     1
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                   GRC                                                                                                          GRC




     .5
                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                               CHN                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                   RUS                                                                                                          RUS
                                                                      COL                                                                                                          COL
                                                                                        PRY                                                                                                           PRY




     0
                                                                                                                  0
                              SLV
                                BOL
                                  ECU         PER
                                               ITA
                                                GTM
                                                 CHL          PRT
                                                              MEX
                                                               HND
                                                                PAN   BRA
                                                                       THANIC       ESP BGR FRA
                                                                                             GBR NOR
                                                                                                  ARG
                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                         DNK                                SLV
                                                                                                                                              BOL
                                                                                                                                                ECU         PER
                                                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                                                                               GTM
                                                                                                                                                               CHL         PRT
                                                                                                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                                                                                                            HND
                                                                                                                                                                             PAN   BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                    THANIC        ESP BGR FRA       NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                  ROM    URY                                                                                                   ROM     URY


                                                                        VEN                                                                                                          VEN


                                                              TUR                                                                                                          TUR




     -.5
                                                                                                                  -.5




           -1.2            -1        -.8       -.6         -.4                                       -.2                -1.2            -1         -.8        -.6          -.4                                     -.2
                          Change in predicted mortality, 1940-1980                                                                     Change in predicted mortality, 1940-1980



     Notes: See Appendix Table A-1 for variable definition and sources. Initially rich, initially middle and initially poor are the
     top, middle and bottom third set of countries in the base sample by level of income per capita.
                                             Table 1: Descriptive statistics



                                                                                                                              By change
                                                                                     By initial income                  in predicted mortality

                                                      Year    Base sample        Rich      Middle      Poor         Above                Below
                                                                                                                    median               median
Variable                                               (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)                  (7)

Fraction of decade in conflict, COW                   1940         0.072           0        0.094      0.088         0.098                0.044
                                                                  (0.212)         (0)      (0.222)    (0.263)       (0.261)              (0.142)

Fraction of decade in conflict, COW                   1980         0.118           0        0.079      0.216         0.209                0.025
                                                                  (0.260)         (0)      (0.188)    (0.347)       (0.328)              (0.102)

Fraction of decade in conflict, Uppsala               1940         0.126           0        0.115      0.229         0.201                0.048
                                                                  (0.306)         (0)      (0.276)    (0.417)       (0.369)              (0.200)

Fraction of decade in conflict, Uppsala               1980         0.269         0.091      0.190      0.440         0.400                0.134
                                                                  (0.408)       (0.302)    (0.341)    (0.468)       (0.447)              (0.319)

Fraction of decade in conflict, Fearon-Laitin         1940         0.121           0        0.100      0.238         0.163                0.077
                                                                  (0.302)         (0)      (0.255)    (0.427)       (0.347)              (0.247)

Fraction of decade in conflict, Fearon-Laitin         1980         0.242         0.091      0.183      0.376         0.367                0.112
                                                                  (0.413)       (0.302)    (0.369)    (0.475)       (0.467)              (0.306)

Log 1 + Battle Deaths/population, Uppsala             1940         0.157           0        0.251      0.112         0.208                0.105
                                                                  (0.527)         (0)      (0.707)    (0.305)       (0.644)              (0.373)

Log 1 + Battle Deaths/population, Uppsala             1980         0.282         0.002      0.159      0.638         0.541                0.005
                                                                  (0.779)       (0.005)    (0.528)    (1.153)       (1.024)              (0.017)

Log of population                                     1940         9.136         9.349      8.738      9.557         9.010                9.261
                                                                  (1.455)       (1.344)    (1.192)    (1.756)       (1.530)              (1.393)

Log of population                                     1980         9.812         9.762      9.393     10.321         9.856                9.768
                                                                  (1.384)       (1.293)    (1.238)    (1.461)       (1.484)              (1.294)

Baseline predicted mortality                          1940         0.469         0.171      0.487      0.626         0.690                0.241
                                                                  (0.271)       (0.050)    (0.224)    (0.272)       (0.195)              (0.080)

Global predicted mortality                            1940         0.456         0.171      0.482      0.593         0.666                0.238
                                                                  (0.258)       (0.050)    (0.222)    (0.252)       (0.184)              (0.079)

Notes: The table reports the mean values of variables in the samples described in the column heading, with standard deviations in parentheses. Initially
rich countries had log GDP per capita over 8.4 in 1940, middle-income countries had log GDP per capita between 7.37 and 8.4, and low-income countries
had log GDP per capita below 7.37 in 1940. Predicted mortality is measured per 100 per year. Columns 6 and 7 report descriptive statistics for subsamples
in which change in predicted mortality between 1940 and 1980s was above or below the median value in the base sample (-0.405). Initially rich countries
have no civil wars recorded in the COW dataset in the 1940s and 1980s, and no conflict incidence according to the Fearon and Laitin and Uppsala sources
in the 1940s. See the text and Appendix Table 1 for details and definitions.




                                                                     30
 Table 2: Population and Conflict: OLS Estimates


Dependent variable...                 Fraction of decade in conflict
                                                                                  Log(1+Battle
                                                                Fearon
                                   COW         Uppsala                            Deaths/
                                                                & Laitin
                                                                                  Pop. 1940)

                                     (1)          (2)              (3)                  (4)

Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

log of population                 0.323***      0.271**          0.236*              0.722*
                                   (0.116)      (0.135)          (0.139)             (0.401)

Observations                         102          104              104                 104
R-squared                           0.177        0.145            0.098               0.102
Number of clusters                    50           51               51                  51

Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

log of population                 0.268***      0.311**          0.251*              0.738*
                                   (0.095)      (0.132)          (0.132)             (0.375)

Observations                         307          308              308                 273
R-squared                           0.086        0.146            0.113               0.106
Number of clusters                    63           63               63                  54

Panel C: long differences controlling for age structure, just 1940s and 1980s

log of population                 0.391***      0.316**          0.344**             1.043**
                                   (0.140)      (0.149)          (0.162)             (0.469)

share of population 15-34           -0.995       -0.529           -3.504              -4.852
                                   (1.271)      (1.544)          (2.805)             (4.678)

Observations                          86           88               88                  88
R-squared                           0.226        0.222            0.178               0.193
Number of clusters                    43           44               44                  44

Panel D: panel regressions controlling for age structure, 1940s-1980s

log of population                 0.331**       0.313**          0.265*              0.968**
                                  (0.124)       (0.153)          (0.148)             (0.442)

share of population 15-34         -1.068**      -1.050*           -2.095            -4.102**
                                   (0.490)      (0.599)          (1.432)             (1.858)

Observations                         227          228              228                 228
R-squared                           0.157        0.161            0.131               0.171
Number of clusters                    46           46               46                  46
Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at
the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation (4) in
the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Panels
A and C are long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial
date and one for the final date. Panels B and D are unbalanced panels with one observation per
decade. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single
cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.




                                               31
                                                Table 3: Predicted Mortality and Population:
                                                 First Stage Estimates and Basic Robustness


                                                               Dependent variable is log of population
                                                               Excluding            Low and              Global                         Excluding
                                          Base Sample           Eastern         Middle Income           Mortality                      Most Affected
                                                                Europe         Countries Only          Instrument                       By WWII
                                                (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)                              (5)

     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality           -0.782***          -0.700***                -0.764***                -0.818***                -0.811***
                                             (0.141)            (0.141)                  (0.191)                  (0.145)                  (0.140)

     Observations                              102                  92                       80                      102                      94




32
     R-squared                                0.823               0.847                    0.828                    0.823                    0.842
     Number of clusters                         50                  45                       39                       50                       46

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality           -0.464***          -0.402***                -0.471***                -0.681***                -0.476***
                                             (0.094)            (0.093)                  (0.131)                  (0.128)                  (0.095)

     Observations                              307                 278                      252                      307                      279
     R-squared                                0.792               0.819                    0.814                    0.814                    0.815
     Number of clusters                         63                  57                       52                       63                       57
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year
     and country fixed effects (equation (7) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Panel A presents
     long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. Panel B presents unbalanced
     panels with one observation per decade. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text
     and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                                                  Table 4: Predicted Mortality and Population:
                                                          First Stage Estimates and Robustness to Differential Trends


                                                                                                                        Dependent variable is log of population
                                                                 (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)                         (7)                (8)                 (9)               (10)
                                                                                                                       Interaction of post-year dummies with...

                                                                                                                                          Share             Diamond           Oil and Gas
                                                                                                  Log GDP               Log                                                                                            Ethnic
                                                                             Independent                                                Population         Production          Rents per            Ethnic                               Initial War
                                                           Institutions                           per capita         Population                                                                                      Fragmenta-
                                                                               in 1940                                                    15-34            per Capita           Capita            Polarization                            in 1930s
                                                                                                   in 1930            in 1930                                                                                           tion
                                                                                                                                         in 1940             in 1960            in 1960


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                            -0.730***         -0.815***          -0.600***           -0.762***          -0.747***          -0.776***           -0.808***          -0.599***           -0.587***          -0.935***
                                                              (0.167)           (0.175)            (0.219)             (0.126)            (0.197)            (0.138)             (0.138)            (0.148)             (0.168)            (0.189)




33
     Observations                                               102                102                100                102                  86                102                102                  96                 96                  88
     R-squared                                                 0.826              0.824              0.833              0.844               0.806              0.842              0.841               0.868              0.849               0.805
     Number of clusters                                          50                 50                 49                 50                  43                 50                 50                  47                 47                  44
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                               0.461              0.582             0.0952             0.00980              0.321              0.000              0.000             0.00432             0.0605               0.931
     indicated at the top of each column

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                            -0.437***         -0.484***           -0.361**           -0.446***          -0.440***          -0.460***           -0.478***          -0.337***           -0.330***          -0.559***
                                                              (0.113)           (0.120)             (0.146)            (0.086)            (0.128)            (0.093)             (0.092)            (0.096)             (0.107)            (0.126)

     Observations                                               307                300                267                265                 223                300                300                 277                277                 244
     R-squared                                                 0.810              0.797              0.818              0.798               0.773              0.801              0.809               0.849              0.835               0.757
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                             7.14e-05           0.00652            6.17e-10             0.0538            1.46e-08             0.000              0.000             0.000140           6.67e-05             0.0529
     indicated at the top of each column
     Number of clusters                                          63                61                  53                 52                  45                 61                 61                  56                 56                 50
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation (8) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered
     by country) are reported in parentheses. Panel A presents long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. Panel B presents unbalanced panels with one observation
     per decade. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                                Table 5: Reduced Forms and Falsification Exercises


                                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                    (6)

                                                                              Low and                               Low and                                   Low and
                                                                               Middle                                Middle                                    Middle
                                                              Base                                  Base                                 Base
                                                                               Income                                Income                                    Income
                                                             Sample                                Sample                               Sample
                                                                              Countries                             Countries                                 Countries
                                                                                Only                                  Only                                      Only

                                                                 Reduced Form                                             Falsification Exercises




34
                                                               Fraction of decade                   Fraction of decade
                                                                                                                                                   Log Population
     Dependent Variable is:                                        in conflict                          in conflict
                                                                                                                                                 Change 1900s-1940s
                                                               Change 1940s-1980s                   Change 1900s-1940s


     Change in predicted mortality, 1940-1980               -0.491***         -0.660***             0.085             0.197              -0.189                  -0.198
                                                             (0.179)           (0.236)             (0.055)           (0.126)            (0.138)                 (0.196)

     Observations                                               52                 41                 36                 28                52                     41
     R-squared                                                0.166              0.200              0.012              0.039             0.033                   0.029
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions (equation (9) in the text). Robust standard
     errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and
     Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                             Table 6: The Effect of Population on Conflict: 2SLS Estimates


                                                   Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict (cols 1-3, 5-7),
                                                      and Log of 1 + Battle Deaths/Pop. in 1940 (cols 4 and 8)

                                    Baseline Predicted Mortality (cols 1-4)                           Global Mortality Rate (cols 5-8)
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)                      (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)

                                                                         Log(1+Battle                                                  Log(1+Battle
                                 COW         Uppsala      Fearon &                            COW         Uppsala      Fearon &
                                                                           Deaths/                                                       Deaths/
                                                            Laitin        Pop. 1940)                                      Laitin        Pop. 1940)


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     log of population         0.617***      0.576**       0.879***         1.347**         0.624***       0.589**      0.872***           1.389**




35
                                (0.213)      (0.238)        (0.303)         (0.598)          (0.216)       (0.247)       (0.303)           (0.619)

     Observations                 102           104           104              104              102          104           104               104
     Number of clusters           50             51            51               51               50          51             51                51

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     log of population         0.609***        0.304        0.873*          1.106**         0.570***        0.341        0.761**           1.278**
                                (0.205)       (0.250)       (0.461)         (0.454)          (0.191)       (0.233)       (0.334)           (0.501)

     Observations                 307           308           308              273              307          308           308               273
     Number of clusters           63             63            63               54               63          63             63                54
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. 2SLS regressions with a full set of
     year and country fixed effects (equation (4) in the text, where population is instrumented by predicted mortality, as in equation (7) in the
     text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Panel A presents long-difference specifications with two
     observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. Panel B presents unbalanced panels with one observation per
     decade. First stages, for the sample with data on years in conflict according to COW, in columns 1 and 4 of Table 3. For clustered standard
     errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                                   Table 7: The Effect of Population on Conflict: 2SLS Estimates
                                                                 Robustness to Differential Trends


                                                                                            Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                                              (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)                            (9)             (10)
                                                                                                                 Interaction of post-year dummies with...

                                                                                                                                Share           Diamond           Oil and
                                                                                            Log GDP             Log                                                                 Ethnic           Ethnic            Initial
                                                                          Independent                                         Population       Production        Gas Rents
                                                         Institutions                       per Capita       Population                                                             Polari-         Fragmen-            War
                                                                            in 1940                                             15-34          per Capita        per Capita
                                                                                             in 1930          in 1930                                                               zation           tation           in 1930s
                                                                                                                               in 1940           in 1960          in 1960


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s


     log of population                                     0.748***          0.563**         1.132***         0.617***         0.839***          0.623***         0.596***          0.738**          0.737**          0.497**
                                                            (0.257)          (0.220)          (0.427)          (0.215)          (0.275)           (0.213)          (0.204)          (0.294)          (0.326)          (0.224)




36
     Observations                                             102              102              100              102               86               102              102               96               96               88
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                             0.106            0.515           0.0541            0.973             0.219          0.00626           0.0173            0.401            0.600             0.533
     indicated at the top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        50               50               49               50               43               50                50               47               47               44

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s


     log of population                                     0.706***         0.497***          1.150**         0.617***          0.632**          0.614***         0.592***          0.712**          0.569**          0.319**
                                                            (0.252)          (0.166)          (0.457)          (0.211)          (0.250)           (0.204)          (0.197)          (0.303)          (0.270)          (0.136)

     Observations                                             307              300              267              265               223              300              300              277              277               220
     p-value for post year dummies x variable
     indicated at the top of each column                     0.165           0.0707           0.0640            0.0160           0.0856            0.000           0.0958            0.562            0.111           0.00636
     variable indicated at the top of each col-
     umn
     Number of clusters                                        63               61               53               52               45               61                61               56               56               44
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. 2SLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation (10) in the text, where
     population is instrumented by predicted mortality, as in equation (7) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations
     per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. First stages in Table 4. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix
     Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                              Table 8: The Effect of Population on Conflict: 2SLS Estimates
                                                                     Basic Robustness


                                                            Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                      (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)                                       (8)

                                                                         Low and                                                                         Base
                                                                                                                Excluding            Base                                      Adding
                                                     Excluding            Middle              Global                                                    Sample
                                    Base                                                                          Most              Sample                                    Population
                                                      Eastern             Income             Mortality                                                  Assign
                                   Sample                                                                        Affected         Assign 1950                                  15-34 as
                                                      Europe             Countries          Instrument                                                  1946-49
                                                                                                                By WWII             to 1940                                   Covariate
                                                                           Only                                                                         to 1940

     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     log of population            0.617***            0.657***           0.828***            0.624***            0.610***            0.420**            0.640***                0.704***




37
                                   (0.213)             (0.240)            (0.294)             (0.216)             (0.215)            (0.198)             (0.226)                 (0.228)

     Observations                     102                 92                 80                 102                  94                102                 102                      86
     Number of clusters               50                  45                 39                  50                  46                 50                  50                      43

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     log of population            0.609***            0.649***           0.862***            0.570***            0.615***            0.276**            0.649***                0.526**
                                   (0.205)             (0.241)            (0.307)             (0.191)             (0.211)            (0.110)             (0.236)                (0.212)

     Observations                     307                278                 252                307                 279                307                 307                     227
     Number of clusters               63                  57                  52                 63                  57                 63                  63                      46
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. 2SLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation
     (4) in the text, where population is instrumented by predicted mortality, as in equation (7) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses.
     Panel A presents long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. Panel B presents unbalanced panels with one
     observation per decade. First stages for columns 1-5, and 8 in columns 1-5 of Table 3. First stages of columns 6-7 are in column 1 of Table 3. For clustered standard errors,
     Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
      Table 9: Timing of the Effect of Population on Conflict: 2SLS Estimates


                                               Dependent variable is
                           fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                         (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)
Panel A: Baseline Predicted Mortality

                         Just 1940s       Just 1940s       Just 1940s       Just 1940s         Just 1940s
Long differences
                         and 1960s        and 1970s        and 1980s        and 1990s          and 2000s


log of population            0.389          0.600**          0.617***         0.409**             0.296**
                            (0.304)         (0.237)           (0.213)         (0.164)             (0.144)

Observations             102                   102              102              102                102
Number of clusters        50                    50               50               50                50
Panel B: Global Mortality

                         Just 1940s       Just 1940s       Just 1940s       Just 1940s         Just 1940s
Long differences
                         and 1960         and 1970s        and 1980s        and 1990s          and 2000s

log of population            0.461          0.574**          0.624***         0.384***            0.272**
                            (0.345)         (0.229)           (0.216)          (0.147)            (0.131)

Observations                  102              102              102              102                102
Number of clusters             50               50               50               50                50
Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
2SLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation (4) in the text, where population
is instrumented by predicted mortality, as in equation (7) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by
country) are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for
the initial date and one for the final date. First stages for columns Panel A in column 1 of of Table 3, and for
Panel B in column 4 of Table 3. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a
single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.




                                                      38
                 Table 10: The Effect of Population on Conflict:
Controlling Flexibly for the Impact of Initial Conflict and Convergence Dynamics,
                                Using Panel Data


                                          Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict
                                                  according to Correlates of War

                                              Baseline                 Including Initial War in 1940,
                                             Specification              Interacted with Time Dummies

                                          2SLS          2SLS           2SLS          2SLS           GMM
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)

          Initial War is fraction of decade in conflict in the 1940s

          log of population             0.609***      0.606***       0.584***      0.266**         0.238**
                                         (0.205)       (0.207)        (0.181)      (0.107)         (0.105)
          lagged conflict                                                           -0.002          0.157
                                                                                   (0.082)         (0.114)

          Observations                     307            281           281           272             235
          Number of countries              65             58            58            57              49
          Number of clusters               63             56            56            56
          Moments                                                                                     38
          Hansen p-value                                                                             0.392
          AR2 p-value                                                                                0.525
          Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the
          1% level. 2SLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (equation (8) in the
          text). Column 2 restricts the sample to the set of countries for which there is available data
          on “initial” (in the 1940s) conflict, measured as the fraction of decade in conflict. Columns
          3, 4, and 5 include a full set of year dummies interacted with initial war. Arellano and Bonds
          GMM estimator (col. 5) removes country fixed effects by taking first differences and then
          constructs moment conditions using all predetermined lags of conflict and predicted mortality
          as instruments. It is estimated in two steps and thus is optimally weighted. Robust standard
          errors corrected for arbitrary serial correlation clustered at the country level (Bangladesh,
          India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster) are reported in cols. 1, 2, 3, and 4, and
          robust standard errors are reported in col. 5. Unbalanced panels with one observation per
          decade. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.




                                                           39
                                                               Table A-1: Variables and Sources

     Variable               Description                                                                                                          Source

                                                                                 Social Conflict

     Years in conflict/     Ratio of the number of years with an internal conflict to total years assigned to reference date. Assignment of years to reference dates and exact
     Total years            definition of internal conflict varies by data source, as detailed below.

                            Number of years with intra-state war (wars that predominantly take place within the recognized territory of a
                            state). These wars include civil wars for central control (type 4 in the COW typology) or over local issues (type
                            5), as well as regional internal (type 6) and intercommunal (type 7) wars. Each war in the dataset may list more
                            than one participating country. For example, the “Overthrow of Abd el-Aziz” involves Morocco and France,
                            and the “First Lebanese” war involves Lebanon and the US. Despite French and American involvement, we take           Intra-State War Data (v4.0), Corre-
     COW                    these as civil wars in Morocco and Lebanon, as fighting took place in their territory. The threshold for inclusion   lates of War (COW).
                            in the dataset is 1,000 battle-related deaths per year (twelve-month period beginning with the start date of         Sarkees and Wayman (2010).
                            the war) among all the qualified war participants, including deaths from combat wounds or from diseases
                            contracted in the war theater. Assignment to reference dates: 1900=1900-09, 1940=1940-49, 1950=1950-59
                            ... 1990=90-1999, 2000=2000-2007. Downloaded from http://www.correlatesofwar.org/data-sets.htmlast
                            accessed on March 24, 2017.

                            Number of years with any incidence of an “internal armed conflict” or of “internationalized internal armed
                            conflict”. Armed conflict is defined to include all contested incompatibilities that concern government or
                                                                                                                                                 UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset,
                            territory or both where the use of armed force between two parties results in at least 25 battle-related deaths.
     Uppsala                                                                                                                                     Version 4-2008.
                            Of the two parties, at least one is the government of a state. Assignment to reference dates: 1940=1946-49,
                                                                                                                                                 Geldtisch et. al (2002).




40
                            1950=1950-59 ... 1990=1990-99, 2000=2000-2008. Downloaded with PRIO’s Battle Deaths Dataset 3.0 (see
                            below).

                            Number of years with violent civil conflicts that: (1) involved fighting between agents of (or claimants to) a
                            state and organized, nonstate groups who sought either to take control of a government, to take power in a
                            region, or to use violence to change government policies, (2) killed at least 1,000 over its course, with a yearly
     Fearon and Laitin                                                                                                                           Fearon and Laitin (2003)
                            average of at least 100, (3) At least 100 were killed on both sides (including civilians attacked by rebels).
                            Counts anticolonial wars as occurring within the empire in question (e.g., Algeria is assigned to France).
                            Assignment to reerence dates: : 1940=1945-49, 1950=1950-59 ... 1980=1980-89, 1990=1990-99.

     Log(1+Battle Deaths/
                            “Best estimate” of annual battle-related deaths for use with UCDP/PRIO dataset.            As-
     No. of years)                                                                                                                               PRIO Battle Deaths Dataset version
                            signment to reference dates as in UCDP/PRIO dataset.             Population in 1940 from Maddi-
     and                                                                                                                                         3.0.
                            son (2006),see below.  Downloaded from http://www.prio.org/Data/Armed-Conflict/Battle-Deaths/
     Log(1+Battle Deaths/                                                                                                                        Lacina and Gleditsch (2005)
                            The-Battle-Deaths-Dataset-version-30/, last accessed March 24, 2017.
     Pop. in 1940)

                                                                                    Population

     Log of Population      Total Population per country in 1900, 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 1990, 2000.                                Maddison (2006)

                                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                      Table A-1 Variables and sources – continued from previous page
     Variable                  Description                                                                                                         Source

                                                                                                                                                   1950-1980: UN demographic database
                                                                                                                                                   (https://unstats.un.org/unsd/
     Share of
                               Percentage of the population ages 15-34 for 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000.                               demographic/).    1940: UN Demo-
     population 15-34
                                                                                                                                                   graphic Yearbook 1948 (United
                                                                                                                                                   Nations 1949, Table 4, pp. 108-158).

                                                                                         Health

                                                                                                                                                   Acemoglu
     Life Expectancy           Life expectancy at birth per country in 1900, 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 1990, 2000.
                                                                                                                                                   and Johnson (2007)

                               Sum of country’s initial (in 1940) mortality rate from 15 diseases until there is a global intervention, and
                               after the global intervention, the mortality rate from the disease in question declines to the frontier mortal-
     Predicted Mortality                                                                                                                           Acemoglu
                               ity rate. See paper for mathematical formula. 15 diseases are (in rough descending order of importance):
     Instrument                                                                                                                                    and Johnson (2007)
                               malaria, pneumonia, and tuberculosis; influenza, cholera, typhoid, smallpox, shigella dysentery, whooping
                               cough, measles (rubeola), dyphteria, scarlet fever, yellow fever, plague, typhus.
                               Sum of the products of each country’s initial (in 1940) mortality rate from 10 diseases and the ratio between
                               the global mortality at time t to the initial (in 1940) global mortality from the disease in question. See paper
                               for mathematical formula. Diseases are as for Predicted Mortality except yellow fever and dysentery/diarrhea
     Global Mortality          for which it was not possible to track the diseases through changes in the classification of death over time.
                                                                                                                                                   Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)
     Instrument                We also exclude cholera, typhoid, and plague since their were often not available for our extended sample
                               of countries. Global Mortality is the unweighted average across countries in the sample of 59 countries (47




41
                               non-Eastern European countries and 12 countries with life expectancy data since 1950, see “Base Sample”
                               below)

                                                                                         Others

                               Includes Acemoglu and Johnson’s (2007) list of 47 non-Eastern Europe countries (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
                               Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, India,
                               Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, South Korea, Rep., Malaysia, Mexico, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
                               Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela); the
     Base Sample               set of 12 additional countries for which they have life expectancy data since 1950 (Algeria, Bolivia, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, Singapore,
                               South Africa, Tunisia, Turkey and Vietnam); and 6 countries from Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and
                               Russian Federation). This implies a total of 65 countries, but not all have all variables for all years. In particular, 13 countries lack population data
                               and/or had not yet been created in 1940 (Algeria, Bangladesh, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Russia, Singapore, South Africa,
                               Tunisia, and Vietnam). Also, Austria is excluded in 1940 when the dependent variables are from COW since it enters the COW state system in the
                               1950s.
     Initially rich,           Each category is defined using the top, middle, and lowest third group of countries in the base sample based on income per capita in 1940. Initially
     middle-income,            rich countries had log GDP per capita over 8.4. in 1940; middle income had log GDP per capita betweeen 7.37 and 8.4; and low income countries
     and poor countries        had log GDP per capita below 7.37 in 1940.

     Country clusters          For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster.

     Countries most affected                                                                                                                       Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)
                               Austria, China, Finland, Germany, Italy, Russian Federation
     by World War II                                                                                                                               based on Urlanis (2003)
                                                                                                                                                                Continued on next page
                                                   Table A-1 Variables and sources – continued from previous page
     Variable               Description                                                                                                          Source


                                                                    Controls and Baseline characteristics

     Institutions           Average of constraints on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970                                                       Polity IV

     Independent in 1940    =1 if country is independent in 1940, 0 otherwise                                                                    Own coding.

     Initial GDP            Logarithm of GDP per capita in 1930                                                                                  Maddison (2006)

                            Oil Production and Oil Production per capita in 1960; Diamond Production and Diamond
     Natural Resources                                                                                                                           Humphreys (2005)
                            Production per capita in 1960
                            Share of natural resource sector in GNP in 1970; Share of mineral produciton in GNP in 1971                          Sachs and Warner (1999)
                            Oil and gas rents per capita in 1960                                                                                 Ross (2008)

     Ethnic and religious   Ethnic Polarization; Ethnic Fragmentation; Religious Polarization; Religious Fragmentation                           Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005)
                            Ethnolinguistic fractionalization index (from 0 to 1). Average value of five indices based on ethnic or linguistic
     composition and                                                                                                                             Easterly and Levine (1997)
                            characteristics of the population.
     polarization           Share of Muslim, Catholic and Protestant Populations in 1980                                                         La Porta et al (1999).




42
Tables below here are not for
         publication




              43
                                                              Table A-2: Conflict and Predicted Mortality
                                                                    Reduced Form Basic Robustness


                                                                    Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                                  (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)                                     (8)

                                                                                                                                                                       Base
                                                                                     Low and
                                                                                                                            Excluding             Base                Sample            Adding
                                                                 Excluding            Middle              Global
                                                Base                                                                          Most               Sample               Assign           Population
                                                                  Eastern             Income             Mortality
                                               Sample                                                                        Affected          Assign 1950           centering          15-34 as
                                                                  Europe             Countries          Instrument
                                                                                                                            By WWII              to 1940              1946-49          Covariate
                                                                                       Only
                                                                                                                                                                      to 1940

     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality             -0.782***          -0.700***           -0.764***           -0.818***           -0.811***           -0.782***          -0.782***           -0.848***
                                               (0.141)            (0.141)             (0.191)             (0.145)             (0.140)             (0.141)            (0.141)             (0.173)




44
     Observations                                102                  92                  80                 102                 94                 102                 102                  86
     R-squared                                  0.823               0.847               0.828               0.823              0.842               0.823               0.823               0.832
     Number of clusters                           50                  45                  39                  50                 46                  50                  50                  43

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality             -0.461***          -0.402***           -0.470***           -0.689***           -0.460***           -0.461***          -0.461***           -0.483***
                                               (0.094)            (0.093)             (0.129)             (0.128)             (0.096)             (0.094)            (0.094)             (0.118)

     Observations                                314                 285                 259                 314                285                 314                 314                 229
     R-squared                                  0.794               0.820               0.816               0.817              0.819               0.794               0.794               0.756
     Number of clusters                           63                  57                  52                  63                 57                  63                  63                  46
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (regressions
     as in equation (4) in the text, using predicted mortality instead of log population as a regressor). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses.
     Panel A presents long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. Panel B presents unbalanced panels with one
     observation per decade. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and
     details.
                                                                     Table A-3: Conflict and Predicted Mortality
                                                                   Reduced Form Robustness to Differential Trends


                                                                                                 Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)                                 (9)              (10)
                                                                                                                      Interaction of post-year dummies with...

                                                                                                                                      Share            Diamond            Oil and
                                                                                                Log GDP              Log                                                                     Ethnic            Ethnic             Initial
                                                                              Independent                                           Population        Production         Gas Rents
                                                            Institutions                        per Capita        Population                                                                 Polari-          Fragmen-             War
                                                                                in 1940                                               15-34           per Capita         per Capita
                                                                                                 in 1930           in 1930                                                                   zation            tation            in 1930s
                                                                                                                                     in 1940            in 1960           in 1960



     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                            -0.730***         -0.815***         -0.600***         -0.762***         -0.747***         -0.776***          -0.808***         -0.599***         -0.587***         -0.935***
                                                              (0.167)           (0.175)           (0.219)           (0.126)           (0.197)           (0.138)            (0.138)           (0.148)           (0.168)           (0.189)




45
     Observations                                                102               102               100               102                86               102               102                96                96                88
     R-squared                                                  0.826             0.824             0.833             0.844             0.806             0.842             0.841             0.868             0.849             0.805
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                                0.461             0.582            0.0952           0.00980             0.321                0                 0             0.00432            0.0605            0.931
     indicated at the top of each column
     Number of clusters                                           50                50                49                50                43                50                50                47                47                44

     Panel B: panel regressions,1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                            -0.426***         -0.468***          -0.354**         -0.450***         -0.430***         -0.457***          -0.475***         -0.343***         -0.326***         -0.553***
                                                              (0.111)           (0.114)            (0.139)          (0.086)           (0.126)           (0.093)            (0.092)           (0.091)           (0.101)           (0.126)

     Observations                                                314               306               273               270               225               306               306               283               283               220
     R-squared                                                  0.812             0.799             0.816             0.799             0.773             0.803             0.811             0.851             0.837             0.754
     p-value for post year dummies x variable
                                                              8.97e-05           0.0113           3.89e-10           0.0513           1.16e-08               0                 0            0.000312          0.000472            0.0228
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                           63                61                53                52                45                61                61                56                56                44
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (regressions as in equation (10) in the text,
     using predicted mortality instead of (instrumented) log population as a regressor). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations
     per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions
     and details.
                                                         Table A-4: Predicted Mortality and Age Structure


                                                                                      Dependent variable is share of population ages 15-34
                                               (1)             (2)                    (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)                              (7)             (8)
                                           Baseline predicted mortality           Global mortality instrument Baseline predicted mortality                        Global mortality instrument
                                                             Low and                               Low and                        Low and                                          Low and
                                                              Middle                                Middle                         Middle                                           Middle
                                              Base                                   Base                            Base                                            Base
                                                             Income                                 Income                        Income                                            Income
                                             Sample                                 Sample                         Sample                                          Sample
                                                            Countries                              Countries                     Countries                                         Countries
                                                              Only                                   Only                           Only                                             Only




46
                                                         Long differences, just 1940s and 1980s                                         Long differences, just 1940s and 1990s

     baseline predicted mortality               0.004              -0.000              0.005              0.001               -0.028             -0.030              -0.030               -0.032
                                               (0.017)            (0.028)             (0.018)            (0.031)             (0.019)            (0.035)             (0.021)              (0.039)

     Observations                                 86                 64                  86                64                   86                  64                 86                   64
     R-squared                                  0.017              0.025               0.017              0.026               0.057               0.038              0.057                0.038
     Number of clusters                           43                 32                  43                 32                  43                  32                 43                   32
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects (regressions as
     in equation (4) in the text, using share of population ages 15-34 instead of conflict as dependent variable). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses.
     For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                                         Table A-5: Population and Predicted Mortality
                                                    First Stage Robustness to Additional Differential Trends


                                                                                                       Dependent variable is log of population
                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)                    (7)                 (8)
                                                                                                       Interaction of post-year dummies with...
                                                           Share of
                                                                            Share of                                                                               Average           Share
                                                             GDP
                                                                            Mineral            Oil             Diamond                           Religious          Ethno-          Catholic
                                                          in Natural                                                           Religious
                                                                           Production       Production        Production                         Fragmen-         linguistic        Muslim
                                                           Resource                                                           Polarization
                                                                            in GNP           in 1960            in 1960                           tation          Fragmen-         Protestant
                                                             Sector
                                                                            in 1971                                                                                 tation          in 1980
                                                            in 1970


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                           -0.495**        -0.661***        -0.796***         -0.772***        -0.562***        -0.636***        -0.777***         -0.584***
                                                             (0.191)         (0.145)          (0.137)           (0.138)          (0.174)          (0.152)          (0.201)           (0.185)




47
     Observations                                              68                92              102              102               96                96              102              100
     R-squared                                               0.888             0.853            0.844            0.837            0.848             0.845            0.823            0.842
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                             0.953             0.167          1.63e-09          0.0126            0.0515           0.0588            0.961            0.158
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        33               45                50               50               47               47                50                 49

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                           -0.268**        -0.379***        -0.469***         -0.455***        -0.312***        -0.362***        -0.429***         -0.359***
                                                             (0.116)         (0.095)          (0.092)           (0.092)          (0.110)          (0.098)          (0.119)           (0.123)

     Observations                                             197               273              306              306              283               283              298              301
     R-squared                                               0.871             0.835            0.813            0.801            0.839             0.829            0.804            0.834
     p-value for post year dummies x variable
                                                            8.97e-06         1.97e-05             0            7.52e-06          1.57e-07         0.000311         0.000516         2.44e-10
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        38               54                61               61               56               56                59                 60
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects
     (equation (8) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for
     the initial date and one for the final date. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1
     for definitions and details.
                                                           Table A-6: Conflict and Population
                                                2SLS Estimates Robustness to Additional Differential Trends


                                                                            Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)                               (8)
                                                                                                 Interaction of post-year dummies with...
                                                            Share of
                                                                            Share of                                                                                Average           Share
                                                              GDP
                                                                            Mineral             Oil            Diamond                            Religious          Ethno-          Catholic
                                                           in Natural                                                           Religious
                                                                           Production        Production       Production                          Fragmen-         linguistic        Muslim
                                                            Resource                                                           Polarization
                                                                            in GNP            in 1960           in 1960                            tation          Fragmen-         Protestant
                                                              Sector
                                                                            in 1971                                                                                  tation          in 1980
                                                             in 1970


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     log of population                                      1.415**          0.720***         0.605***          0.627***          0.848**         0.772***          0.555**           0.965**
                                                            (0.558)           (0.265)          (0.206)           (0.214)          (0.371)          (0.288)          (0.275)           (0.380)




48
     Observations                                              68                92              102               102               96               96               102                 100
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                             0.0553           0.0632           0.00768           0.0358            0.365            0.270             0.678            0.161
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        33                45               50               50                47               47               50                  49

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     log of population                                      1.498**          0.667***         0.600***          0.618***          0.710**          0.672**          0.356**           0.945**
                                                            (0.668)           (0.259)          (0.203)           (0.205)          (0.353)          (0.275)          (0.181)           (0.410)

     Observations                                              191              267              300               300              277              277               292                 295
     p-value for post year dummies x variable
                                                              0.165           0.0166            0.0804          6.62e-11           0.701            0.472             0.147            0.441
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        38                54               61               61                56               56               59                  60
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. 2SLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects
     (equation (10) in the text). Robust standard errors (clustered by country) are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for
     the initial date and one for the final date. For clustered standard errors, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. First stages in Table A-5. See the text
     and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
                                                       Table A-7: Conflict and Predicted Mortality
                                                 Reduced Form Robustness to Additional Differential Trends


                                                                           Dependent variable is fraction of decade in conflict according to Correlates of War
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)                               (8)
                                                                                                Interaction of post-year dummies with...
                                                           Share of
                                                                            Share of                                                                               Average           Share
                                                             GDP
                                                                            Mineral            Oil             Diamond                           Religious          Ethno-          Catholic
                                                          in Natural                                                           Religious
                                                                           Production       Production        Production                         Fragmen-         linguistic        Muslim
                                                           Resource                                                           Polarization
                                                                            in GNP           in 1960            in 1960                           tation          Fragmen-         Protestant
                                                             Sector
                                                                            in 1971                                                                                 tation          in 1980
                                                            in 1970


     Panel A: long differences, just 1940s and 1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                          -0.700***         -0.476**        -0.481***         -0.484***        -0.477**          -0.492**         -0.431**         -0.563***
                                                            (0.232)           (0.182)         (0.178)           (0.179)          (0.228)           (0.201)          (0.199)          (0.208)




49
     Observations                                              68                92              102              102               96                96              102              100
     R-squared                                               0.331             0.210            0.195            0.196            0.194             0.194            0.199            0.265
     p-value for post year dummy x variable
                                                             0.0319            0.331            0.551            0.115            0.942             0.924            0.660            0.212
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        33               45                50               50               47               47                50                 49

     Panel B: panel regressions, 1940s-1980s

     baseline predicted mortality                          -0.370***        -0.247***        -0.285***         -0.292***         -0.204*          -0.231**        -0.185***         -0.318***
                                                            (0.131)          (0.084)          (0.086)           (0.088)          (0.107)           (0.099)         (0.068)           (0.114)

     Observations                                             192               271              305              305              281               281              295              300
     R-squared                                               0.116             0.094            0.077            0.078            0.090             0.086            0.097            0.136
     p-value for post year dummies x variable
                                                             0.397             0.365            0.832          8.41e-10           0.660             0.633           0.0599           0.0460
     indicated at top of each column
     Number of clusters                                        38               54                61               61               56               56                59                 60
     Notes: * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. OLS regressions with a full set of year and country fixed effects
     (regressions as in equation (10) in the text, using predicted mortality instead of (instrumented) log population as a regressor). Robust standard errors (clustered by country)
     are reported in parentheses. Long-difference specifications with two observations per country, one for the initial date and one for the final date. For clustered standard errors,
     Bangladesh, India and Pakistan are considered a single cluster. See the text and Appendix Table A-1 for definitions and details.
