NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID THE REFORM FIX THE LONDON FIX PROBLEM?
Takatoshi Ito
Masahiro Yamada
Working Paper 23327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23327

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

The first author acknowledges financial support Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
A-25245044. The authors are grateful to comments on an earlier version by Shmuel Baruch,
Alain Chaboud, Robert Engle, Martin Evans, Michael Melvin, Carol Osler and Sadayoshi
Takaya. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23327.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Takatoshi Ito and Masahiro Yamada. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Did the Reform Fix the London Fix Problem?
Takatoshi Ito and Masahiro Yamada
NBER Working Paper No. 23327
April 2017
JEL No. D43,D47,F30,F31,F33,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the consequences of the 2015 reform on the London fixing in the interbank
forex market, which resulted from finding and imposing a penalty on banks’ collusive behavior
around the fixing window. The banks changed their behavior after the reform, and the volume
spike in the fixing window disappeared. However, the anomalies on price dynamics reported in
the previous literature still exist, and banks’ passive trading strategy generates another
predictability in the price movement. A theoretical model of optimal execution is used to calibrate
the execution of fixing transactions by banks, and evaluate the increase in the cost and risks of
fixing trades incurred by the banks' behavior. This paper is the first to examine the efficiency of
banks’ behavior after the reform. The volume pattern during the fixing time window suggests that
banks, by avoiding (even the appearance of) collusion, now incur the costs of executing
customers’ orders.

Takatoshi Ito
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
International Affairs Building
Room 927, (MC 3333)
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu
Masahiro Yamada
Hitotsubashi University
2-1 Naka
Kunitachi, Tokyo, 186-8601
Japan
m.yamada@r.hit-u.ac.jp

1 Introduction
This paper examines the exchange rate (price) and trading volume behaviors in pre-, during, and
post-fixing time windows in the London market, with a comparison of periods before and after the
reform of the fixing method in February 2015. The reform was brought about by the discovery of
banks colluding before the start of fixing window by sharing information regarding customers’
orders. Banks were heavily penalized for the behavior. The banks significantly modified their trading
strategies around the fixing window after the reform, which changed the fixing window from 1
minute to 5 minutes. We document the changes in the price and volume patterns before and after the
reform, and evaluate those consequences using a theoretical model of optimal execution. This paper
is the first to examine the efficiency of banks’ behavior after the reform. The volume pattern during
the fixing time window suggests that banks, by avoiding (even the appearance of) collusion, now
incur the costs of executing customers’ orders.
“Fixing” is a practice in the foreign exchange market to determine the bid-ask mid-point exchange
rate (fixing price) in a transparent formula at a pre-determined time of the day. The fixing price is
used to the settlement of foreign exchange transactions between banks and bank’s customers
including broker-dealers, institutional investors, insurance companies, exporters and importers and
for valuation of foreign securities and mutual funds, as well as derivatives on the financial
institutions’ balance sheets. Using the fixing price, bank customers are reassured in that they are not
discriminated among themselves by the bank, and valuations reflect the market fairly and
transparently.
In London, WM/Reuters announces the fixing price just after 4:00 pm, based on transaction prices
in the one-minute window around 4:00 pm (that is, from 15:59:30 to 16:00:30). The WM/Reuters 4
pm fixing rate is calculated as the median of sampled transactions during the one-minute window.
The WM/Reuters fix is widely used as the exchange rates for customer trades in the London and
New York markets, and as the exchange rate to value financial products on the book. In the 24-hour
cycle, transaction volumes are highest around 1:00 pm to 4:00 pm in London (8 am to 11:00 am in
New York). After the 4:00 pm fixing in London, transaction volumes and price volatility quickly
diminish. The banks have accumulated the customer orders of the day by 4:00 pm London so that
there will be no large exposures after the 4:00 pm fixing.
The fixing poses as a profit opportunity for banks if they can manipulate the fixing price away
from the prevailing market price. When a bank realizes that the bank was asked to sell more dollars
than to buy dollars from bank’s customers, it may profit from bidding up the fixing price higher
(dollar appreciation) than prices of other times of the day. Suppose that the bank can quote 100.10
yen/dollar for retail customers as the fixing price, while the bank can buy the dollar in the interbank
market at 100.00 yen, then the bank can earn the extra profit of 0.1 yen per dollar. However, for this
to transpire, the fixing price had to be “manipulated” to be higher than other times (around the fixing
2

time), and the amount of net buy from retail customers had to be known. Such an attempt by banks to
affect the market price before the fixing is called “pre-hedge”. Whether this can be done in a deep
liquid market like the foreign exchange market is a big question.
The banks’ behavior around the London WM/Reuters 4:00 pm fixing is a target of an
investigation by regulatory authorities. We summarized the timeline regarding the Forex benchmark
scandal in Table 1. The investigation was first reported in the media on June 12, 2013, followed by
other occasional media reporting.1 In the wake of these investigations, several traders were
suspended and resulted in penalties imposed on several large banks in London trading. In addition, a
Bank of England employee was suspended.2 There was evidence of information exchange on
customer order flows of several large banks, which constituted collusion. However, no direct
evidence was presented (in public) in the manner of price behavior or manipulation.
The investigations resulted in large fines on several banks for a collusion through the sharing of
customers’ order information.3 Evidence mostly based on the readings of chat room records was
supplemented by case studies of particular banks behavior in particular days. In essence, when banks
can figure out via chats customer order imbalances then banks can bid up or down depending on the
direction of imbalances, to manipulate the fix rate that was determined as a median of transactions
exchange rates (price) during the fixing window that was for one minute around 4 pm.
In response to the concerns over the Forex benchmarks, the Financial Stability Board (FSB)
formed a working group that undertook an analysis of the Forex market structure and incentives
regarding the particular trading activities around the fixings. The working group published a report in
July, and the FSB published a final report in September 2014 (Financial Stability Board (2014)). The
report points out the large spike in trading volume in and around the fixing window and expresses
concern over the incentive for dealers to try to influence the exchange rate. The recommendations by
the group included widening the fixing window (from 1 minute to 5 minutes) and minimizing the
conflicts of interest arising from managing customer flow within banks.
On February 15, 2015, based on the FSB recommendations of September 2014, the WM
widened the fixing window in London that is used to calculate benchmark rates from 1 minute for
1

On June 12, 2013, Bloomberg broke the story first, and followed by Financial Times. Subsequent
reporting was in Bloomberg (2013, August 27, and December 19), Financial Times (2014, February 16,
March 21, March 25, March 27, March 31) and Reuters (2014, March 11).
According to the Economist on March 8, 2014: “On March 5th the Bank of England announced that it
too had suspended an official following an internal investigation.”
2

3

On November 12, 2014, the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) imposed £1.1 billion ($1.7 billion) fines on
five banks “for failing to control business practices in their G10 spot foreign exchange trading operations”: Citibank $358
million, HSBC $343 million, JPMorgan $352 million, RBS $344 million and UBS $371 million. See
https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-fines-five-banks-%C2%A311-billion-fx-failings-and-announces-industry
-wide. On May 20, 2015, FCA imposed £284 fines on Barclays Other authorities, including Federal Reserves,
Department of Justice, and Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), imposed fines. In total, about 10 billion
dollars were imposed on 7 banks.

3

‘traded’ currencies and 2 minutes for ‘non-traded’ currencies, to 5 minutes for all currency pairs. We
will take the change on February 15, 2015 as the “reform” in the rest of the paper.
In the 2015 FSB progress report, they examined the EBS and Reuters tick data over three months
after the reform. They find that the increase of trading volume around the fix spread over 5 minutes
after the reform, from the one-minute before the reform, and the liquidity (measured by the bid-ask
spread) also increased in the five minutes fixing window. More importantly, they report that the
trading volume now spread more evenly over time, while it was more concentrated at the beginning
of the fixing window before. They relate this finding to the increased use of algorithmic execution.
They also note on the “pre-hedging” behavior by banks (Financial Stability Board (2015)): “A rise in
trading volume is evident once the fixing window is open, with little or no pre-hedging taking place
through either the EBS or TRM platforms.”
As another result of the reform, they report the charging for fixing transactions by sell-side banks.
Because banks suffer from the risk that the fixing transaction causes, which might be covered by the
misconduct before, after the reform, their pricing methodologies charge for fixing transactions, such
as applying a bid-ask spread and charging a fixed fee.
The objectives of this paper are three-fold. First, we examine the price, volume, and liquidity
behavior at the 4:00 pm “fixing” in London. In the literature, several papers have examined a
24-hour cycle of price volatility, bid-ask spread, and order flows, as well as volumes. This paper will
extend what we know from the existing literature on high-frequency data to a specific institution of
fixing. More specifically, we re-examine the anomaly of price behavior relating the fixing that was
reported by Evans (2014). Second, we provide an evaluation of the reform, by analyzing data before
and after the reform. This is an extension of the findings by Financial Stability Board (2015). Third,
we provide a model-based analysis on the cost and risk that the banks pay for the fixing transactions.
The existing literature mostly focuses on the volume spikes around the fixing time. It is well
known that transaction volumes tend to skyrocket at Tokyo 10 am fixing and London 4:00 pm fixing
(Chaboud et al. (2004), Melvin and Prins (2015)).4 Associated with this volume spike, the price is
also affected (Evans (2014)). In contrast to the other market event such as macro announcements, the
price jumps and spikes during the fixing window, representing only temporary order imbalances and
liquidity shortages, which is expected not to result in such jumps to a new equilibrium.
Before the reform, the price and volume behavior around the fix were very unusual. First, the path
of price showed a reversal after the end of fixing the window, and the reversal is particularly
reinforced at each end-of-month trading day (Evans (2014)).5 Second, the volatility in pre- and the
4

In addition to the London 4pm fixing, there are other times of the day that have spikes in trading
volumes: Tokyo 9:55 am fixing, US macro announcement times, New York option cut at 3pm. For the Tokyo
fixing, see Ito and Yamada (2016).
5

Melvin and Prins (2015) also report the past positive equity return in a country is associated
with the currency depreciation of that country at the end of month fixing. Equity investors hedge the
4

post-fixing period is abnormally high (Evans (2014)). This imposes a doubt on the fixing rate as a
fair benchmark of the intraday exchange rate. Again, this unusually high volatility is more evident at
end of month trading days. Third, the trading volume is the larger in the first-half of fixing window
than that in the second-half. Supposedly, this fact relates to the pre-hedging behavior of banks.
Even after the reform, the total trading volume during the fixing window has not necessarily
reduced. This implies that the demand for fixing trade is still high and the investigation on the
unusual patterns at the fixing is necessary. We confirm that the second observation still holds. The
first observation also holds but the pattern is relatively weakened, and the pattern also changed. The
large part of the third observation disappeared.
Finally, we quantitatively evaluate the cost and risk for fixing traders. Although the changes in the
patterns of liquidity provision are evident, the effect on total cost of fixing traders is still not clear.
Related to this, most sell-side respondents to the Foreign Exchange Committee (FXC) surveys,
conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, had largely implemented the recommendation
to charge for fixing transactions for 4 pm London fixing, after the February 2015 reform (FSB 2015
document). Although the bid-ask spread during the fixing windows had decreased, the depth had
become the thinner than before. Evaluation of cost for fixing traders is particularly important.
Based on the optimal execution model and using high-frequency data on the limit order book, we
calibrate the behavior of fixing traders.6 The calibration provides the predictions of trade pattern and
the estimates of trading cost and risk. Our conclusion is that the reduction of transaction cost for
fixing traders after the widening of the fixing window is not large enough to offset the increase of
risk. Moreover, if the traders are not allowed, or are discouraged, to use pre-hedge, which is the
prescription of the model, the transaction cost increases dramatically.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 will describe the EBS tick-by-tick data
used in this paper. Section 3 will present econometric analysis on the exchange rate (price) and
transaction volumes in the periods of “pre-”, “during” and “post-” the fixing window. The regime
change by the reform will be a main objective of the investigation. Section 4 will construct and
examine the model of cost and risk from fixing trades for a bank. Section 5 will conclude.

2 Data
In this section, our data and their treatment are described. The main market exchange rate data come
growth of equities of a foreign country by selling the currency of that country. The timing of the
hedging trade is typically at the London fixing at the end of the month, generating the predictability
of price around end of month fixing.
6

Osler and Turnbull (2017) theoretically discusses banks’ strategic behavior to generating the
fixing anomalies. In contrast, our model aims to calibrate the dynamic of trade and does not focus on
the strategic relationships between banks.
5

from the trading platform of EBS:7


ICAP EBS Level 5 (or Level 2) data (proprietary data, purchased by the first author) from
January 2, 2006 to June 30, 2016. Currency pairs: 'AUD-USD', 'EUR-GBP', 'EUR-JPY',
'EUR-USD', 'GBP-USD', 'USD-CAD', 'USD-CHF', 'USD-JPY'

The ICAP EBS Forex dataset contains the information of deals and quotes at each time-slice.8
Each observation has time-stamped prices (transaction prices and limit order prices if available) and
volume (transaction volumes, limit order volumes if available). The grid of time-slices has changed
during the following periods: “one second” before January 22, 2008, “a quarter-second” from
January 22, 2008 to August 31, 2009, and “a 100 millisecond” from August 31, 2009 to present. The
minimum price unit, or pips, also has changed. It was traditionally two digits after the decimal point
for USD/JPY and four digits after the decimal point for EUR/USD. It was decimalized (three digits
for USD/JPY and five digits for EUR/USD) on March 7, 2011 and then rolled back to half pips after
September 24, 2012.
The dataset has different levels of recording details: EBS Level 2 and EBS Level 5. In the Level 5
dataset, each observation of the deal has buyer-initiated and seller-initiated deal volumes. The
database, however, omits certain deals that show multiple transactions between time slices. The
observation at a time-stamp (HH:MM:SS for example) contains the deals that occur between t-1 and
t, where t is by one second. The recorded transaction prices at the time slice are the most extreme
ones (highest paid and lowest given) during the time slice (1-second window in Level 2).
The information of quote contains the limit order prices and volumes up to ten steps (tenth best)
of the limit order book. This observation is a snapshot of the limit order book, which is recorded
when any change occurs in the book. The dataset also contains quote counts. A quote count is the
number of traders who are submitting limit orders at each step of the book.
Note that EBS allows negative spreads: the best ask price can be lower than the best bid price.
This situation happens when the two entities at the book do not have credit lines. Also, when an
observation has both a deal and a quote, the dataset does not specify the order of each transaction.
This may affect the estimation results in a later section. We take the limit order information for every
three seconds, and the trade volume information at time t is aggregated in the period [t, t+3sec].

3 Empirical Analysis
We implement three empirical experiments for examining the 2015 reform. First, we examine
7

Observations on Saturdays and Sundays (at GMT) are dropped, and so are observations on Christmas
and New Years days.
8

The ICAP EBS Forex data is a high-frequency data, which needs data cleaning. We provided a detailed
data cleaning process when we introduced the methodology.

6

whether the fixing rate properly represents the intraday rate. This follows the analysis of Evans
(2014). Second, we examine the changes in intra-fixing dynamics of order flows and liquidity, which
extends the analysis in FSB report. Lastly, we evaluate the transaction cost and risk of fixing to trade
in the fixing window.

3.1 Fixing rate as an appropriate benchmark of intraday rate
Average price path and trading profit around the fix
Figure 1 shows the average path of spot rate for EUR/USD and USD/JPY in 20 minutes around 4
pm London time. The left panels show the sample before the reform, and the right panels are after
the reform. The rates are the mid-price and are relative to their levels at 3:50 pm. The paths are
conditional on (1) positive (or negative) pre-fix changes (over 10 minutes) at end of month (upper
and lower solid); (2) positive and negative pre-fix changes on intra-month days (upper and lower
dots); (3) pre-fix changes above the 75th (or below the 25th) percentile on intra-month days (upper
and lower dash). The resolution of the x-axis is two seconds and the y-axis is basis points.
Before the reform, as Evans (2014) pointed, the average price path showed a small reversal after
the end of fixing window: the rates tend to drop after rising toward the fix, and tend to rise after
dropping towards the fix. The larger reversal is found at the end-of-month trading days than
intra-month days. After the reform, although not as clear as before because of the insufficient sample
size, this reversal looks still exist in both end-of-month and intra-month trading days. The reversal
seems to happen at the end of fixing window (or 4:02 pm) for both intra-month and end of month
samples, but the magnitude is relatively small.
The predictable pattern of price around the fixing can imply a profitable contrarian investment
strategy: taking a long (short) position after the end of fixing if the rates fell (rose) towards the fix.
Table 2 shows the profitability of this investment strategy for each currency pair for each
end-of-month and intra-month trading day sample.9 The holding length of 1, 5, and 10 minutes are
examined and the average return in basis point is presented.
Before the reform, this strategy made a profit for major currency pairs (such as EUR/JPY,
EUR/USD, USD/CHF, and USD/JPY) at the end-of-month trading days. In the intra-month sample,
9

The precise definition of profit is as follows. The pre-fix return is measured as the
log-difference of the price at 16:00:00 and the first-recorded price during 15:49:30 to 15:59:30. The
post-fix return is measured as the log-difference of the last quotes before 16:00:30 and the last quotes
before 16:00+X:30, where X is chosen from 1, 5, and 10 minutes. The pre-fix return is calculated by
mid-quotes, and the post-fix return is calculated by bid or ask prices depending on the direction of
trades (e.g., in case of taking a long position, using ask price for the starting price and using bid price
for the liquidating price.) Thus we consider the transaction cost from bid-ask spreads.
7

the profitability does not exist. This profit considers the bid-ask spread and annualized Sharpe ratios,
defined as
considering the transaction cost and the risk.

, are also high.10 Thus, the profit is still large after

After the reform, the end-of-month profitability is still available, consistent with the visual
findings in Figure 1. While the profitability of holding one minute is no longer available, the
profitability of 15 minutes holding becomes even stronger than before. In the intra-month sample,
there are no profitability, the same as before the reform.
As shown in later sections, fixing traders have an incentive to “pre-hedge”; i.e., they order more
aggressively in the earlier period in the fixing window. By doing this, they can reduce the transaction
cost significantly. Since this concentration of trades in the beginning part of the fixing window tends
to cause a temporal impact on price and the price is resilient, the price after the fixing trade tends to
reverse. The restriction on pre-hedge may dampen the evident pattern of reversal that was observed
in the before-the-reform period. The concentration of trading volume during the fixing window tends
to produce the reversal of prices after the end of fixing window. This indicates that the liquidity
provision may not be sufficiently large to prevent apparent profitability taking advantage of price
spite and reversal, if one is certain of the direction of the spike beforehand.
Tail probability of Pre and Post-fix price changes
Evans (2014) reports a particular rise in pre- and post-fix volatility in days at end of month. The
pre- and post-fix volatilities are measured by the frequency of days that the absolute changes in rates
in pre or post-fix interval are larger than the 95 percentile of the distribution of those away from the
fix. This measure is a tail probability of volatility.
Table 3 reports the tail probability of pre- and post-fix rate volatility. The value of 0.05 is
expected to be in normal times, and the value larger than 0.05 indicates abnormally high volatility.
Before the reform, the volatility was higher in the pre- and post-fixing period. This evidence is
particularly pronouncing for the rate behavior near the fix, or one minute before (and after) the fixing
window. In addition, the abnormal volatilities are intensified on days at the end of month. This
end-of-month calendar effect supports the projection that the abnormal volatility relates to the
demand for fixing trades, since we expect settling needs from exporters, importers, and bank
customers in general, tend to rise at the end of month.
This abnormal volatility near the fixing window remains even after the reform. This evidence
holds for both intra-month and end-of-month trading days. One difference is that the tail probabilities
10

The profit presented at Table 2 is daily return. Since the return does not correlate over time,
annualized Sharpe ratio is daily Sharpe ratio multiplied by the root of number of trading days (see Lo
(2002) for the statistical background). This specification is the same as Evans (2014). A problem is
that the end-of-month investment opportunity occurs monthly and multiplying one-year trading days
exaggerates the magnitude of annualized Sharpe ratio.
8

for USD/JPY being relatively low. Another notable difference is that post-fix volatilities on major
currency pairs becomes less persistent: The post-fixing tail probabilities over 15 minutes are mostly
smaller than 0.1 for measure currencies, while those were larger than 0.1 before the reform.
In summary, the price changes around the fixing time are still abnormal after the reform. There is
high volatility in pre- and post-fixing period. A reversal after the fixing period still exists at a level
that could generate profits.

3.2 Liquidity and trading volume
Does the trading volume in the fixing window decrease after the reform?
Figure 2 shows the changes in fixing trading volume year by year. Each panel shows the average
of daily trading volume around the fixing: (1) trading volume one minute before the fixing window,
(2) trading volume during the fixing window, (3) trading volume one minute after the fixing window.
Before the reform, the window is between 15:59:30 and 16:00:30. After the reform, the window is
between 15:57:30 and 16:02:30.
For projecting the demand for fixing trades, we calculate an “excess” fixing trading volume. The
excess volume is the excess of trading volume to the average one-minute volume between 15:00:00
and 17:00:00. The average is taken monthly to control for low-frequency trend and the monthly
seasonality. After the reform, the average of the five-minute volume is subtracted, adjusting for the
extension of the window. The excess of fixing trade volume to normal times is, averaged across
years, 289 units for EUR/USD and 207 units for USD/JPY.
The figure shows that the trading volume in the fixing does not necessarily decrease even after the
reform. Thus, the reform does not discourage nor encourage the fixing trades significantly.
Changes in the intra-fixing liquidity and trading volume.
Figure 3 shows the pattern of trading volume and market depth around 4 pm London time. The depth
is defined as the sums of the best ask and bid limit orders at the end of the four-second interval.11
The trade volume is the sum of each four-second interval. Each variable is an average over sample
days for the same (GMT) time interval.
For before and after the reform, we observe the increase in volume and depth in the fixing
window, but their patterns are quite different. Before the reform, the trading volume gradually
11

ICAP EBS changed the minimum price unit on March 11, 2011 and October 01, 2013. The
first made the minimum price unit to be one-tenth (decimalization) of a pip (1/100 of a yen, in case
of USD/JPY). The second change raised the price unit to a half pip. The size of limit orders that stays
at each limit price is affected by this change, and an adjustment was necessary. We adjusted the
best-quote volume by summing up to four best quotes (between the first and second changes) or by
summing up to two best quotes (from the second change to the latest).
9

increases before the fixing window and reaches its first peak a few seconds after the beginning of
fixing window. After the peak, the trade volume decreases toward the end, with another peak at 4 pm.
The dynamics of depth follows the trading volume and the peak of depth also appears at 4 pm.
After the reform, the gradual increase in pre-fixing trading volume is not observed. The trading
volume suddenly rises at the beginning of the window. Still, the trading volume slightly concentrates
in the earlier period of the window, but far less evident than before. The trading volume spreads
more evenly across the window. As before, there is a peak of trading volume at 4 pm. The depth also
follows the dynamics of trading volume: it suddenly increases at the beginning of the window. The
FSB report points out that this may be explained by a surge of manual trading.
Monthly changes in the patterns of trading volume in EUR/USD are shown in Figure 4. It is
evident that the trading volume spreads over five-minute window after February 2015. Certain
months, such as September 2015, show high trading volume several seconds around 4 pm. In the
month when the total trading volume is particularly high, the volume tends to cluster around 4 pm
rather than spreading across window. Again, it looks that the reform decreased the trading volume
per second during the fixing. If the sum of the volume over the window is taken, however, the total
trading volume has not changed a lot (Figure 2).
Another remarkable pattern in Figure 3 is that the ratio of trading volume in the first-half period
of fixing (time between [start of fixing window -30sec,4 pm]) to that in the second-half (time
between [4 pm, end of fixing window +30sec]). The ratio is presented in each panel. Before February
2015, the trading volume in the first-half is mostly 30% larger than that in the second-half. The ratio
of the first-half volume to the second-half volume becomes much smaller after the reform, especially
for a few months after the reform. Recently, the trading volume in the first-half tends to increase.
The average of the ratio after the reform is 1.24 which is smaller than 1.42 (p-value of t-test =
0.0062), the average of the ratio before the reform.
We consider the change in the volume pattern is important. As shown in next section, fixing
traders (or banks) can reduce the transaction cost by taking a large position before the first-half of
fixing window. This pre-hedging behavior has been criticized by the regulators, and it is discouraged
after the London fixing scandal because it may represent the proprietary trades taking advantage of
private information, or often called “front-running”. Theoretically speaking, the hump-shaped pattern
of intra-fixing trading volume can be explained because of minimizing transaction costs even without
proprietary trades. Observed patterns after the reform violate a cost-minimizing behavior of banks.
Whether this is due to self-restraint by banks avoiding even an appearance of front-running.
Alternatively, it may be a result of changed liquidity patterns around the fixing windows so that it
may have become difficult to execute theoretically optimal trades.
In summary, surges in trading volumes are observed during the fixing periods after the reform as
well as before. Per-minute trading volumes are less after the reform, but the total trading volume
10

during the fixing window (1 minute before the reform, 5 minutes after the reform) stayed about the
same after the reform. This is true even after taking the “excess” of the volume, i.e., trading volumes
minus the average volumes. Most importantly, the pattern of trading volume in intra-fixing window
changed. After the reform, the hump-shaped pattern of trading volume, a potential connection with
the pre-hedging trades, disappeared.

3.3 Predictability after the reform
As mentioned earlier, the fixing “scandal,” which resulted in large fines on banks, made the banks
extremely conservative and careful not to give any appearance of using private information about
customer orders. Suppose that each dealer decided to pass customer orders for fixing prices on to the
interbank market in equal batches over five minutes of the fixing window, which is consistent with
observations of the volume pattern in the fixing window after the reform. This order pattern avoids
any suspicion of taking advantage of private information about customer orders. Moreover, the
average execution prices would turn out to be close to the fixing price that is the sampled median of
transactions during the 5-minute window. So, for example, customer orders of 300 units (one unit =
1 million dollars in JPY/USD) are divided into 300 x 1 unit, and 1 unit is executed in every second.12
If every bank behaves like this, after several seconds, bank orders for the rest of the fixing window
become predictable by others (proprietary traders and professional trading communities). By
spreading orders evenly over the fixing window, a bank reveals private information and, collectively,
banks reveal market order imbalances. They become quite vulnerable to strategic nonbank traders.
Hence, a testable hypothesis is whether the order flows in the beginning of the fixing window can
predict the price movements in the rest of the window. We examined this by taking the average of
the price path conditional to the magnitude of order flows in the first 30 seconds from 15:57:30 to
15:58:00. Put differently, we measured the persistence of the price impact that is ignited by the order
flows in the first 30 seconds of the window. When the market is efficient, the 30-second order flow
does not have an impact on the future price movement.
Banks’ behavior may not have changed on the exact day of the reform, but, as Figure 4 shows,
there exist clear structural changes in the trading volume pattern on the date of the reform. For this
reason, we decided to use the sample from February 15, 2015 to June 30, 2016 (the total sample size
is 359) for examining its predictability. We first calculated the sum of order flows in the first 30
seconds of the five-minute fixing window. Conditional on the magnitude of the order flows, we
calculated the average of the price path (Figure 5) and the price change in the rest of the fixing
window (Table 4). The price is the mid-price obtained from the limit order book data. In Table 4, we

12

To be precise, the fixing window is defined as 61 seconds around 3:59:00 through 4:01:00
before the reform and 301 seconds round 3:57:30 through 4:02:30. However, it is approximated as
300 seconds for the simplicity of exposition.
11

showed
. If this value is
positive, it indicates that the predictability can be profitable over the transaction costs.
The conditional average price path shows that, for some currency pairs such as EUR/JPY and
EUR/USD, the price keeps moving toward the direction of the order flows in the first 30 seconds.
This tendency is more pronounced in the sample of days with extreme imbalances of order flows.
So the finding here is consistent with a hypothesis that, after the reform, banks attempted to avoid
further legal risk related to fixing transactions by spreading orders evenly and executing
automatically over the fixing window through the usage of simple algorithm trading (Financial
Stability Board (2015)). This produced a predictable price path during the fixing window after an
initial segment of time, say 30 seconds, because all subsequent trades submitted by a bank would be
a repeat of the initial segment. Market participants other than banks, such as proprietary human
traders and algorithm traders in the professional trading community, can exploit this predictability
and come up with a trading strategy to earn extra profits.
However, this kind of inefficiency cannot last long. Banks must have modified the order
distribution patterns without jeopardizing the appearance of taking advantage of private information
to their advantage. In a sense they must have corrected patterns so that they would become neutral
rather than sure losses from trades in the fixing window. They could introduce a bit of randomization.
We do not know how banks corrected the order pattern or how long it took for them to change the
pattern. So, we conducted a crude test by splitting the after-the-reform samples into half and showed
the results of the first half vs. those of the second half.
Table 4 shows the subsample analysis for the predictability. The sample is divided into two;
between February 15, 2015 and October 29, 2015, and between November 1, 2015 and June 30, 2016.
Each has 179 business days as a sample size. As observed in Figure 5, the predictability is high for
the first half. For example, EUR/USD at the sample above is in the 90th percentile of positive order
flow, the price change is 4.52 pips on average. For the samples above the 90th and 95th percentiles,
as well as the samples below the tenth and fifth percentiles, most of the statistics are positive,
indicating predictability. However, the large part of the predictability is lost in the second-half
sample; the statistics are negative. This implies that such a chance of profitability had not continued
for long. A question is how long the profit opportunities lasted.
We conjecture that the predictability of the price movement in the fixing window existed right
after the reform of February 2015, but diminished gradually, as banks figured out how not to be
taken advantage by others. In order to verify this conjecture, we conducted a rolling regression. In
order to show this, we implemented a rolling regression analysis:

The dependent variable is the price change from 30 seconds after the fixing window starts to the
end of the window. The independent variable is the sum of order flows in the first 30 seconds. The
12

rolling window spans for 40 days, with rolling starting on February 15, 2015. We show the
time-series change in the coefficients
with their one standard error bars in Figure 6. The positive
and statistically significant coefficient implies that the order flows have predictive power for the rest
of the fixing window. Market participants other than banks could exploit this information and come
up with the profitable trading strategy, and they probably did. In the figure, we show the results for
three currency pairs (EUR/JPY, EUR/USD, USD/JPY), whose EBS transaction volumes are high.
The profitability lasted for about 8 months for the EUR/JPY currency pair, for about 2 month for
EUR/USD, and for about 3 months in the USD/JPY market.
In sum, the evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that the reform made banks behave naively
to avoid the appearance of collusion or of the use of private information about customer fixing
orders; moreover, that behavior must have taken advantage of by non-bank participants. Banks
corrected their behavior, so that predictability disappeared after less than a year.

4 Analysis on the cost and risk of fixing trades13
The extension of the fixing window from 1 minute to 5 minutes was implemented to increase the cost
of manipulation. It also helps to reduce execution costs because banks can split a big customer order
into smaller parts to execute it slowly to avoid price impacts. However, after the reform, banks are
subject to more risk that comes from the random-walk component of the price fluctuations. In this
section, we calibrate the execution cost and associated risks of fixing trading by using the model of
the optimal execution strategy (Obizhaeva and Wang (2013)).
The Model
We consider a strategy of sequential trade sizes
problem:

that solves the following optimization

13

The analysis in this section is based on our earlier letter journal article, Yamada and Ito (2016).
However, the detail in data handling is slightly different: the parameters for calibration is estimated
in equation (2).
13

is an ask price just before

th trade

, and

is the fundamental value of the security

without trade which follows a Brownian motion.
is the reference price to calculate the cost. We
evaluate the reference price as either
(the mid-price) or a median of ask prices in a certain
time interval (or the fixing rate), depending on the purpose of analysis. This change in the
specification dramatically alters the solution.
before trading at . Thus

is the remaining orders to be executed at time ,
and
(or no remaining position after the

last trade). , , , and are the permanent price impact, limit order depth, resilience (or
convergence speed to the fundamental value
), and bid-ask spread. The
transaction price at
is
and the transaction cost is
trade times are fixed at

. The

.

This problem takes the form of linear quadratic regulators, and Obizhaeva and Wang (2013)
provides the closed-form solution with the assumption of a constant depth and bid-ask spread. Our
specification differs at least in two; the time-varying depth and bid-ask spread and the
set as
the fixing rate. The time-varying liquidities make the traders to trade more when the liquidity is
many. When

is the median of the transaction prices, for replicating the fixing transaction,

can be a function of trading volume
. When
is given as the price at the beginning of
the trading, traders cannot affect it. Thus, the trading volume patterns, costs, and risks become
different for each specification. The reform and the legal pressure potentially discourage banks to
take the trades influencing
itself. These modifications make the calibration more realistic and
comparable to the observed data, but the analytical solution becomes more difficult to derive.
For calibrating the model, each structural parameter is estimated from the data. The depth
parameter

is estimated from the limit order book information. This is done through the regression

of the distance of the

th limit ask price

from the best ask price

(i.e.,

)

on the cumulative limit order volumes up to
th steps (i.e.,
). The bid-ask
spread is also obtained from the order book information. While Obizhaeva and Wang (2013)
assumed a constant depth and bid-ask spread, we allow depth and bid-ask spread to be time-varying.
Throughout this calibration, we assume that the interval of time is three seconds. The time-stamp
of the price is set to the nearest three-second grid. The order flows are the sum during each interval.
The If there is no observation within any three seconds in data, we interpolate the observation: the
state variables (such as price, depth, and bid-ask spread) are replaced with the last observation, and
the flow variables (such as trading volume and order flows) are replaced with zero.
The permanent price impact
and resilience
mid-price return
on order flows :14

are estimated from the following regression of

14

In this specification, different from previous version of this paper (Yamada and Ito (2016)),
contemporaneous order flows rather than lagged order flows are used as an independent variable.
When considering the data construction, the specification is essentially identical.
14

This equation corresponds to the difference of the transition equation of
in the minimization
problem (1).
is the observed mid-price and
is the unobserved random-walk component of
fundamentals . Associated with the estimates of depth
and permanent price impact , the
estimated coefficients
give the inference on the resilience . In practice, we regress
the estimate of

on the distance of lag
. The regression coefficient yields
. The estimation of parameters is executed for the daily basis.

The averages of daily estimates of { },
, the assumption of window-length
(sec), and
the number of trades
are used to calibrate the limit order book dynamics.
Since we assume that the depth and the bid-ask spread are time-varying, the minimization problem is
solved numerically.15 We assume
; at each time, traders cannot trade more than the
customer orders. In case of
being negative, the solution of the minimization problem
becomes unbounded. This assumption avoids the problem. Since we also assume
, traders
cannot have position more than
, or they do not have a proprietary position.
The pre-calibration estimates are shown in Table 5. We examine the trading window of
.16 The depth (average over the window) is presented as its inverse, meaning
the changes in pips on 1 unit of trade.17
Calibration and discussion of the model prediction
The estimates above are translated into a total transaction cost. As an assumption,
is
normalized to 100. The reference price
is set as either
(first mid-quote) or the
fixing rate, which is approximated by the average of the ask price during the 60-second window (or a
300-second window after the reform).
The settings for the reference price strongly affect the incentive for the traders. In the case of the
first mid-quote as the reference price, which is a typical optimal execution problem, traders are
assumed not to employ pre-hedging. In the case of the fixing rate as the reference price, the reference
price becomes a function of
15

. Thus, traders can use pre-hedge.18 The calibrated optimal strategy

Matlab function “fmincon” is used to derive the numerical solution.

16

It should be reminded that we change the length of trading window, not the fixing window.
Traders are free to change the trading length but we set the length as given.
17

The “pip” represents the minimum price unit of the currency rate before the decimalization
occurred. For EUR/USD, it is one cent, and for USD/JPY, it is 1/100 yen. The “unit” of currency is
one million in the EBS interbank market.
18

In this paper, we use the term “pre-hedge” in the sense that traders can influence the average
settlement price.
15

of

is plotted in Figure 7. The price path following this strategy is presented in Figure

8.
First, when
is set as
, the solution prescribes a large trade at the beginning of the
trading and many small subsequent trades. Traders take advantage of resiliency by starting with the
big-shot, which is a common recommendation from such a model. Depending on the bid-ask spread
and the depth, the trade size during the fixing window substantially increases. The last trade is also
slightly larger than the interim trades.
Second, more realistically,
is set as the fixing rate. The model predicts the existence of
pre-hedging trades before the fixing window, and “banging-the-close” type of trading, or larger
trades in the first half of the fixing window. In the second half of the fixing window, trading does not
occur. The concentration of trades in the first half period causes a transitory impact on the prices and
the return reversal after the end of trading. Because of the pre-hedging, the fixing rate increases, or
the settlement price for banks with customers increases, and the total trading cost decreases
compared to the first case.
In fact, the theoretical prediction of the second model (fixing price model) resembles the actual
volume path observed in the data before the reform: the trade volume increases before the fixing
period, reaches the highest at the beginning of the fixing window, and gradually decreases toward the
end of the window (see Figure 3). In the post-reform period, the trading volume suddenly increases
at the beginning of the window. The observed data look more like the first model where the reference
price is set as
. As presented in next analysis, this restriction can increase the transaction
cost for fixing traders.
A price reversal after the end of the fixing window is observed in the case of fixing rate
specification. If traders do not aim to affect prices, they continue trading even after the fixing and the
price reversal does not appear. The price reversal occurs because of the resiliency of the price after
the concentration of fixing trades. In the model by Osler and Turnbull (2017), to contrast, the traders
holding proprietary position reverse the position after the fixing, and this generates the price reversal
after the fixing. An important difference from the theoretical model by Osler and Turnbull (2017) is
that we do not allow traders to take proprietary position nor taking the opposite position to the
original customer orders. Also, Osler and Turnbull (2017) assumes there is no temporary price
impact and therefore no resiliency. The information of the trade is immediately reflected into the
price. Our result indicates that, if there is larger temporal price impact than the permanent price
impact, the price reversal after the fix occurs even when the traders do not attempt the proprietary
trading.
Cost and the risk of fixing trades
In the model, the traders are assumed to be risk-neutral and the random fluctuation of
fundamentals is not a concern. In the reality, this risk can matter. We can evaluate the risk of trades
16

by

. The only risk considered in the model is the random-walk component of the

fundamental
Let

and the variance can be simplified.

be the variance of

,

reduces to

when the reference price is

. We evaluate
as the realized volatility of return of the data sample. When the
reference price is the fixing rate, the expression of
is atypical, and it is calculated from
100 simulation of the model. The simulation set the depth and bid-ask spread as given, and generates
random paths of . The average of the simulated cost of execution and its sample standard
deviation, or the estimates of cost-risk trade-off
, is presented in Table 6,
Fixing traders prefer less cost and less risk. Our focus is on how the reform, or the changes in
fixing window-length, and the use of pre-hedge affect the cost-risk structure of fixing traders. The
determination of optimal length of the fixing window is a different problem. The pattern of liquidity
provision can be a function of the policy, which is given in our model. Although our research
provides some insight into this problem, a complete discussion of optimal window-length is left to
future research. In general, as the trading window extends, the transaction costs tend to become
smaller and random-walk risk tends to be larger. If the fixing rate is used as the reference price, the
cost can be negative, or fixing traders can make a profit.
The trading cost decreases when the pre-hedge is used. For EUR/USD within a 60-sec window
before the reform, the difference amounts to 9.9 (not using pre-hedge) - 3.3 (using pre-hedge) = 6.6
(thousand dollars). Pre-hedging affects the reference price, which reduces the transaction costs. The
risk is also reduced by using pre-hedge. If the banks cannot use pre-hedge after the reform, the rise of
the trading cost is inevitable.
What is the difference before and after the reform? We investigate this for the specification that
the reference price is
. Since the results for EUR/USD and USD/JPY are similar, we
comment on the overall results. In the calibration of the pre-reform case, the 60-second window had
dominated the alternative window lengths in terms of the risk, while incurring the largest cost. After
the reform, trading in the 300-second window, or the same length within the fixing window, incurs
the cost at the same level as that of the 60-second trading before the reform but raises the risk
dramatically. The traders cannot reduce the cost by splitting the trade less than the cost available
before the reform. This is due to that the liquidity provision in the fixing window is not sufficiently
high after the reform. Because of the insufficient liquidity provision, shorting the trading length
makes the cost even higher.
If the banks must stop using pre-hedging after the reform and assume that they trade only in the
fixing window, the increase of the cost for the exchange of 100 million dollars to 100 million euros.
is estimated as $13.1k – $3.3k = 9.8 thousand dollars. This is approximately one basis point increase.
The risk (or the standard deviation of the cost) increases by $17.3k - $5.7k = 11.6 thousand dollars.

17

5 Conclusion
This paper examined the liquidity and trading volume patterns around the London fixing time,
which is at 4 pm, before and after the February 2015 reform. After the reform, the fixing time
window was widened from 1 minute to 5 minutes. Its effects on the cost and risk of fixing traders
have not been examined carefully in the literature. This is the first paper to find out the price and
volume behavior and put them in the framework of a model for the problem of optimal execution that
is used to evaluate the cost and risk. Our findings are summarized as follows.
First, the total cumulative surge in trading volumes during the fixing window did not change.
They spread over 5 minutes, instead of 1 minute, after the reform. However, the surge is more evenly
distributed in the window, as opposed to front-loaded previously. Second, some of the characteristics
in price behaviors around the fixing windows did not change by the reform: the return reversal after
the fix, the high volatility during the pre- and post-fixing period, and the end-of-month calendar
effect. Third, after the reform, trading volumes prior to the fixing window became subdued. The
trading volumes suddenly jumped at the beginning of the fixing window, and the trading volumes
stayed at a constant level during the window, as opposed to a volume spike in the beginning of the
window before the reform. These observations are evaluated in two analyses. Fourth, we conjecture
that banks changed their behavior to avoid any appearance of taking advantage of private
information from customer orders by placing a constant amount during the fixing window, which is
consistent with the third observation. However, this behavior created profit opportunities for
non-bank participants. Fifth, the calibration of an optimal execution model indicates that the
extension of the window did not reduce the transaction cost, but increased the risk for fixing traders.
The total liquidity during the fixing window did not increase despite the longer fixing window. The
optimal execution model resulted in pre-hedging, which was discouraged after the reform.

18

Reference
News reports
Bloomberg, (2013, June 12). “Traders Said to Rig Currency Rate to Profit off Clients.”
Bloomberg, (2013, August 27). “Currency Spikes at 4 P.M. in London Provide Rigging Clues.”
Bloomberg, (2013, December 19). “Secret Currency Traders’ Club Devised Biggest Market’s Rates.”
Economist, (2014, March 8). “Bank, fix thyself.”
Financial Times, (2013, June 12). “Forex fixing hits regulator’s radar.”
Financial Times, (2014, February 16). “Forex in the spotlight.”
Financial Times, (2014, March 21). “WM/Reuters examines forex fix overhaul.”
Financial Times, (2014, March 25). “Thomson Reuters tightens forex trading platforms rules.”
Financial Times, (2014, March 27). “UBS suspends six more forex traders.”
Financial Times, (2014, March 31). “Swiss and UK watchdogs step up forex investigations.”
Reuters, (2014, March 11). “TIMELINE-The FX ‘fixing’ scandal.”

Chaboud, Alain P, Sergey V Chernenko, Edward Howorka, Raj S Krishnasami Iyer, David Liu,
and Jonathan H. Wright, 2004, The high-frequency effects of US macroeconomic data releases on
prices and trading activity in the global interdealer foreign exchange market, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Papers.
Evans, Martin D D., 2014, Forex Trading and the WMR Fix, Working Paper.
Financial Stability Board, 2014, Foreign Exchange Benchmarks.
Financial Stability Board, 2015, Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Report on progress in
implementing the September 2014 recommendations Contents.
Lo, Andrew, 2002, The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios, Financial Analysts Journal Vol. 58, No. 4
(2002): 36–52.
Melvin, Michael, and John Prins, 2015, Equity hedging and exchange rates at the London 4p.m.
fix, Journal of Financial Markets 22, 50–72.
Obizhaeva, Anna A., and Jiang Wang, 2013, Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand
dynamics, Journal of Financial Markets 16, 1–32.
Osler, Carol, and Alasdair Turnbull, 2017, Dealer Trading at the Fix, Brandeis university working
paper.
Yamada, Masahiro, and Takatoshi Ito, 2016, The forex fixing reform and its impact on cost and
19

risk of forex trading banks, Finance Research Letters, 1–6.

20

Table 1: Timeline of Foreign exchange benchmark scandal
Dates

Entities

Title/Summary

1994

WM/Reuters

Launch of London Forex benchmark.

12 June, 2013

Bloomberg

“Traders Said to Rig Currency Rates to Profit Off Clients”19

2013

Follow up by Financial Times and Wall Street Journal.

15 July, 2014

Financial
Stability Board

“Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Consultative Document” 20

30 September, 2014

Financial
Stability Board

“Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Final report”21

September, 2014

IOSCO

“Review of the Implementation of IOSCO’s Principles for Financial
Benchmarks by WM in respect of the WM/Reuters 4.p.m Closing
Spot Rate”22

US Office of the
Comptroller of the
Currency

Consent Order for Civil Money Penalty on Bank of America,
Citigroup, and JPMorgan, for their deficiencies in its internal controls
and had engaged in unsafe or unsound banking practices with respect
to the oversight and governance of the Bank’s FX Trading. 23

12 November, 2014

Financial
Conduct Authority

Impose fines totaling $1.7 billion on five banks for failing to control
business practices in their G10 spot foreign exchange (FX) trading
operations: Citibank N.A. $358 million, HSBC Bank Plc $343
million, JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A. $352 million, The Royal Bank
of Scotland Plc $344 million and UBS AG $371 million. 24

12 November, 2014

Commodity
Futures
Trading
Commission

Impose fines over $1.4 billion in civil monetary penalties for
attempted manipulation of Foreign exchange benchmark rates,
specifically: $310 million each for Citibank and JPMorgan, $290
million each for RBS and UBS, and $275 million for HSBC. 25

11 November, 2014

12 November, 2014

FINMA

“FINMA sanctions foreign exchange manipulation at UBS” 26

15 February, 2015

WM/Reuter

Forex benchmark method change27

20 May, 2015

Commodity
Futures
Trading
Commission

1 October, 2015

Financial
Stability Board

19
20
21
22
23

$400 Million Penalty to Settle CFTC Charges of Attempted
Manipulation and False Reporting of Foreign Exchange Benchmark
Rates28
“Progress report on 2014 recommendations” 29

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-11/traders-said-to-rig-currency-rates-to-profit-off-clients.html
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140715.pdf
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930.pdf
http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD451.pdf
https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/2014/nr-occ-2014-157b.pdf

24

https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-fines-five-banks-%C2%A311-billion-fx-failings-and-announces-industry
-wide
25
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7056-14#PrRoWMBL
26

https://web.archive.org/web/20141115011002/http://www.finma.ch:80/e/aktuell/Pages/mm-ubs-devisenhandel-20141112
.aspx
27
http://www.wmcompany.com/pdfs/WMReuters_Spot_Rate_Service_-_Methodology_Changes.pdf
28
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7181-15
29
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/FX-Benchmarks-progress-report.pdf

21

Table 2: Trading profit around the fix
Before Reform

Intra
month

End of
month

profit(bp)

holding time
15
(min)
AUD/USD -3.29

SR

profit(bp)

SR

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

-2.63

-2.39

-4.68

-6.21

-11.2

-0.355

-0.257

-1.66

-0.47

-0.432

-5.54

EUR/GBP

-2.23

-2.13

-2.1

-5.16

-7.94

-15.8

-1.25

-1.23

-1.71

-2.18

-2.85

-7.97

EUR/JPY

-1.83

-1.66

-1.34

-2.57

-3.88

-6.7

-0.589

1.17

0.115

-0.751

2.05

0.442

EUR/USD

-1.06

-0.839

-0.597

-1.85

-2.45

-4.16

0.617

0.827

0.171

0.974

1.75

0.827

GBP/USD

-2.39

-1.89

-1.69

-4.5

-6.1

-11.6

-2.95

-2.6

-1.11

-4.32

-5.41

-5.81

USD/CAD

-2.12

-2.03

-2.17

-3.52

-5.4

-12.3

-2.18

-0.96

-1.6

-3.28

-1.76

-5.32

USD/CHF

-1.31

-1.26

-1.08

-2.02

-3.31

-6.14

0.248

-0.521

-0.569

0.339

-1.02

-2.32

USD/JPY

-0.883

-0.893

-0.776

-1.68

-2.75

-4.98

-0.904

0.935

0.32

-1.25

2.46

1.48

After Reform

Intra
month

End of
month

profit(bp)

holding time
15
(min)
AUD/USD -1.58

SR

profit(bp)

SR

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

-1.67

-2.52

-2.94

-5.73

-65.4

4.26

0.939

-2.69

7.84

2.98

-88.7

-2.58

-5.38

3.79

-59.4

EUR/GBP

-2.29

-2.37

-2.72

-5.29

-9.43

-68.6

-2.76

1.54

EUR/JPY

-1.31

-1.2

-1.89

-2.86

-4.77

-42.9

2.91

-0.0511 -2.04

5.36

-0.159

-61

EUR/USD

-0.519

-0.395

-0.861

-1.04

-1.43

-40

1.21

1.32

-1.02

2.28

7.41

-31.1

GBP/USD

-1.08

-1.72

-1.99

-2.68

-7.88

-49.1

2.03

0.171

-2.42

2.2

0.348

-16.8

USD/CAD

-2.47

-2.53

-2.62

-4.41

-8.3

-59.1

3.31

2.12

-2.74

5.1

6.28

-77.9

USD/CHF

-1.09

-1.72

-1.75

-2.11

-5.73

-38.3

6.19

-0.0809 -1.45

14

-0.209

-30.1

USD/JPY

-0.501

-0.556

-0.811

-1.4

-2.79

-36.9

2.39

2.27

6.99

8.48

-28.6

-0.511

This table shows the average profits (and Sharpe ratio) of investment of holding short (long) for X-minute if the
10-minute pre-fixing return is positive (negative). The investment starts at the last quotes during the fixing window:
30 seconds at 4 pm before Feb 15, 2015 or 150 seconds after Feb 15, 2015. The profit considers the transaction
cost of spreads: when the investment starts from short (long), the triggering price is at the bid (ask) and liquidating
price is at the ask (bid). The pre-fixing return is difference of the mid-price at 4:00:00 pm from the mid-price at
10-minute before the start of fixing window. The return defined as log-difference of prices. Sharpe ratio is defined
as
. The positive profit is bolded.

22

Table 3: Tail probabilities for pre- and post-fix rate changes
Before
Reform

Intra
month
pre

End of
month
pre

pre

post

post

post

pre

pre

pre

post

post

post

interval (min) 15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

AUD/USD

0.0711

0.0804

0.125

0.0649 0.0644 0.0662

0.148

0.204

0.287

0.102

0.176

0.231

EUR/GBP

0.0769

0.072

0.121

0.0489 0.0565 0.0703

0.284

0.284

0.303

0.0826

0.156

0.211

EUR/JPY

0.0611

0.0637

0.1

0.0646 0.073

0.0677

0.176

0.241

0.352

0.13

0.167

0.222

EUR/USD

0.0618

0.0478

0.0872

0.0684 0.0776 0.0583

0.119

0.193

0.33

0.119

0.138

0.138

GBP/USD

0.0764

0.0671

0.115

0.0627 0.0653 0.0582

0.176

0.296

0.352

0.12

0.111

0.176

USD/CAD

0.113

0.119

0.186

0.0694 0.0992 0.0863

0.222

0.278

0.454

0.102

0.204

0.361

USD/CHF

0.0791

0.0836

0.107

0.0782 0.088

0.0685

0.148

0.25

0.361

0.148

0.157

0.167

USD/JPY

0.0782

0.0922

0.134

0.0654 0.0769 0.0742

0.204

0.306

0.454

0.157

0.139

0.222

After Reform

Intra
month
pre

End of
month
pre

pre

post

post

post

pre

pre

pre

post

post

post

interval (min) 15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

15

5

1

AUD/USD

0.0647

0.118

0.147

0.0824 0.1

0.185

0.0625

0.0625

0.438

0.125

0.25

0.375

EUR/GBP

0.0472

0.0826

0.0944

0.0236 0.059

0.0796

0.294

0.176

0.118

0.0588

0.176

0.588

EUR/JPY

0.0437

0.0612

0.0758

0.0496 0.0671 0.0991

0.333

0.333

0.4

0.0667

0.133

0.2

EUR/USD

0.0549

0.0751

0.127

0.0549 0.0694 0.118

0.188

0.125

0.375

0.0625

0.125

0.25

GBP/USD

0.085

0.114

0.179

0.0469 0.0616 0.129

0.133

0.267

0.267

0.133

0.267

0.333

USD/CAD

0.115

0.147

0.191

0.115

0.0625

0.375

0.625

0.188

0.25

0.625

USD/CHF

0.0789

0.0936

0.14

0.0614 0.0965 0.135

0.4

0.333

0.2

0.133

0.267

0.333

USD/JPY

0.0636

0.101

0.0925

0.0434 0.0694 0.0838

0.333

0.267

0.267

0.0667

0.2

0.267

0.118

0.188

This table reports the frequency of days in which the absolute price changes in the window before and after the fix
is larger than 95th percentile from the distribution of the absolute price changes away from the fix. “Before the fix”
window starts from X minutes before the fixing window starts. “After the fix” window ends at X minutes after the
fixing window ends. The log-difference of mid-price is employed to calculate the return.

23

Table 4: Conditional changes in rates from 15:58:00 to 16:02:30
before 20151030
>q75
AUD/USD
(std)

EUR/GBP
(std)
EUR/JPY
(std)
EUR/USD
(std)
GBP/USD
(std)
USD/CAD
(std)
USD/CHF
(std)
USD/JPY
(std)

-1.59
-1.72

9.21

1.39
5.43

-2.85
11.5

-2.3
9.34

0.311
13

-0.238

(std)

16.6

2.23

-1.28
5.75

-1.81

6.87

0.542

-3.49

10.1

-3.9

-5.28

10.1

-3.41

15.9

10.8

9.86

-8.21

-3.45

10.8

-1.7

8.88

5.64

4.23

-3.9

-1.7

8.72

9.68

-2.14

8.68

7.24

-2.12

10.5

9.86

-27
14

-3.72

20.7

-3.95

<q10

<q5

<q25

<q10

<q5

-1.56
3.29

-0.681

8.31

(std)

10.1

-0.405

6.8

-2.89
8.82

<q25

0.0213

USD/JPY

10.1

-3.8

10.6

0

8.15

(std)

(std)

0.542

-4.54

9.92

-8.75
6.85

7.04

EUR/USD

USD/CHF

4.52

-4.5

4.35

5.95

8.24

(std)

4.52

-2.22
4.4

6.85

8.67

>q95

8.71

(std)

USD/CAD

-4.5

3.81

9.24

-1.8

4.04

-0.929

4.58

3.5

-2.63

>q90

7.86

6.04

GBP/USD

-1.72

>q75

6.44

0.0769

EUR/JPY

3.73

-2.12

(std)
(std)

-0.375

5.76

4.58

0.993

>q95

-0.975

5.48

AUD/USD
EUR/GBP

>q90

after 20151030

-1.17
11.3

-1.38
7.25

-3.78
9.97

-0.131
4.69

1.15
7.84

-1.56
3.29

0.812
7.12

1.74
10.1

-1.12
13.4

-3.13
9.37

-0.386
7.71

-1.12
4.93

1.69

-1.84

5.81

-2

4.42

1.69

-1.09

2.59

-1.09

3.45

4.56

0.256

7.94

-0.269

-1.39

11.9

1.18

-3.04

9.4

0.382

9.37

-4.38

4.6

0.165

5.06

5.81

10.3

8.16

-2.58

14.9

-1.87

9.75

-1.87

7.24

-4.23

5.53

-1.56

1.17
1.13

-2.26

10.3

5.75

2.3

6.39

13.2

-3.13

1.38

9.08

6.5

-9.17

5.93

3.45

6.76

1.81

-1.35
4.76

6.38

1.66

7.24

-2
5.36

0.694
6.57

8.53

This table shows the changes in forex rates (in pips) from 15:58:00 to 16:02:30 conditional on the magnitude of
order flows during the first 30 seconds in the 4pm fixing window. The bid-ask spreads are already subtracted. The
lower panel, the case of negative order flow, multiplies the changes in rates with -1 and then subtracts the bid-ask
spreads. Thus, the positive values indicate a profitable predictability that overcome the spreads; the first 30 seconds
predict the returns in the rest of the fixing window. The sample is from Feb 15, 2015 to June 30, 2016, and it is
divided into two subsamples; each has 180 sample size.

24

Table 5: Pre-calibration estimates
EUR/USD,
before
Reform
window

sec

60
0.249
pip/unit 0.0403
pip/unit 0.0025
pip
0.857
pip/3sec 0.23

[0.0155]
[0.000826]
[0.000627]
[0.00929]
[0.00504]

180
0.315
0.0484
0.00505
0.951
0.262

[0.0127]
[0.000748]
[0.000731]
[0.00721]
[0.0131]

300
0.335
0.0519
0.00663
0.97
0.242

[0.00919]
[0.000677]
[0.000627]
[0.00686]
[0.0113]

420
0.338
0.0539
0.00664
0.979
0.225

[0.01]
[0.00068]
[0.000617]
[0.00713]
[0.00871]

540
0.334
0.0553
0.00737
0.983
0.214

[0.00869]
[0.000652]
[0.00068]
[0.00666]
[0.00781]

[0.019]
[0.00112]
[0.00182]
[0.00833]
[0.00869]

180
0.233
0.0745
0.0125
1
0.32

[0.0199]
[0.00106]
[0.000949]
[0.00734]
[0.00871]

300
0.272
0.0761
0.0135
1
0.32

[0.0141]
[0.00101]
[0.000744]
[0.00741]
[0.00708]

420
0.283
0.0782
0.0142
1
0.324

[0.0177]
[0.000933]
[0.00086]
[0.00705]
[0.0101]

540
0.278
0.0794
0.0137
1
0.307

[0.0122]
[0.000908]
[0.000831]
[0.00686]
[0.0106]

[0.0146]
[0.000957]
[0.000597]
[0.00631]
[0.00532]

180
0.353
0.0535
0.00424
0.873
0.25

[0.0134]
[0.000918]
[0.000811]
[0.00656]
[0.0155]

300
0.385
0.0593
0.00531
0.923
0.228

[0.0178]
[0.000916]
[0.000748]
[0.00698]
[0.0125]

420
0.386
0.0627
0.00528
0.945
0.21

[0.0122]
[0.000929]
[0.000535]
[0.00718]
[0.00858]

540
0.38
0.065
0.00616
0.957
0.194

[0.0114]
[0.000925]
[0.00056]
[0.00733]
[0.00747]

[0.021]
[0.00152]
[0.00543]
[0.0107]
[0.0272]

180
0.234
0.0889
0.0147
1
0.252

[0.017]
[0.00228]
[0.0016]
[0.0104]
[0.0113]

300
0.252
0.09
0.0158
1
0.253

[0.0139]
[0.00181]
[0.0011]
[0.0099]
[0.00848]

420
0.261
0.0917
0.0172
1
0.266

[0.0117]
[0.00153]
[0.00178]
[0.00863]
[0.0132]

540
0.27
0.0928
0.0156
1.01
0.248

[0.0114]
[0.00141]
[0.0014]
[0.00817]
[0.011]

EUR/USD,
after
Reform
window

sec

60
0.17
pip/unit 0.0743
pip/unit 0.00927
pip
1
pip/3sec 0.259

USD/JPY
before
Reform
window

sec

60
0.278
pip/unit 0.0411
pip/unit 0.00211
pip
0.631
pip/3sec 0.208

USD/JPY
after
Reform
window

sec

60
0.162
pip/unit 0.089
pip/unit 0.00943
pip
1
pip/3sec 0.203

This table shows the estimation of structural parameters for the calibration. The depth and bid-ask spread ( ) are
calculated from data. The average and
is presented. Other parameters are estimated
by the following regression of return
on order flow :
.
and
are the
permanent price impact and resilience (or convergence speed to the fundamental value). The regression is executed
in daily basis, and the average of estimates and their
is presented.

25

Table 6: Calibrated results of execution cost and risk
EUR/USD

USD/JPY

Before RF
window
cost
risk
(sec)
($1000)
60
9.9
5.9

After RF
cost
risk
($1000)
19.9
6.5

Before RF
window
cost
risk
(sec)
($1000)
60
9.5
5.4

After RF
cost
risk
($1000)
23.2
4.4

120

8.5

9.5

15.1

11.4

120

8.4

10.5

17.8

8.6

180

8.3

10.7

14.1

13.1

180

8.1

10.8

16.1

9.9

240

8.1

12.9

13.6

14.9

240

7.7

14.8

15.2

11.3

300

8.4

13.2

13.1

17.3

300

8

13.2

15

14.3

360

8.3

12.9

13.9

18.6

360

7.9

14.8

15.2

17.4

420

8.2

12.6

13

20.6

420

7.8

13.4

15.2

17.4

480

8.5

16.1

12.4

21.8

480

7.9

15.7

14.6

15.7

540

8.5

16.1

12.6

19.9

540

8.2

14.6

14.2

18.7

600

8.7

15.4

13

19.8

600

8.1

15.5

14.6

19

window
(sec)
window
(sec)
60

cost
risk
($1000)
cost
risk
($1000)
3.3
5.7

cost
risk
($1000)
cost
risk
($1000)
1.9
4

window
(sec)
window
(sec)
60

cost
risk
($1000)
cost
risk
($1000)
3.6
5.8

cost
($1000)
cost
($1000)
1.8

risk

120

3.1

10.2

2.9

8.3

120

3.5

8.1

2.9

6.1

180

2.8

10

2.7

8.8

180

3.4

9.7

2.8

7.7

240

2.6

9.7

2.3

9.1

240

3.4

11.6

2.6

9.9

300

2

10.6

2.2

9.9

300

3.1

10.3

2.1

8.5

360

1.9

11.4

1.2

11.9

360

3

11.8

1.4

10.9

420

1.9

12.2

1.1

13.3

420

3

11.4

0.8

10.7

480

1.6

12.8

1.3

11.4

480

2.8

11.6

0.8

9.5

540

1.5

11.6

0.9

13.4

540

2.6

11.6

0.9

10.4

600

1.2

10.9

0.3

14

600

2.6

11.6

0.3

10.8

risk
4.1

This table shows the calibrated results for the execution cost and risk for EUR/USD and USD/JPY, before and after
the reform (February 15, 2015). The reference price is
(top panel) or fixing rate (bottom panel).
Execution of 100 units (or the exchange of 100 million currency) is assumed.

26

Figure 1: Average price path of EUR/USD and USD/JPY around the fix
This figure shows the average price pace of around the 4pm London fixing before (left column) and after (right
column) the reform (February 15, 2015). The price is obtained from the quotes and is normalized by the mid-price
at 15:50:00. The paths are conditional on (1) positive (or negative) pre-fix changes (over 10 minutes) at end of
month (upper and lower solid); (2) positive and negative pre-fix changes on intra-month days (upper and lower
dots); (3) pre-fix change above the 75th (or below the 25th) percentile for intra-month days (upper and lower dash).

27

Figure 2: Total trading volume around the fix
This figure shows the total trading volume around the London fix. Raw (left column) and excess (right column)
volumes are reported. Black, grey, white bars represent one-minute before the fixing window, during the fixing
window, and one-minute after the fixing window. Excess volumes are defined by
.

28

Figure 3: Average path of trading volume and depth around the fix
This figure shows the average path of trading volume and depth (up to four steps) around London fixing for
EUR/USD and USD/JPY. Before (left columns) and After (right columns) the reform (February 15, 2015). The
trading volume is the sum of every four seconds, and the depth is sampled at the last moment in each four seconds
interval.

29

Figure 4: Monthly changes in the trading volume pattern around the fix
This figure shows the pattern of trading volume of EUR/USD around London fixing for each month (from January
2013 to June 2016). The figures in each panel is ratio of A to B, where A is the trading volume in the first-half
period of fixing (time between [start of fixing window -30sec,4 pm]), and B is that in the second-half (time between
[4 pm, end of fixing window +30sec]).

30

Figure 5: Average price path conditional on the order flows
This graph describes the average price path conditional on the sum of order flows in the first 30 seconds in the
fixing window. For the conditions on the sum order flows, the sample above 75 percentiles, 90 percentiles, 95
percentiles, and the sample below 25 percentiles, 10 percentiles, and 5 percentiles are presented. The price is
standardized at the one at 15:55:00. The sample is from February 15, 2015 to June 30, 2016.

31

Figure 6: Rolling regression for predictability of fixing price movement
This figure shows the time-series changes of the predictability of fixing price movement. The horizontal axis is the
day of the rolling regression window starts, counting from February 15, 2015. Each regression is:
, where
is the sum of order imbalance during the first 30 seconds in the 5-minutes
fixing window at day . We present the estimated
with their 1 SE error bars. Each rolling window has 40
subsamples. The significant coefficients show the predictability of price movements in the rolling window specified
by the dummy.

32

Figure 7: Optimal trading strategy
This figure shows the calibrated optimal execution strategy for EUR/USD (upper low) and USD/JPY (lower row).
The reference price is
(left column) and
(right column). The feeding parameters are the estimates
from the sample from Oct 01, 2012 to Feb 14, 2015. Execution of 100 units (or the exchange of 100 million
currency) is assumed.

33

Figure 8: Calibrated price path
This figure shows the calibrated price paths generated by the optimal execution strategy. EUR/USD (upper low)
and USD/JPY (lower row). The reference price is
(left column) and
(right column). The feeding
parameters are the estimates from the sample from Oct 01, 2012 to Feb 14, 2015. Execution of 100 units (or the
exchange of 100 million currency) is assumed. The random walk component is suppressed.

34

