                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE PRODUCTIVITY ADVANTAGE OF SERIAL ENTREPRENEURS

                                         Kathryn L. Shaw
                                         Anders Sørensen

                                      Working Paper 23320
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23320


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




An earlier version of this paper was prepared for the conference on “The Labor Market and
Human Resource Management Implications of Entrepreneurship” supported by the National
Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. in October 2016, organized by Diane Burton, Rob
Fairlie, and Don Siegel. We are thankful for the thoughtful comments of the conference
organizers, and the seminar participants at the University of Toronto, the University of Maryland,
and Stanford University Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kathryn L. Shaw and Anders Sørensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Productivity Advantage of Serial Entrepreneurs
Kathryn L. Shaw and Anders Sørensen
NBER Working Paper No. 23320
April 2017
JEL No. G24,J24,L26,M13

                                           ABSTRACT

Serial entrepreneurs, who open more than one business, are found to have higher sales and higher
productivity than novice entrepreneurs, who open one business. Using panel data on
entrepreneurs and their firms from Denmark for 2001-2013, the serial entrepreneur has 67%
higher sales than the novice, but also opens firms that are larger in terms of the initial capital and
labor, and thus is 39%more productive. There are subsets of firms that perform especially well –
serial entrepreneurs that hold a portfolio of overlapping ongoing firms perform the best, as do
those that open as limited liability firm rather than proprietorships. Female serial entrepreneurs
do as well as male serial entrepreneurs relative to the performance of novices of their own
genders. The second firms of the serial entrepreneurs also stay in business longer than the first
(and only) firms of the novices.


Kathryn L. Shaw
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
kathryns@stanford.edu

Anders Sørensen
Copenhagen Business School
Department of Economics
Frederiksberg, Denmark
as.eco@cbs.dk
                                                                                                                    1


The popular press often idolizes a few very visible serial entrepreneurs. Two that come to mind are Elon
Musk, founder of Tesla and SpaceX, and Steve Jobs, founder of Apple, Next, and Pixar. The popular
press and researchers also suggest that the VCs look to fund tech serial entrepreneurs at higher rates than
novices who have never opened a previous business. Is there strong evidence that serial entrepreneurs
perform better – or, are Musk and Jobs just a few visible outliers?

The question is, are serial entrepreneurs remarkably more successful? A few other researchers have
examined this issue, but not many. Those that have, have looked only at how long new firms stay in
business, showing serial firms stay in business longer than novice firms. The novice firm is the one
opened by a novice entrepreneur, who, by definition, either has not opened a business before or never will
again.

The reason serial entrepreneurship is little studied is that it is very hard to obtain a long time-series of
longitudinal data on the small new firms that they open. For that reason, the data here is from Denmark.
Denmark is now very widely studied, because they link all their data sets on people and firms for the
population of all people and firms. Entrepreneurship has been a particularly popular topic using Danish
data, so there is much to draw on that we know about the characteristics of Danish entrepreneurs.1 The
institutions of setting up a new business and the market conditions are similar in Denmark to the U.S., but
Denmark probably has a smaller high tech sector.2

The emphasis here is on the sales, employment, and productivity of new ventures opened by ordinary
people. Around the world, most new ventures are not tech ventures. Tech ventures surely have more
upside successes than non-technology companies—and technology successes lead to greater employment
and higher GDP—though Walmart is a good example of the upside success for a non-tech firm. Most
importantly, it is hard to say exactly what a high-tech firm is: Amazon is succeeding in retail due to
technology, and Tesla is succeeding in manufacturing due to technology, and even Walmart is known for
its innovation in supplier relationships.

The goal of the paper is to determine how much more successful serial entrepreneurs are relative to
novices (if serial entrepreneurs even are more successful), and if the success of the serial entrepreneur
depends on the characteristics of the entrepreneur or the characteristics of the firm. The results are as
follows:

    1. Serial entrepreneurs are 39% more productive than novice entrepreneurs. Serial entrepreneurs
       have sales that are 67% higher. Because serial entrepreneurs open firms with more capital and
       labor, their productivity advantage is not as great as their sales advantage.
    2. There are subsets of serial entrepreneurs that perform especially well. Those entrepreneurs that
       hold a portfolio of firms – rather than opening and closing firms sequentially – are 46% more
       productive than novices.
    3. The serial advantage is conferred equally across the industries of their firms and the education
       levels of the entrepreneurs.



1
 Researchers in the U.S. may in the future get access to U.S. data (Goetz, Hyatt, McEntarfer, and Sandusky, 2015)
2
 The establishments started by entrepreneurs in Denmark tend to be smaller than those establishments started by
existing firms (Malchow-Møller, Schjerning, Sørensen (2011), which would be true in the U.S. as well.
                                                                                                        2


    4. Women exhibit performance advantages as serial entrepreneurs that are greater than those of male
       entrepreneurs, when women serial entrepreneurs are compared to female novices, and when male
       serial entrepreneurs are compared to male novices. To identify who is most likely to run a
       thriving business, the firms are divided up into those that open as employers (43% of firms have
       employees) and those that open as non-employers (57%), but may employ people later. For these
       two subgroups, female serial entrepreneurs are 41% more productive among employers, and 30%
       more productive among non-employers. As a group, all women open smaller companies than
       men (i.e., lower sales), but those who are female serial entrepreneurs are about as productive as
       all male entrepreneurs (including novices).
    5. Serial entrepreneurs close their first businesses much faster than do novice entrepreneurs and run
       their second businesses much longer than novices do.

These results are discussed in the Empirical results section below, which is preceded by the Empirical
Framework and Data description. The Conclusion describes the full picture of who succeeds as a serial
entrepreneur.

    I.      Theoretical Framework and Literature Review

There are two avenues to pursue in the literature – what makes a good manager or executive (since
entrepreneurs are managers) and what makes a good entrepreneur? Start with the latter.

There is past evidence that some entrepreneurship skills are learned. Lazear (2005) shows that a person is
more likely to found a firm if he has more “roles” in school or work from which to learn how to do the
multi-faceted job of founding and running firms. He is also, therefore, suggesting that an entrepreneur
can learn to be a good entrepreneur from past jobs in firms he does not run. Liang, Chang, and Lazear
(2017); Phillips and Sorensen (2011); and Hvide (2009) show that prior business experience inside firms,
either engaging in multiple roles or obtaining general managerial experience, matters. Nanda and
Sorensen (2010) suggest the existence of a “ripple effect”—that individuals are more likely to become
entrepreneurs if their co-workers have been self-employed in the past. Klepper (2001) emphasizes the
importance of co-workers in creating new high-tech startups. Entrepreneurs also learn from family
experience (Fairlie and Robb, 2007a, b), and from others in their community (Glaser, Kerr, and Ponzello,
2006).

Another indicator of the importance of learning to be an entrepreneur is does entrepreneurship go up with
age, suggesting people need to learn before opening a firm? If the probability of entrepreneurship does
rise with age and peak, this suggests that learning (or access to capital) is more important than the
creativity and low opportunity cost of time that are more characteristic of young entrepreneurs (Liang,
Chang, and Lazear, 2017). More generally, all business schools teach a very extensive number of classes
on entrepreneurship, suggesting it is a learned activity. Experiments in developing countries have tested
whether entrepreneurship can be taught: it is hard to find high returns from these training programs
(Fairlie, Karlan, and Zinman, 2015).

There is also past evidence that some entrepreneurs have personal traits that lead them into
entrepreneurship. The most common focus is that entrepreneurs are risk-takers (Blanchflower and
Oswald, 1998; Levine and Rubinstein, 2016; Hvide and Panos, 2013) and are more capable, in terms of
their own education and parents’ education (Levine and Rubinstein, 2016; Hartog, et.al., 2010). Second,
                                                                                                                  3


is that they have personal wealth that affects entrepreneurship, often in a non-linear way.3 They are also
likely to have many personal traits that are identified more anecdotally than in rigorous research, such as
that entrepreneurs set direction, coach, and are decisive and inspiring (Shaw and Schrifin, 2015, applied
to managers). Such anecdotal qualities, however, are bolstered by the evidence that the founder has a
lasting impact on his business (Becker and Hvide, 2014).

Entrepreneurs are ultimately managers, so does managers’ quality really matter for improving the
performance of their subordinates or of their entire firms? A growing literature shows that there are
“manager effects” that are large in shaping their subordinates’ productivity (Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton
(2015), in lowering attrition (Hoffman and Tadalis, 2016), and in improving firm performance (Bertrand
and Schoar, 2003).

In sum, what are the traits and the skills of a typical entrepreneur? They are risk takers, they are
wealthier, they are creative, they are inspiring, they have had broad managerial experience at prior firms,
they have business networks and social networks that enable them to attract financing and customers and
increase their knowledge, and their past history of success signals that they are capable. These are the
traits and skills that a serial entrepreneur is either likely to have in advance or likely to build through on-
the-job learning.

There is evidence that the firms opened by serial entrepreneurs stay open longer because serial
entrepreneurs are more talented to begin with and also learn on the job. 4 Venture capitalists have a
preference for the serial entrepreneur because he has learned from experience, good and bad, and has
strong social networks.5

The goal of this paper is to determine whether serial entrepreneurs have higher sales or productivity, and
if so, how high these are, and which types of serial entrepreneurs achieve the most. Past research has
never performed analyses to answer these questions. The likely reason for this omission in the literature
is that researchers have not had panel data on the performance of entrepreneurs’ firms. Data on the
performance of serial entrepreneurs’ firms – in terms of sales, productivity, and employment – has not
been available because few countries keep this data for very small firms, and in order to study serial
entrepreneurs, a very long time series of years is needed to see which entrepreneurs open multiple firms
over time. 6




3
  Hurst and Lusardi (2004), Anderson and Nielsen (2012), Vereshchagina and Hopenhayn (2009), and for Norway,
Hvide and Hoen (2010), and Malacrino (2016).
4
   See Lafontaine and Shaw (2106) for evidence that the businesses opened by serial entrepreneurs last longer in
retail trade. See also Amaral, Baptista, Lima (2011), Hyytinen and Ilmakunnas (2007), Parker (2013),
Rocha,Carneiro, Amorim Varum (2015), Wagner (2003), Westhead and Wright(1998). Amaral, Baptista, and Lima
(2009) expand upon the importance of past entrepreneurial experience by indicating past experience as an
entrepreneur is a primary indicator of future entrepreneurship in Portugal.
5
  Gompers, Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2010), Hsu (2007), and Zhang (2011) study venture-backed
entrepreneurs.
6
  Despite the challenges associated with locating data for those smaller and micro enterprises not publicly traded,
some firm performance metrics have been studied by amalgamating data from several different national sources, as
achieved by Malacrino (2016) using specifically Norwegian data. Humphries (2016) also shows that the self-
employed who have higher cognitive skills are more likely to run firms that have higher levels of capital in Sweden.
                                                                                                                       4


    II.      Empirical Framework


The first step using Danish panel data is to calculate who is a serial entrepreneur and who is a novice (i.e,
only operating one firm ever). Seriali is a dummy variable that indicates that a person is a serial
entrepreneur if he/she opened more than one business in the 13 years of data from 2001-2013. The data is
then organized to follow the performance of the Serial entrepreneur’s businesses. He/she opens multiple
businesses, but the question here is, how does his/her average business fare compared to the one business
of the novice?

Using the longitudinal data, the sales regression is:

    (1)


where       is the log of average monthly sales for entrepreneur “i” and for firm “j.” The time “t” a bi-
annual time period, but the panel time for each firm is restricted to be up to six years (so there are up to 12
observations on the sales of each firm “j”). The purpose of the six year restriction is twofold: to compare
performance in the early years when firms would grow and learn, and to recognize that the panel of 13
years will very often truncate the duration of firms, so it would be hard to model a learning curve as a
non-linear function of experience when the few firms that have long experience are those that happen to
open early in the panel and are successful.7 Controls               are time dummies (semi-annual period
dummies) and 88 industry dummies. The            are the education, gender, age, and immigrant status of the
entrepreneur at the beginning of each of his firms. The capital and labor are the                          , the
standard variables that are specific to each firm and measured annually (not bi-annually).

The variable                is the experience of the entrepreneur as he runs his business over time for the
bi-annual periods that firms are followed. Experience is a linear variable that takes the values of 1 to 12
for the bi-annual observations, and in the regressions Experience will also enter quadratically.

The novice entrepreneur will have only one firm “j” attached to his personal data. The serial entrepreneur
can have many firms “j” in the data, and the regression therefore contains a measure of                for
each of his firms, in the stacked panel data set and in the variables in the regression. So the serial
entrepreneur who typically has two firms will have two measures of Experience for each firm.

The            is a dummy variable equal to 1 if person “i” is a serial entrepreneur. The          does not
have a firm “j” subscript because it is capturing the effect of being a serial entrepreneur averaged across
all the “j” firms that he has in the data.




7
 The Experience effect on Sales is identified in the within-firm regression (2) below, and the effects of firms with
high Experience on Sales would be identified off the quadratic Experience effect, which could be driven by the
small number that stay open a long time.
                                                                                                                      5


The Experience variable has one coefficient for the novice entrepreneur, β3, which is his learning curve.
The Serial entrepreneur has his learning curve, which is the learning curve for the novice plus his
coefficient, equal to β3+ β4.8

There are two primary empirical hypotheses imbedded in equation (1):

Hypothesis 1: the serial entrepreneur has higher sales performance on the day he opens his firm, so β2>0.

Hypothesis 2: the serial entrepreneur has a faster learning curve, or β4>0.

The testing of these two hypotheses becomes complicated in numerous important ways.

In testing Hypothesis 1 that β2>0, should there be control variables in the regression? The first regression
in tables below is estimated with no controls—testing whether mean Sales are higher for the serial
entrepreneur than the novice – except the controls         for time dummies and 88 industry dummies. If
sales are higher for the serial entrepreneur, why? The next step is to introduce the background traits of
the entrepreneurs,      , for education, gender, age, immigrant status, to see if the β2 falls in value, because
if serial entrepreneurs are, for example, more educated, then holding constant education would reduce the
estimated performance gains by serial entrepreneurs. The interpretation of these traits is discussed with
the empirical results. The next set of controls is Capital and Labor, where Labor is the number of FTE
employees, and Workforce Education is the average education of the employees in the firm. The
regression tests whether the average firm of the Serial entrepreneur is bigger because he opens firms with
more capital and labor. After introducing all the controls for capital and labor, the Sales regression (1) is
estimating the greater productivity of the serial entrepreneur if β2>0.

In testing Hypothesis 2, that β4>0, there are two “learning curves,” one in an OLS regression, and one in a
firm fixed effects regression. The coefficient on Experience in the OLS regression picks up the sorting by
firms: firms that live longer should have higher sales, so the coefficient on Experience should be positive
in equation (1), even if the firms are not growing at all within the average firm. Therefore, it is necessary
to estimate a firm fixed effects model:

    (2)


where the firm fixed effect is λj. The coefficient on Experience is now the within-firm growth of Sales,
with Experience entering quadratically. Introducing the firm fixed effect holds constant the quality of the
firm, which eliminates the upward bias on the Experience coefficient in (1) that would result from
selection (if high-quality firms stay open longer).9 As with Hypothesis 1, it is important to find out if
entrepreneurs increase sales within the firm because they are adding capital and labor, so controls are
introduced.


8
  There is a very large literature on organizational learning, which often means the degree to which costs fall as units
produced rise, and the literature also asks whether learning is passed from one production line to another. See
Argote (1999) and Thompson (2012) for summaries of the literature.
9
  The firm fixed effect holds constant the quality of the entrepreneur, in terms of the personal talent he has in
elevating sales or productivity levels. However, equation (2) could still have a person-specific bias if the
entrepreneurs that stay in business longer are innately better learners.
                                                                                                                 6


Now it is clear that the OLS coefficients on Experience in (1) are useful. If β 3 and β4 in (1) are greater
than they are in (2), then the gap implies that if you look at a cross-section of firms, older firms are bigger
because these are the firms that have survived longer.

Note that there are some restrictions placed on the coefficients in (1) through (2) that are relevant. It is
assumed that the effects of the X, Z, and capital and labor variables on Sales do not differ by whether the
entrepreneur is a serial or a novice. That is, the within-industry production function of translating capital
into sales is assumed to be the same across Serial versus Novice, because some functional form
restrictions are helpful to test the hypotheses that Serial differ from novices.

There is also annual data on the number of employees. The regression for employment is the same as
sales, but the time “t” refers to annual data:

     (3)


where E is number of employees including the owner, so no firms have zero employees.

The third hypothesis is that not all serial entrepreneurs are alike:

Hypothesis 3: the value of being a serial entrepreneur may differ by industry, gender, or a host of other
factors.

That is:

     (4)


where the ‘k’ superscript on each coefficient is either the type of firm or type of entrepreneur, to be
described below with the empirical results.10 For example, k could be industry, the gender or education of
the founder.

The last hypothesis is that:

Hypothesis 4: Firms founded by serial entrepreneurs survive longer.

The model used to estimate firm durations is the Weibull duration model. In these models, the rate at
which a firm exits, given that it has survived till time t, is written as h(t)=h 0(t)eX’B, and B are the
exponentiated coefficients that determine the exit rate. If one of the b1 coefficients in B is greater
(smaller) than 1, the difference (b1-1)*100 specifies the percentage by which a one unit increase
(decrease) in the X1 would increase the hazard of exit. The purpose of using the Weibull model (instead
of, for example, a linear model with the months in business as the dependent variable) is that the model
accounts for the right-censoring that pertains to all panel data sets that must end with some incomplete
spells.


10
  An equivalent but messier way of writing equation (4) for Hypothesis 3 would be to permit all the coefficients of
the regressions (1) and (2) to be interacted with the X and Z variables.
                                                                                                                    7




     III.    Data


Descriptions of the key variables are intertwined with descriptions of the data sets used to create them.

     A. Linking Four Data Sets
Entrepreneurs: The Statistics of New Enterprises identifies all firm start-ups in Denmark during the
period 2001-2013. This database includes firms that fulfill a number of conditions that make these newly
started (nascent) firms organic start-ups, not spin-offs or re-organized firms. For the majority of the new
firms in the Statistics on New Enterprises, Statistics Denmark has been able to identify the founder behind
the firms. For the personally-owned firms identification is straightforward: The entrepreneur is simply
identified as the owner of the firm. For incorporated firms, Statistics Denmark uses a prioritized list of
criteria to identify the principal entrepreneur.11 For around 15% of the cases, Statistics Denmark has not
been able to identify the founder behind the firm, so these firms have been dropped from the data below.
There are between approximately 14,000 (2009) and 20,000 (2007) firm start-ups with founder identified
per year in the database.

As will be shown below, these entrepreneurs are founding small businesses, and are not likely to be tech
entrepreneurs seeking large growth. As pointed out by Hurst and Pugsley (2011), most small businesses
are run by entrepreneurs who never plan to grow beyond a few employees. However, these founders are
not the self-employed, who are likely to be even less ambitious in terms of levels and growth of sales and
employment (as pointed out by Glaeser, 2007).

Note that Statistics Denmark has undertaken extensive efforts to identify the organic start-ups. Their
scrutiny of firms has eliminated those that could be the result of restructurings or the result of organizing
existing or additional activities into new enterprises. Consequently, a firm that appears in the Statistics on
New Enterprises must not only be newly registered for VAT at the business authorities, but also not
previously existed under a different name/company or with a different owner.12 Finally, the data are


11
   If information about a founder is available from the registration information, this person is identified as the
principal entrepreneur. In case of more than one founder, Statistics Denmark selects the one who has the highest
salary – or if none of the founders are employed in the firm, they pick the founder who appears first in the
registration database. If information about founders is not available, they look for a member of the board (or the
executive board) who is also employed in the firm. Again, they pick the one with the highest salary in the case
where more than one board (or executive board) member is employed in the firm. If no board (or executive board)
member is employed in the firm, they pick the board (or executive board) member who appears first in the
registration database.
12
   For administrative reasons, the Danish Business Authorities only use one firm-id per individual that opens sole
proprietorships. This implies that an entrepreneur that has a sole proprietorship will always have his firm registered
under the same firm-id. Consequently, a serial entrepreneur that establishes two firms as sole proprietorship will
appear to be a novice entrepreneur in the data set; not as serial entrepreneur. However, in the data set we find that
                                                                                                                     8


cleaned for registrations that are due to re-starts of businesses after closure or changes in the firm-
registration information. Thus, the set of start-ups used in this paper is more likely to reflect true organic
entrepreneurial start-ups than if we had only used all “new establishments” or all “new firms,” as has been
the common practice in the literature.

The Statistics on New Enterprises is restricted to industries that Statistics Denmark categorizes as “private
urban functions”. This restriction excludes the public sector and (most of) the primary sector, in addition
to industries with activities that are not liable to VAT, such as dentists, transportation of persons, banking,
etc.13

In the Statistics of New Enterprises, the founder-specific information is available on marital status,
educational attainment, gender, labor market experience as a wage worker, age, and immigrant status.
These variables are measured when each of their firms are opened.

Sales: The Purchase and Sales of Danish Firms contains information on sales of VAT liable firms. Sales
of firms are determined from the sales tax that VAT registered businesses have reported on the VAT form
of the Danish tax authorities. Firms report VAT on a monthly, quarterly, or bi-annual basis dependent on
sales size – large firms are required to report at a greater frequency. To make all data comparable, all
sales are made bi-annually. The sales data covers the period 2001 to 2014, thus following the
entrepreneur as of 2013 into his sales of 2014.

Employment, capital, educational attainment of employees: The General Enterprise Statistics that
contains annual information about all active firms in the Danish economy. This database includes the data
on the capital input and employment of the entrepreneurial firms.

The Firm Integrated Database (FIDA) also identifies all the individuals working in a given firm in the
last week of November each year. This database provides information on the employees’ educational
backgrounds from Statistics Denmark’s education registers. This information is used to construct
measures of average years of education of firms’ employees to characterize the educational content of
employees. In the analysis, the six different education groups feed into a Workforce Education variable
that is the average years of education, where the groups are defined by the length of the education
program (and following the Danish Education Classification system): Primary schooling (9 years);
vocational training (12 years); high school (12 years); short further education (14 years); medium further
education (16 years); and long further education (18 years).




there are very few sole proprietorships with multiple, which suggests that the number of (“portfolio”) entrepreneurs
using sole proprietorships is clearly not a problem (Table 4).
13
   These industries are not included because the basis for the Statistics on New Enterprises is firms that register for
VAT. Hence, we do not have information on new firms that are not liable to VAT. Private sector service firms that
are excluded from the analysis for this reason are firms within the following service sectors: child day-care
activities, primary education, general secondary education, higher education, nursing homes, activities of household
employers, other service activities, general medical practice activities including dentists, hospital activities, real
estate agencies etc., and mortgage credit institutions.
                                                                                                               9


Employment, capital, and education of the workforce are annual data.14 Employment is the total of the
owner/entrepreneur plus the people he/she hires. The entrepreneur is always included in the Employment
calculation below because in LLC firms, he is an employee, so for comparability, for sole proprietorships,
he is also counted as an employee.

     B. Measurement of Types of Entrepreneurs
Serial entrepreneurs are measured using data for organic new firms in Denmark. The entrepreneurial firm
is identified by a unique firm id and the founder or entrepreneur of the entrepreneurial firm is identified
by a unique person id.

The entrepreneurial firm: An organic start-up that has newly registered for the VAT with the business
authorities. This includes both personally-owned and incorporated firms that fulfil a number of conditions
that allow us to consider them as being organic new firms (described above).

Firm data in the Statistics Denmark registers only include firms that are labelled “truly active,” defined as
firms that have wage hours for employees of at least 0.5 full time equivalent employees during the year
OR have sales above a threshold. The threshold sales vary across industries. In industries such as
wholesale trade, the threshold sales equal around USD 75,000, whereas for Manufacturing firms are in the
range of USD 22,000 to USD 30,000 DKK.

The founder or entrepreneur: Defined as the person who establishes an organic startup. For the
majority of the new firms in the Statistics on New Enterprises, Statistics Denmark has been able to
identify the entrepreneurs behind the firms (described above).

Serial entrepreneur: In the data, 215,645 new firms have been established by 190,834 founders during
the period from 2001 to 2013 (see Table 1.) Around 10% of the entrepreneurs are serial entrepreneurs,
meaning that they have founded more than one firm during the 13 year period from 2001-2013. Among
the serial entrepreneurs, only 20% open more than one business.

An important point is that serial entrepreneurs establish around 20% of all organic new firms. Though
they are 10% of entrepreneurs, because they found multiple firms, they run 20% of new firms.

A necessary condition for a serial entrepreneur is - in general terms – a founder that has opened up more
than one organic firm during the period 2001-2013. However, such founders can be grouped by their
patterns of firm survival. If the serial entrepreneur opens up two firms during the period under
investigation, the figure below displays the firm types.15

     Sequential Entrepreneur. An entrepreneur that opened an organic firm that has been closed again.
     After the firm was closed, the entrepreneur opened a new firm. The closed firm is active between year
     t0 and t1, whereas the new firm is active from t2>t1. The new firm may have: a) closed down (Type
     1a in figure); or, b) still being active (Type 1b in figure).

14
   After 2008, there is monthly data on Employment for these firms. Prior to 2008, monthly employment data has to
be interpolated data, and Statistics Denmark posts interpolated data. But the annual employment data used here is
available for all years.
15
   Westhead and Wright (1998) also distinguish between novice, portfolio, and serial to mean sequential.
Entrepreneurs, or the self-employed, move often between positions as entrepreneurs and as paid employees, as they
map out their careers (Dillon and Stanton, 2016; Manso, 2016; and Humphries, 2016, using Swedish data).
                                                                                                            10


    Portfolio Entrepreneur. An entrepreneur that opened an organic firm and opened a second firm
    before closing the first. The first firm is active between year t0 and t1, whereas the next firm is active
    from t2<t1. The second firm may have: a) closed down (Type 2a); or, b) still being active (Type 2b).
    Additionally, an entrepreneur have never closed its first firm. At some point in time the entrepreneur
    opens up a new firm (Type 3).

      Type 1a           Old firm                              New firm

      Type 1b           Old firm                              New firm

                        Old firm
      Type 2a                                                     New firm
                        Old firm
      Type 2b                                                     New firm

                        Old firm
      Type 3
                                                              New firm
           2001                                                                                      2013




A serial entrepreneur can also open more than two firms. In this case, a serial entrepreneur is said to be
sequential if two of his firms are sequential (Types 1a and 1b). Otherwise, the serial entrepreneur is
portfolio.

     C. Measurement of Key Variables
Table 2 provides a summary of the variable names and definitions, and Tables 3 and 4 show mean values
for these variables. Appendix Table A1 shows the decline of the sample size when each firm must have
information on sales, and a further decline in the sample as information on the control variable is
required.

    D. The Characteristics and Average Success of Serial Entrepreneurs
As described above, the serial entrepreneur is one who opens more than one business from 2001 to 2013.
The means of all the variables by subgroup tell the initial story of whether serial entrepreneurs are
different and if they seem to perform better (without introducing the controls of the regressions).

In a few ways, the background characteristics serial entrepreneurs are different from those of novices; in
most ways, they are the same (Table 3). Serial entrepreneurs are more likely to be men: 69% of novice
entrepreneurs are men; 87% of serial entrepreneurs are men. All other personal characteristics are the
same. Regarding education for both types, about 40% have a vocational education, and 28-33% have a 2-
year college to a university degree. Perhaps surprisingly, their industry choices are the same. For all
types of entrepreneurs, 40-45% are in services and 23-24% are in retail. Appendix Table A2 shows
regression results for the linear probability of being a serial entrepreneur. The available characteristics for
these people explain little of this probability. The regression results mimic the differences in the means in
                                                                                                             11


Table 3: the biggest factor is that men are more likely than women to be serial entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurship for both types also rises slightly with age (at a declining rate).16

The biggest difference between serial entrepreneurs and novice entrepreneurs is that the companies serial
entrepreneurs open are much more likely to be limited liability corporations (LLCs) and the companies
novices open are sole proprietorships. Serial entrepreneurs’ firms are 69% limited liability corporations,
and novice entrepreneurs’ firms are 24% LLCs (Table 3b).             The important distinction between
incorporated and un-incorporated firms is made in Levine and Rubinstein (2016)—using U.S. data, they
show that those owners who incorporate are more likely to use non-routine cognitive skills and to earn
more per hour and to work more hours. No comparable data is available here, but the higher rates of
incorporation of serial entrepreneurs could also be a proxy for their higher non-routine cognitive skills
that make the serial entrepreneurs perform at higher levels.

Do serial entrepreneurs run firms having higher sales than do novices? Are serial entrepreneurs also more
productive? Before turning to the regression results, it is useful to see the raw means of the sales data.

But first, it must be acknowledged that firms have very different durations in business, and that the data
on the number of months in business (and thus the sales for those months) is right censored. Firms
originate after they open in 2001 or later; with 2013 as the last year of establishment. Most close before
the sales data ends in 2014: in the original data (not conditioning on the availability of control variables)
only 37% of firms are still in business after 2014. To limit the degree to which right censoring of the data
alters the results of the sales performance regressions, firms are followed only for the first six years that
they are in business (as described above).

The serial entrepreneur has more than twice the average sales of the novice entrepreneur (Table 4), and
the serial entrepreneur is working with more than three times the amount of capital. Also, the serial
entrepreneur employs about two people, and the novice only one.17 The result of these differences is that
the serial entrepreneur is almost twice as productive as the novice (row 3).

The bottom of Table 4 displays mean values for the characteristics of the entrepreneurs. Means for these
variables were also displayed in Table 3a – the difference in mean values between Table 3 and Table 4 is
that Table 4 means are conditional on being in the smaller sample of entrepreneurs who have complete
data on their firms. Their mean values show that there are more men in the subsample of firms with
complete data on sales and input values.

In some studies, it could be misleading to use data aggregated from the establishment to the firm level,
because big firms open many plants or stores and the experience of each of these would differ. However,
the distinction between the firm and establishment is not relevant in these entrepreneurship data, because,
as Table 4 shows (row showing Average # of Workplaces), these small firms do not have more than one
establishment. The firm is the establishment.




16
   Columns 4-6 drop the Experience variable to identify Age effects while omitting the multicollinearity between
Age and Experience, and the regression results are the same as in columns 1-3.
17
   The mean Employment levels are 3 and 2 for the serial and the novice because the owner is included in the
Employment numbers.
                                                                                                                    12


     IV.     Empirical Results: Sales and Employment


Before turning to the regressions, Table 5 shows the distributions of sales and employment for serial and
novice entrepreneurs. The sales data shows that when these firms are big, they are more likely to be run
by serial entrepreneurs.18 The 90th percentile level of sales for the serial entrepreneur is $1.32 million
dollars a year, while the 90th percentile of novice sales is $612,000: at each percentile of the sales
distribution, the serial entrepreneurs are running much bigger firms.19

However, there are more novice entrepreneurs than serial entrepreneurs running all firms in general, so if
we look at who is running firms with sales of $1million or more, about 65% of them are run by novices.

The employment distribution in Panel B is especially interesting in one way – the distribution of
employment is even more skewed than that of sales. The median 50th percentile firm has only one
“employee,” and that employee is the owner/entrepreneur. In Table 3, the mean average Employment
was 3 and 2 for the serial and the novice firms— these means are twice as big as medians.

     A. Sales Regressions

Estimation of regression (1) shows that the serial firms are substantially bigger: with no controls, the
serial has 67% higher average sales within detailed industries (Table 6, column 1).20 Adding Experience
and Experience-squared in business (column 2), the serial firm does not appear to grow faster than the
novice after it opens, so the greater sales of serial occurs on the day the firm opens (but the Experience
coefficient is subject to substantial sample selection bias, addressed shortly in fixed effects regressions).

What causes some firms to be bigger on their first day of business? The coefficients on the personal
characteristics show that men open much larger businesses than women, and that married men and
women also open larger businesses (column 2). But these person-specific variables cannot explain the
serial entrepreneur advantage in sales, which remains at 65%.

Adding capital and labor to the regression, serial entrepreneurs are 39% more productive than novices
(column 3). Because serial entrepreneurs open firms with more capital and labor, the relative sales gains
of the serial entrepreneur fall from 65% to 39% when capital and labor are added.21 But these serial gains
are now gains in productivity, because capital and labor are held constant in the sales regression.

Do these small firms grow after they open their doors? Yes, within each firm, sales grow markedly, but
serial firms do not grow much more than novice firms. The unbiased within-firm growth rates are in
column 4, adding firm-fixed effects to the regression, to estimate equation (2). The implied growth is
20% a year in the first few years for the novice with the peak growth at 5.3 years implied by the quadratic
18
   The skewness of the sales data also show why the dependent variables in all regressions take the log of sales (and
of employment).
19
   The sales at the 99th percentile have annual sales of $5.84 million.
20
   The mean gain in sales of the serial entrepreneur (relative to the novice) in Table 6 is a bit smaller than the mean
gain in Table 4, because Table 6 controls for 88 industry dummies. Though the distribution of entrepreneur type by
industry in Table 3 displayed no apparent differences in industry choice, the detailed industry controls suggest that
serial owners operate in industries with slightly higher average sales.
21
    In these small firms, the quality of the Workforce Education does not affect sales, and it is shown elsewhere for
Denmark that these small firms don’t create skilled jobs (Kuhn, Malchow-Møller, Sørensen, 2016).
                                                                                                            13


term on Experience. The within-firm sales growth rate for the serial entrepreneur is slightly greater than
that of the novice (at 27% in the first year). What is clear is that there is sorting that goes on over time as
these firms age: the smaller ones are more likely to drop out, so half of the apparent 35% annual growth
rate in column 3 is because big firms survive longer than small ones.22

Within-firm growth of productivity is considerably smaller than within-firm growth of sales, because
more than half of the within-firm growth of sales is due to the accumulation of capital and labor (column
5). For the serial entrepreneur, productivity does not grow within the firm.

In sum, firms operated by serial entrepreneurs are 39% more productive than those run by novice
entrepreneurs, reinforcing Hypothesis 1 that serial entrepreneurs are stronger performers. But the serial
entrepreneur does not increase the productivity of his firm after he opens it, rejecting Hypothesis 2.

       B. Employment Regressions

Serial entrepreneurs do not employ many more people than novice entrepreneurs. On average, they
employ 22% more people over the first six years in operation (Table 7). This is why the 67% sales
advantage translates into a 39% productivity advantage after controlling for employees and capital – serial
entrepreneurs achieve their higher sales with a modest increase in employment and also capital.

But the patterns of employing people are different than the patterns of selling goods or services: serial
entrepreneurs open their doors with 41% fewer employees than novices (column 3) and then increase
their employment 41% in their first year of operations and about 80% after their second year (column 5,
recalling that the Employment data is measured annually).

These percentage increases are deceptive. These are tiny firms in terms of employment. Even a 100%
increase in employment is going from one employee to two, and the median firm employs a fraction of a
person in addition to the owner (Table 5). To focus on job creation by entrepreneurs, section IV.C. below
follows the 43% of firms that employ people.

       V.       Empirical Results: Heterogeneity in the Gains from Being a Serial Entrepreneur

Thus far, these regression results provide estimates of the average serial entrepreneurs’ advantage in
producing higher productivity and sales in the firms he opens, relative to the novice. Are these
advantages to serial entrepreneurship the same across all types of entrepreneurs and their firms?
Regression equation (4) introduced possible differences in the returns to being a serial entrepreneur due to
differences in the technology, market conditions, or personal characteristics of entrepreneurs. These
differences are examined next.

       A. Characteristics of the Firm

It could be expected that the sales and productivity advantages displayed by entrepreneurs running
multiple businesses could vary by industry, for a range of reasons, such as that the technology of
production or the conditions of the market—serial entrepreneurs in some industries that may value serial
talent or knowledge more highly in other industries. Is the serial entrepreneur in retailing or services
capitalizing on his talent or network as much as he is in construction or manufacturing?
22
     Models of duration in business in tables below show higher sales strongly predict longer durations.
                                                                                                               14


Estimation of (4) with “k” as industry-specific coefficients for the four major industries shows that there
are no industry differences in the mean effects of serial on sales (Appendix Table A3, in columns (1), (3),
(5), (7)). There are modest industry differences in the productivity of serial entrepreneurs (columns 2, 4,
6, 8): after introducing capital and labor controls, the productivity gains of serial entrepreneurs are not as
sizeable in services (where they are 36% more productive than novices) as in construction (where they are
49% more productive).23 Employment regressions yield results showing that there are no significant
industry differences in the coefficients on “Serial” in the level of employment (Appendix Table A4) or in
the growth of employment (Appendix Table A5). The conclusion is that the results in Tables 6 and 7
above prevail across industries.

Existing data sets (for Denmark or the U.S.) do not permit researchers to separately examine the “high
tech” sector, for several simple reasons: industry codes do not differentiate (except for the software
industry and the hardware industry); it would be tough to argue that a sophisticated manufacturing firm
today is not high-tech; and if researchers aim to study only software/hardware entrepreneurs, they are a
very small subsample of entrepreneurs. Thus, the few studies of high tech use venture capital data. The
Danish data especially does not lend itself to the study of high tech firms, because the Danish are not
known for having large numbers of possible tech firms. Nevertheless, Appendix Table A6 presents
results for a subindustry labelled “HKIS” which is the set of small industries that have labels suggesting
they are either knowledge or technology intensive. Once again, the returns to being a serial entrepreneur
are not distinguishably different for this sub-industry (more pointedly, they are not higher) compared to
all other entrepreneurs (Table 6).

     B. Characteristics of the Entrepreneur

These Danish data are a long panel in time and represent the population of entrepreneurs in Denmark, so
serial entrepreneurs can be identified as “sequential” (27% of firms) or “portfolio” (73% of firms). Recall
that the Data section defines portfolio as those that have run two or more businesses concurrently, and
sequential is all others.

Serial entrepreneurs who concurrently maintain a portfolio of businesses (or, more accurately, two
businesses concurrently since most have only two) have much higher sales and productivity. The real
action in the gains to serial entrepreneurship is for the portfolio entrepreneur: the sales of the portfolio
entrepreneur are 77% greater than those of the novice, and the sales of the sequential entrepreneur are
32% greater than those of the novice (Table 8).24 Portfolio firms are 46% more productive and sequential
firms are 22% more productive than novices. Portfolio firms also employ more people, and grow their
within-firm employment at faster rates (Table 9). Yet, portfolio entrepreneurs do not have any personal
traits that differ from those of serial entrepreneurs (Appendix Table A2).

Perhaps serial entrepreneurs perform better than novices because they are smarter, as measured by their
educational attainment. All the evidence here on sales and productivity rejects that hypothesis.25 Recall
from Table 3 that serial entrepreneurs are no better educated. Education does raise sales a little bit: in

23
   Though not shown, the within firm fixed effects regressions for sales show that industries also do not have
different growth rates.
24
   The regressions for “portfolio” and “sequential” contain all the novices in each regression, so the results for
novices do not differ across these regressions.
25
   But in Table 18 below, well-educated entrepreneurs stay in business longer.
                                                                                                                 15


Table 6, the coefficient on education shows the college-educated have 10% higher sales. But considering
only the college-educated subsample, where novices and serial entrepreneurs could be equally smart,
there are still big gains to being a serial entrepreneur (that education can’t explain): their sales are 62%
higher and their productivity is 33% higher than novices (Tables 10 and 11).26

The conclusion is that either these types of firms (in construction, retail, and services) don’t benefit from
having better educated founders, or that education is simply a poor proxy for the secret sauce that makes
new firms perform, and in particular, that makes new firms run by serial entrepreneurs perform. As a
result, controlling for education does not answer the question of whether serial success is innate or
learned over time, because even though education is surely correlated with IQ, education need not be
correlated with other “innate” traits that result is better performing firms by serial entrepreneurs.27

     C. Non-employers Versus Employers and Gender Differences

Put aside for the moment the topic of the returns to serial entrepreneurship, and consider the differences in
the performance of men versus women, for all types of entrepreneurs. What has not been the focus of
past research is that men open bigger firms than women – their sales are 28% higher, all else constant
(Table 6, column 2). Table 12 shows the full distribution of sales by gender: new firms run by men have
a higher median and a longer thicker right tail in sales (Panel A). Men also employ slightly more people
than do women (regressions in Table 7), so the male productivity advantage is a lesser 17% (Table 3,
column 3) compared to the male sales advantage of 28% (column 2). The past literature on entrepreneurs
has rarely had data on the sales and productivity of their small firms, so all the emphasis has been on the
probability of becoming an entrepreneur by gender, when women are shown to be less likely to become
entrepreneurs.

But the question here is, do female serial entrepreneurs perform as well as male serial entrepreneurs?
What are the returns to serial entrepreneurship by gender?

There is a notion that women open firms as a hobby, and men open firms to make money. To explore this
possibility, it is time to compare firms that are opened with employees and those that have no initial
employees.

It can be difficult to follow the literature on entrepreneurship because researchers use markedly different
definitions of an entrepreneur as researchers access different data sets. Researchers often use “self-
employed” to identify entrepreneurs when studying individuals’ careers, but at other times, they use
“founders.” A distinction many would like to make is between those who create jobs for others versus



26
   However, educated entrepreneurs have slightly higher amounts of capital, perhaps due to their wealth or credit
rankings, so when regressions control for capital, the overall return to education falls (column 3, Table 6) and the
return to serial entrepreneurship among the college educated falls (column 7 , Table 10). Table 11 shows that serial
entrepreneurs do not employ many more people but do hire later, within both education subsamples.
27
   For Danish data, Iversen, Malchow-Møller, and Sørensen (2010) show that highly educated self-employed do
better as self-employed than do the less educated. Anecdotally, tech firms are by owners who are all highly
educated, yet some firms succeed and some fail, and some of the successes are founders who do not complete
college (i.e., Bill Gates). Moreover, Iversen, Malchow-Møller, and Sørensen (2016) find support for the hypothesis
that theoretical skills from schooling and practical skills acquired through wage-work are complementary inputs in
the human capital earnings function of self-employed.
                                                                                                                 16


those who work alone. The self-employed are more likely to work alone than are the founders, requiring
a careful read of the broad literature that spans different definitions of entrepreneurs.28

The founders of these Danish firms are divided into two types: those who employ no one the day they
open (the “non-employers”) and those who employ others (the “employers”).29 These two groups are
then followed over time, comparing the serial entrepreneurs within these two groups to the novice
entrepreneurs. The number of observations displayed in the far right column of Table 12 shows that
employers are 43% of all new firms. Though not shown in a table, these “employers” are firms that are
almost all opened as Limited Liability Corporations, while the “Non-employers” are firms opened as sole
proprietorships.

As would be expected, the “employers” have much higher sales than the “non-employers,” and a thicker
right tail in sales (Panel B, Table 12). At the median, employers are nearly four times bigger, and at the
90th percentile, employers are nearly five times bigger.

Among employers, the gains to serial entrepreneurship for women are greater than they are for men:
holding constant their industry choice, the sales gain is 34% for women and 25% for men, for the serial
entrepreneur versus the novice (Table 13, columns 5 and 1). The productivity gain of serial entrepreneurs
is also greater for women than men, at 41% and 27% for women versus men (Table 13, columns 7 and
3).30 But women are less likely than men to be employers, and less likely to be serial entrepreneurs
(Table 16).

Among non-employers, the gains to serial entrepreneurship are the same for women and men (Table 14.)
Mean sales are about 50% higher, but serial entrepreneurs use more capital, so productivity is 26-30%
higher for men and women.

After the firm opens, how much does employment grow? Not surprisingly, firms that start as employers
also grow employment at a faster rate within the firm over time. Serial entrepreneurs grow over 50% in
their first year when they start as employers, and grow 30% when they start as non-employers (Table 15,
firm fixed effects, columns 4 and 8). But as pointed out earlier, a big percent gain is a small number of
employees, if you start with only one employee other than the owner. The employment gains of female
entrepreneurs are the same as male entrepreneurs relative to novices of their own gender (not shown).

Putting the gender results aside for the moment, one big reason that serial entrepreneurs have higher sales
when they open their firms compared to novices is that serial entrepreneurs are much more likely to be
employers. Serial entrepreneurs are 30% of all employers, but only 12% of all non-employers (Table 16).
Looking within each firm type (of employer and non-employer), the sales gains to being a serial

28
   Lazear (2005) follows Stanford Graduate School of Business graduates, but limited his data to those who are
“incorporated self-employed” which he states “eliminates most household and other service workers who work
alone” (page 662). So, he does focus on employers. His founders are then in construction, retail trade, professional
services, business services, and real estate, in that order.
29
   The “non-employers” are 91% sole proprietors (rather than limited liability corporations) and the “employers” are
70.5% corporations (rather than sole proprietors). The phrase “self employed” is not used here because it could
encompass non-employers and employers and span firm type. Fairlie and Miranda (2016) examine the determinants
of being an employer.
30
   For women, the productivity advantage of being a serial entrepreneur is greater than the sales advantage, because
serial women achieve their sales gains with slightly less capital than do novices.
                                                                                                                    17


entrepreneur are large (25% for employers and 50% for non-employers), but not as large as the 67%
across all firms (Table 6) when serial firms achieve these higher gains because serial entrepreneurs are
more likely to be employers.



     VI.     The Duration in Business

The length of time that these firms stay in business is a topic studied previously, but worth revisiting here
with these data. Past research has found that serial firms survive longer, but past researchers have not had
data as rich as these Danish data for explaining durations.31

In these Danish data, the mean durations of serial entrepreneurs is 47.8 months (for the entire data set of
41,815 serial entrepreneurs) and 48.6 months (for the entire data set of 159,036 novice entrepreneurs).32
Thus, both survive about four years.

At first glance, in the regressions, the firms run by serial entrepreneurs do not appear to last much
longer.33 For the 6.6 million observations of months on firm duration, the probability of exit of the serial
firm is only 3.5% below all other firms (column 1, Table 17). But there is data on the duration of each of
the firms owned by the serial entrepreneur, so the next step is to model the durations of these firms
separately.

Serial entrepreneurs close their first firms more quickly than do the novice entrepreneurs: the probability
of closure is 17% higher (Table 17, column 2, row 3) for the serial entrepreneurs’ first firms relative to
the novice, holding constant the personal characteristics of the entrepreneur. Adding controls for how
successful the first firm is – the size of the capital and labor inputs (column 3) or the sales of the firm
(column 4) – reveals that serial entrepreneurs shut down their first firms even faster than the novice.34

However, the second firms of the serial entrepreneurs have much lower exit rates: the probability of exit
is 23% lower for his/her second firm relative to the first firm of the novice. The remaining columns of
Table 17 show that second firms are open longer because they are more successful: controlling for past
sales, the second firm of the serial entrepreneur is no different in duration than the novice firm.

Education does have a striking effect here that it didn’t have when modeling sales. The second firms of
the college educated stay in business much longer than those run by the vocationally educated. The
second firm of a college-educated serial entrepreneur is 29% less likely to exit (with capital controls), and
14% less likely to exit even controlling for sales (column 6, Table 18).            (Recall that the serial
entrepreneur’s sales and productivity are not higher for the well-educated.)



31
   Lafontaine and Shaw (2015) show that for their 2.3million U.S. retail businesses, the second firm of the serial
entrepreneur survives 7% longer than the first or the only firm of the novice.
32
   The longer durations in Table 4 are because these firms have data also on sales.
33
   In these duration regressions, all the observed years of the operation of the business are used – the data is not
limited to the first six years in business as was done in the performance regressions.
34
   The coefficients on the control variables in the duration results make sense: high capital and high labor firms shut
down less (column 2) because they are high sales firms (column 3). The sales effect on duration was also evident in
Table 6, when the OLS returns to experience was biased upwards by the greater experience of high sales firms.
                                                                                                                  18


Gender effects in duration are modelled in two ways. First, across all firms, the “male” control variable
shows that the firms operated by men have a 20% lower probability of exit than those operated by women
(column 2, Table 17). But men open and run bigger firms, so after firm size is introduced, the men have a
probability of exit that is only 8% lower than women (column 4). Second, female serial entrepreneurs are
once again no different than male serial entrepreneurs. When all the coefficients on Serial are interacted
with Male, the interactions are insignificant: serial men and women are equally likely to close first firms
and equally likely to retain their second firms (not shown).

     VII.    Robustness

A concern with the measure of “serial” used here is that some firms labeled as “novice” may be serial if
the Danish data went back in time prior to 2001. Some Danish data does: the information on firms
opened for individual entrepreneurs goes back to 1990; the data on the sales of all new firms starts in
2001.

By going back in time ten years, it turns out that the number of entrepreneurs who are “serial” rises from
19,118 (based on serial defined from new firms years 2001-2013) to 37,089 (based on serial defined from
new firms 1990-2013) (Table 19). This jump in the number of all entrepreneurs who are serial implies
that 19% of all entrepreneurs observed for 2001-2013 are serial entrepreneurs, up from 10% used
throughout this paper when the early history of entrepreneurs was omitted.35

The problem is, for those serial entrepreneurs who started firms prior to 2001, there is no information on
the performance of their firms. Therefore, re-estimating all previous tables with this more accurate
definition of who a “serial” is results in estimates of their firm performance with only the second firms
they opened, not the first.

Table 20 replicates Table 6, but with a new definition of “serial” as those who opened more than one firm
from 1990-2013. The estimated coefficients on “serial” fall modestly in the sales and productivity
regressions but are still very large: Table 20 shows that serial firms are 57% bigger in sales and 33% more
productive than novices; the comparable numbers from Table 6 are 67% and 39%. So, the results are
sustained with the broader definition of serial, given the data that only follows their second firms, but not
their first firms.

 Another robustness check is to estimate Tables 6 and 7 using median regression, because all the
performance data is rightward skewed. The median regression results are no different from the OLS,
because the log(sales) dependent variable takes into account the rightward skew.

     VIII.   Conclusion

Serial entrepreneurs are much talked about, but little studied. Venture capitalists are said to seek them out
because serial entrepreneurs have a combination of talent and learned experiences that increase the odds
that their next company will be more successful than that pitched by a novice entrepreneur. Their
visibility is in the high tech sector, but the logic of their value should also prevail for non-high-tech


35
  The much higher 19% is consistent with the U.S. data, that used a panel of 22 years (1990-2011) to identify serial
entrepreneurs and found that more than 20% of all retail entrepreneurs in Texas were serial (Lafontaine and Shaw,
2015).
                                                                                                                   19


founders who open the vast majority of firms. Therefore, this paper aims to identify whether serial
entrepreneurs perform better than novices, and which of these serial entrepreneurs are the highest
performers.

The data requirements to study serial entrepreneurs are extensive, requiring many years of panel data to
identify entrepreneurs as serial versus novice, and then matching of their personal traits to the
performance of the firms they found. The Danish data on the population of entrepreneurs and the
performance of their firms for 2001-2013 provides the unique data needed. These are the founders of
firms, but, as pointed out by Levine and Rubinstein (2016), they are largely small business owners across
a range of industries in which they do not plan to grow big or to innovative.

Serial entrepreneurs are a sizable group of entrepreneurs. When “serial” status is measured using the
2001-2013 data they are 10% of all entrepreneurs, but they run multiple firms, so 20% of all firms are run
by serial entrepreneurs. In Denmark, there are 43,929 firms run by people identified as serial
entrepreneurs from 2001-2013.36

In seeking to identify the relative performance of the serial entrepreneur versus the novice entrepreneur,
two more general types of entrepreneurs emerge. First, there are larger scale entrepreneurs, who register
their first company as a Limited Liability Corporation and who open their doors with employees and with
relatively high sales and capital. These are less than half of all entrepreneurs. Among this group, serial
entrepreneurs are the stronger performers: they are about 35% more productive than novices. However, if
we focus only portfolio serial entrepreneurs—who operate several businesses simultaneously rather than
closing their first business before they open their second—these types of serial entrepreneurs are about
45% more productive than novices.

Second, there are smaller scale entrepreneurs, who register their first (and usually only) company as a sole
proprietor, typically without employees and with low sales and capital. These entrepreneurs rarely open
second firms to become serial entrepreneurs. But when they do, the productivity of the average firm of
the serial entrepreneur is about 30% higher than the only firm run by the novice, and their sales is about
50% higher.

Combining the large and small-scale firms for the entire panel dataset of 877,417 firm-time observations,
serial entrepreneurs are 39% more productive and have 67% higher sales than novice entrepreneurs.
That is, for the entire population of entrepreneurs, serial entrepreneurs perform much better than novices.
The subsample analysis above reveals that a portion of their performance advantage can be explained by
the serial entrepreneurs’ greater propensity to open corporations with employees: the work of Levine and
Rubinstein (2016) suggests that these entrepreneurs who incorporate have better non-routine cognitive
skills.37


36
   This is about a 50% underestimate of the number of firms run by serial entrepreneurs during this time. When the
time period for calculating who is a serial entrepreneur is extended back to 1990, the number of serial entrepreneurs
rises from 19,118 to 37,089 over the entire 1990-2013 period. However, there is no information on the firms run by
serial entrepreneurs (or novice entrepreneurs) prior to 2001, so the paper focuses on the definition of “serial” using
the 2001-2013 data and shows that the productivity advantage of the group of serial relative to the novice’s slightly
higher than the group of serial defined back to 1990.
37
   Levin and Rubinstein (2016) also find that the incorporated tend to be male, white, better-educated, and from
wealthier families; here, serial entrepreneurs are more likely to be male in Denmark.
                                                                                                          20


The large size and richness of these Danish data permit us to see how female entrepreneurs fare when
they open new firms. It has been well established previously that women are less likely to become
entrepreneurs, and that is true here. It is also true that the firms women run are smaller on average. But an
interesting revelation comes from the focus here on serial entrepreneurs. Relative to other women, the
productivity advantage of female serial entrepreneurs is larger than the productivity advantage of male
serial entrepreneurs relative to male novices. Because serial female entrepreneurs perform so well, their
sales and productivity are as high as the average male entrepreneur (where men are mostly novices).
Female serial entrepreneurs also stay in business as long as men.

The conclusion is that the firms run by serial entrepreneurs are 39% more productive than those run by
novice entrepreneurs. These entrepreneurs may be born with more talent, may learn it from their parents,
may learn it from prior employers, or may develop it as they run multiple firms of their own. This paper
focuses on which serial entrepreneurs perform better than novices – a deeper understanding of why they
perform better would necessitate the development of an expansive database on their employment prior to
entrepreneurship and their early family life.
                                                                                                    21


                                             References

Amaral, Miguel, Rui Baptista, Francisco Lima. 2011. “Serial Entrepreneurship: impact of human capital
       on time to re-entry.” Small Business Economics 37 (1): 1- 21.
Anderson, Steffen, and Kasper Meisner Nielsen. 2012. “Ability or Finances as Constraints on
       Entrepreneurship? Evidence from Survival Rates in a National Experiment.” The Review of
       Financial Studies 25(12): 3684-3710.
Argote, Linda. 1999. Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining and Transferring Knowledge.
       Kluwer. Boston, MA.
Becker, Sasha and Hans K. Hvide. 2014. “Do Entrepreneurs Matter?” working paper.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
        Policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), 1169–1208.
Blanchflower, David and Andrew Oswald. 1998. “What Makes an Entrepreneur?” Journal of Labor
       Economics 16(1): 26-60
Dillon, Eleanor W. and Christopher T. Stanton. 2016. “Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to
        Entrepreneurship,” Working Paper.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. “The Role of Entrepreneurship
        in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 28(3): 3-24.
Fairlie, Rob, and Javier Miranda. 2016. “Taking the Leap: Determinants of Entrepreneurs Hiring their
         First Employee.” NBER Working Paper 22428.
Fairlie, Robert W., and William Holleran. 2012. “Entrepreneurship Training, Risk Aversion, and Other
         Personality Traits: Evidence from a Random Experiment.” Journal of Economic Psychology
         33(2): 366-378.
Fairlie, Robert, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Behind the GATE Experiment: Evidence on
         Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship Training," American Economic
         Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2): 125-61.
Fairlie, Robert and Alicia Robb. 2007a. “Families, Human Capital, and Small Business: Evidence from
         the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60 (2):
         225-245.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007b. “Why are Black-Owned Businesses Less Successful than
         White-Owned Businesses? The Role of Families, Inheritances, and Business Human Capital.”
         Journal of Labor Economics 25(2): 289-323.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2007. “Entrepreneurship and the city." NBER Working Paper 13551.

Glaeser, Edward L., William R. Kerr, and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. 2006. “Clusters of Entrepreneurship.”
        Journal of Urban Economics 67(2010):150-168.

Goetz, Christopher, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Kristin Sandusky. 2015. “The Promise and
       Potential of Linked Employer-Employee Data for Entrepreneurship Research.” NBER Working
       Paper No. 21639.

Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. 2010. “Performance Persistence in
      Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital.” Journal of Financial Economics 96:18-32.

Hartog, Joop, Mirjam Van Praag, and Justin Van Der Sluis. 2010. “If You are So Smart, Why Aren’t You
        and Entrepreneur?” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.
                                                                                                   22



Hoffman, Mitchell and Steven Tadelis. 2016. “How Do Managers Matter? Evidence from Performance
      Metrics and Employee Surveys in a Firm.” Working paper.
Hsu, David H. 2007. “Experienced Entrepreneurial Founders, Organizational Capital, and Venture Capital
       Funding.” Research Policy 35(5): 722-741.

Humphries, John Eric. 2016. “The Causes and Consequences of Self-Employment over the Life Cycle.”
      University of Chicao PhD student working paper.

Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2004. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
       Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 319-347.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. “What Do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity: 73-118.

Hvide, Hans K. 2009. “The Quality of Entrepreneurs.” Economic Journal 119 (535): 1010-1035.

Hvide, Hans K., and Jarle Møen. 2010. “Lean and Hungry or Fat and Content? Entrepreneurs’ Wealth and
       Start-Up Performance.” Management Science 56(8): 1242-1258.

Hvide, Hans K. and Georgios A. Panos. 2013. “Risk Tolerance and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of
       Financial Economics 111(1): 200-223.

Hvide,     Hans K. and Sascha Becker.              2014.    “Do     Entrepreneurs   Matter?”    Link:
         https://ssrn.com/abstract=2199645

Hyytinen, Ari and Pekka Ilmakunnas 2007. “What distinguishes a serial entrepreneur?” Industrial and
       Corporate Change. 16 (5): 793-821.
Iversen, N., N. Malchow-Møller, and A. Sørensen, (2010), “Returns to Schooling in Self-Employment”
        Economic Letters, 109: 179-182.
Iversen, N., N. Malchow-Møller, and A. Sørensen, (2016), “Success in Entrepreneurship:
        Complementarity between Education and Wage-work Experience”, with Jens Iversen and Nikolaj
        Malchow-Møller, Small Business Economics, 2016, Volume 47, Issue 2, 437–460,
        doi:10.1007/s11187-016-9732-y

Klepper, Steven. 2001. “Employee Startups in High Tech Industries.” Industrial and Corporate Change
       10(3):639-674.

Kuhn, Johan, Malchow-Møller, Nikolaj, and Anders Sørensen. 2016. “Job Creation and Job Types –
       New Evidence from Danish Entrepreneurs.” European Economic Review. 86: 161-187.
Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw. 2016. “Serial Experience: Learning by Doing?” Journal of
        Labor Economics. 34 (S2):S217-S254.
Lazear, Edward. 2005. “Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Labor Economics.
Lazear, Edward. (2004). “The Peter Principle: A Theory of Decline.” Journal of Political Economy. 112
        (S1): 141-163.
Lazear, Edward, Kathryn Shaw, and Christopher Stanton. 2015. “The Value of Bosses,” Journal of Labor
        Economics, 33 (4), October 2015: 823-862.
                                                                                                  23


Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. 2016. “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes and Entrepreneur and Do They
        Earn More?” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Malacrino, Davide. 2016. “Entrepreneurs’ Wealth and Firm Dynamics.” Stanford PhD student working
       paper.
Malchow-Møller, N, Schjerning, B. Sørensen, A. 2011. “Entrepreneurship, Job Creation, and Wage
      Growth.” Small Business Economics 36: 15-31.
Manso, Gustavo. 2016. “Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship.” The Review of Financial
       Studies 29(9): 2319-2340.
Nanda, Ramana, and Jesper B. Sorensen. "Workplace Peers and Entrepreneurship." Management
       Science 56, no. 7 (July 2010): 1116–1126.
Parker, Simon. 2013. “Do Serial Entrepreneurs Run Successively Better Performing Businesses?”
        Journal of Business Venturing 28 (5): 652-666.
Phillips, Damon, Jesper Sorensen. 2011. “Competence and Commitment: Employer Size and
         Entrepreneurial Endurance.” Industrial and Corporate Change. 20: 1277-1304.
Rocha, Vera, Anabela Carneiro, Celeste Amorim Varum. 2015. “Serial Entrepreneurship, learning by
       doing and self-selection.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 40: 91-106.
Shaw, Kathryn and Debra Schifrin, 2015. “Royal Bank of Canada: Transforming Managers (A),”
      Stanford GSB Case Study.

Thompson, Peter. 2012. “The Relationship between Unit Cost and Cumulative Quantity and the Evidence
      for Learning-by-Doing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3): 230-224.

Vereshchagina, Galina, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn. 2009. “Risk Taking by Entrepreneurs.” The American
       Economic Review 99(5): 1808-1830.
Wagner, Joachim, 2003, ‘Taking a second chance: Entrepreneurial restarters in Germany’, Applied
      Economics Quarterly 49, 255-272
Westhead, Paul, and Mike Wright. 1998. “Novice, Portfolio, and Serial Founders: Are They Different.”
       Journal of Business Venturing 13(3): 173-204.
Zhang, Junfu. 2011. “The Advantage of Experienced Start-Up Founders in Venture Capital Acquisition:
       Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs.” Small Business Economics 36(2): 207-228.
Table 1: Types of Entrepreneurs and Entrepreneurial Firms
                      # of firms per         # of         Percent   Cumulative    # of     Percent   Cumulative
                      entrepreneur      entrepreneurs                            firms

    Novice
 Entrepreneurs                     1          171,716       89.98        89.98   171,716     79.63        79.63
                                   2           15,505        8.12        98.11    31,010     14.38        94.01
                                   3            2,526        1.32        99.43     7,578      3.51        97.52
                                   4              696        0.36         99.8     2,784      1.29        98.81
     Serial
 Entrepreneurs                     5              192         0.1         99.9      960       0.45        99.26
                                   6               92        0.05        99.94      552       0.26        99.52
                                   7               38        0.02        99.96      266       0.12        99.64
                                   8               22        0.01        99.98      176       0.08        99.72
                                   9               11        0.01        99.98       99       0.05        99.77
                                >=10               36        0.02          100      504       0.23          100
       All                      Total         190,834         100                215,645       100




                                                                            1
Table 2: Description of variables
Variable                            In regression
Sales                               Average monthly sales in US dollars, Thousands
Serial E Firm                       Dummy variable equal to one if number of firms by E is 2 or more
Semi-annual experience              Experience variable – measure time since establishment of firm in periods of six months or years
Semi-annual experience of SE Firm   Serial E Firm * Semi-annual or annual experience
Married                             Equal to 1 if entrepreneur is married when firm is established
Education                           Number of years in school completed by entrepreneur when firm is established
Male                                Equal to 1 if entrepreneur is male
Business Experience                 Number of years’ business experience as wage employed for entrepreneur when firm is established
Age                                 Age of entrepreneur when firm is established
Immigrant                           Equal to 1 if entrepreneur is immigrant
Descendent                          Equal to 1 if entrepreneur is descendent
Log(Capital)                        Log(Capital in firm) measured in terms of fixed assets and is obtained from accounting data in US dollars, Thousands.
Log(Employment)                     Log(Employment) in firm is the quantity of employees measured in full time equivalent units. Including owner for Sole
                                    proprietorship
Workforce Education                 Average years of schooling of employees in firm (excl. owner).




                                                             2
Table 3a: Characteristics of Entrepreneurs; Across Types of Entrepreneur
                                                                               Serial entrepreneur             Novice entrepreneur
                                                                               Frequency Percent       Cum     Frequency Percent       Cum
 Persons                                   Total                                  19,118                         171,716


 Education of entrepreneur                 Elementary                              2,887        15.1    15.1      34,088        19.9    19.9
                                           High-School                             1,902        10.0    25.1      14,322         8.3    28.2
                                           Vocational                              7,599        39.8    64.8      66,748        38.9    67.1
                                           2 year college                          1,407         7.4    72.2       9,327         5.4    72.5
                                           4 year college                          2,596        13.6    85.7      22,024        12.8    85.3
                                           University                              2,284        12.0    97.7      17,166        10.0    95.3
                                           Unknown                                   443         2.3   100.0       8,041         4.7   100.0


 Marital Status                            Married                                10,108        52.9    52.9      88,404        51.5    51.5
                                           Single                                  8,871        46.4    99.3      80,047        46.6    98.1
                                           Unknown                                   139         0.7   100.0       3,265         1.9   100.0


 Gender                                    Man                                    16,544        86.5    86.5     117,943        68.7    68.7
                                           Woman                                   2,558        13.4    99.9      50,893        29.6    98.3
                                           Unknown                                    16         0.1   100.0       2,880         1.7   100.0


 Danes, Immigrants and descendants         Danes                                  17,518        91.6    91.7     145,546        84.8    86.7
                                           Immigrants                              1,300         6.8    98.5      20,340        11.9    98.5
                                           Descendants                               279         1.5   100.0       2,565         1.5   100.0
                                           Unknown                                    21         0.1     0.1       3,265         1.9     1.9
                                                                               Mean          Percent   Cum     Mean          Percent   Cum
 Age                                                                                  39.6      99.9    99.9          39.0      98.3    98.3
                                                                                       NA        0.1   100.0           NA        1.7   100.0

 Business experience from wage work in years                                          13.1      99.9    99.9          12.5      98.1    98.1
                                                                                      NA         0.1   100.0          NA         1.9   100.0




                                                                           3
Table 3b: Characteristics of Entrepreneurial Firms; Across Types of Entrepreneur
                                            Serial entrepreneur                    Novice entrepreneur
                                            Frequency    Percent   Cum             Frequency   Percent   Cum
 All firms                Total                 43,929     100.0   100.0             171,716    100.0    100.0


 Firm type         Sole proprietorship          11,232      25.6    25.6             126,667     73.8     73.8
                 Stock-based corporation         2,406       5.5    31.0               3,266      1.9     75.7
                Limited liability company       30,178      68.7    99.7              41,689     24.3     99.9
                          Other                    113       0.3   100.0                  94      0.1    100.0


 Sectors            Manufacturing                2,224       5.1     5.1               7,546      4.4      4.4
                       Service                  19,484      44.4    49.4              85,234     49.6     54.0
                 High Tech Knowledge             4,207       9.6    59.0              12,469      7.3     61.3
                        Retail                  10,471      23.8    82.8              39,964     23.3     84.6
                     Construction                5,380      12.2    95.1              21,849     12.7     97.3
                        Other                    2,163       4.9   100.0               4,654      2.7    100.0




                                                                              4
Table 4: Characteristics of Entrepreneurial Firms and Entrepreneur; Across Types of Entrepreneur; Average for first 6 years
                                     Serial Entrepreneur                         Novice Entrepreneur
                                     #firms       Mean         Std Dev           #firms       Mean         Std Dev
    Firm Characteristics
    Sales (monthly $1000)                27,873        56.3       469.5             115,326        25.6       172.1
    Employment                           27,873         3.0         8.4             115,326         1.9         5.7
    Labor Productivity                   27,873        23.6       191.0             115,326        12.7        63.4
    Capital Stock                        27,873       446.4      9057.0             115,326       137.7      2695.6
    Capital Intensity                    27,873       328.2     22930.6             115,326        91.5      1699.3
    Average workforce education          21,739        12.1         2.4              52,930        11.8         2.4
    Average # of workplaces1             26,725         1.0         0.3             111,917         1.0         0.2
    Months in business                   27,873        53.9        38.7             115,326        53.8        41.5

    Entrepreneur Characteristics
    Married                              27,873         0.6          0.5            115,326         0.6          0.5
    Male                                 27,873         0.9          0.3            115,326         0.8          0.4
    Business Experience                  27,873        13.1          8.6            115,326        13.6          9.4
    Age                                  27,873        38.6          9.5            115,326        39.1         10.8
    Education                            27,873        12.9          2.6            115,326        12.5          2.6
    Dane                                 27,873         0.9          0.3            115,326         0.9          0.3
    Immigrant                            27,873         0.1          0.2            115,326         0.1          0.3
    Descendant                           27,873         0.0          0.1            115,326         0.0          0.1
Note: The averages are based on 479,739 annual observations; 96,045 observations for serial entrepreneurs and 383,694 for novice entrepreneurs.




1
    The “months in business” uses the available data in months, not truncated to their first 6 years in business.


                                                                                     5
Table 5:
Panel A: Distribution of Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneur, 1,000 USD
Percentiles      1              5             10            25            50                         75              90               95              99             #observation
Serial E         0.6            2.0           3.5           8.1           20                         50              110              181             487            175,410
Novice E         0.4            1.3           2.1           4.2           8.7                        21              51               87              266            702,007
All              0.4            1.4           2.3           4.6           10                         26              64               109             318            877,415

Panel B: Distribution of Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneur
Percentiles      1            5            10             25                        50               75              90               95              99             #observation
Serial E         0.5          0.5          0.5            1.0                       1.2              3.2             6.5              9.6             21             175,410
Novice E         0.5          0.5          1.0            1.0                       1.0              1.7             3.6              5.6             12             702,007
All              0.5          0.5          0.9            1.0                       1.0              2.0             4.2              6.6             15             877,415
Note: The percentiles are presented for averages of 5 firms around the specific percentile. This is done to fulfill Statistics Denmark’s regulations on anonymity.




                                                                                          6
Table 6: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data
                                                       OLS                   OLS                               OLS                         FE                         FE
Serial E Firm                                       0.670***              0.653***                           0.389***
                                                      (0.009)              (0.011)                            (0.009)
Experience (time of firm)                                                 0.180***                           0.038***                  0.107***                    0.042***
                                                                           (0.002)                            (0.001)                    (0.001)                    (0.001)
Experience-squared                                                       -0.008***                          -0.001***                  -0.005***                  -0.001***
                                                                           (0.000)                            (0.000)                    (0.000)                    (0.000)
Experience of SE                                                            -0.005                          -0.047***                  0.027***                   -0.026***
                                                                           (0.004)                            (0.003)                    (0.004)                    (0.003)
Experience of SE-squared                                                    0.000                            0.003***                  -0.002***                   0.002***
                                                                           (0.000)                            (0.000)                    (0.000)                    (0.000)
Married                                                                   0.168***                           0.066***
                                                                           (0.007)                            (0.004)
Years of Schooling                                                        0.026***                           0.013***
                                                                           (0.001)                            (0.001)
Male                                                                      0.282***                           0.169***
                                                                           (0.008)                            (0.005)
Business Experience (for entrepreneur)                                      -0.000                           0.004***
                                                                           (0.000)                            (0.000)
Age                                                                         -0.000                          -0.003***
                                                                           (0.000)                            (0.000)
Immigrant                                                                -0.299***                          -0.043***
                                                                           (0.011)                            (0.007)
Descendant                                                               -0.109***                             0.030
                                                                           (0.027)                            (0.018)
log(Capital)                                                                                                 0.251***                                              0.107***
                                                                                                              (0.002)                                               (0.002)
log(Employment)                                                                                              0.603***                                              0.518***
                                                                                                              (0.004)                                               (0.005)
Workforce Education                                                                                          0.014***                                                -0.002
                                                                                                              (0.001)                                               (0.001)
R-squared                                                   0.180                   0.235                      0.579                      0.830                      0.851
Number of observations                                     877417                  877417                     877417                     877417                     877417
Note: The dependent variables are the log of semi-annual sales. “Serial E” is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm is established by a founder that is a serial entrepreneur; 0
otherwise. Experience is the number of six-month periods since the business was founded. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on firm-entrepreneur. All regressions
include the 88 industry dummies for 2-digit NACE rev.2 and are bi-annual. Also included are time dummies for each bi-annual time period. Number of Firms: All firms: 143199;
Novice E: 115326; Serial E: 27873. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                         7
Table 7: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data
                                             OLS                OLS                           OLS                 FE                 FE
Serial E Firm                              0.220***          -0.156***                    -0.405***
                                            (0.006)            (0.008)                      (0.008)
Experience (time of firm)                                    0.225***                     0.098***            0.211***           0.166***
                                                               (0.002)                      (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)
Experience-squared                                           -0.020***                    -0.008***           -0.021***          -0.016***
                                                               (0.000)                      (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
Experience of SE                                             0.219***                     0.229***            0.239***           0.236***
                                                               (0.006)                      (0.006)             (0.007)            (0.006)
Experience of SE-squared                                     -0.024***                    -0.024***           -0.027***          -0.026***
                                                               (0.001)                      (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)
Married                                                      0.070***                     0.016***
                                                               (0.004)                      (0.003)
Years of Schooling                                           0.009***                     0.003***
                                                               (0.001)                      (0.001)
Male                                                         0.056***                       0.007**
                                                               (0.005)                      (0.003)
Business Experience (for entrepreneur)                       -0.002***                       -0.000
                                                               (0.000)                      (0.000)
Age                                                          0.001***                      -0.000**
                                                               (0.000)                      (0.000)
Immigrant                                                    -0.179***                    -0.048***
                                                               (0.007)                      (0.005)
Descendant                                                   -0.114***                    -0.055***
                                                               (0.015)                      (0.011)
log(Capital)                                                                              0.115***                                0.065***
                                                                                            (0.001)                                (0.001)
Workforce Education                                                                       0.009***                                0.008***
                                                                                            (0.001)                                (0.001)
R-squared                                           0.072               0.141                 0.476             0.821               0.843
Number of observations                             479739              479739               479739             479739              479739
Note: The dependent variables are the log of annual employment. “Serial E” is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm is established by a founder that is a serial entrepreneur;
0 otherwise. Experience is the number of years since the business was founded. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on firm-entrepreneur. All regressions include
the 88 industry dummies for 2-digit NACE rev.2 and are bi-annual. Also included are time dummies for each bi-annual time period. Number of Firms: All firms: 143199; Novice E:
115326; Serial E: 27873 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                        8
Table 8: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data
                                     Sequential SE                                                              Portfolio SE
                                         OLS                OLS               OLS                 FE                OLS          OLS         OLS              FE
Serial E Firm                          0.323***          0.386***          0.220***                               0.772***   0.764***      0.456***
                                        (0.015)           (0.020)           (0.016)                                (0.010)     (0.013)      (0.010)
Experience (time of firm)                                0.180***          0.035***           0.108***                       0.181***      0.038***        0.107***
                                                          (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)                         (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.001)
Experience-squared                                      -0.008***          -0.001***          -0.005***                      -0.008***    -0.001***       -0.005***
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)                         (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)
Experience of SE                                         -0.021**          -0.036***            -0.007                        -0.010**    -0.055***        0.038***
                                                          (0.008)           (0.007)            (0.007)                         (0.005)      (0.004)         (0.004)
Experience of SE-squared                                  0.001**          0.003***             -0.000                          -0.000     0.003***       -0.002***
                                                          (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)                         (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)
Married                                                  0.172***          0.072***                                          0.164***      0.063***
                                                          (0.007)           (0.005)                                            (0.007)      (0.004)
Years of Schooling                                       0.026***          0.013***                                          0.026***      0.013***
                                                          (0.002)           (0.001)                                            (0.001)      (0.001)
Male                                                     0.284***          0.171***                                          0.282***      0.170***
                                                          (0.009)           (0.006)                                            (0.008)      (0.005)
Business Experience (for                                   0.000           0.005***                                             -0.000     0.004***
entrepreneur)
                                                          (0.001)           (0.000)                                            (0.000)      (0.000)
Age                                                     -0.002***          -0.004***                                            -0.000    -0.003***
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)                                            (0.000)      (0.000)
Immigrant                                               -0.300***          -0.039***                                         -0.304***    -0.043***
                                                          (0.012)           (0.008)                                            (0.012)      (0.008)
Descendant                                              -0.093***           0.040**                                          -0.112***       0.029
                                                          (0.029)           (0.020)                                            (0.028)      (0.019)
log(Capital)                                                               0.260***                                                        0.251***
                                                                            (0.003)                                                         (0.002)
log(Employment)                                                            0.613***                                                        0.605***
                                                                            (0.005)                                                         (0.004)
Workforce Education                                                        0.014***                                                        0.015***
                                                                            (0.002)                                                         (0.001)
R-squared                                0.147             0.207             0.565              0.825               0.188       0.242        0.584           0.831
Number of observations                  742654            742654            742654             742654              836770      836770       836770          836770
Note: See footnote to Table 6. Sequential Entrepreneur: An entrepreneur opened an organic firm that has been closed again. After the firm was closed, the entrepreneur
opened a new firm. Portfolio Entrepreneur: An entrepreneur opened an organic firm that has been closed again. Before the firm was closed, the entrepreneur opened a new
firm. Number of Firms: All firms: 143199; Novice E: 115326; Serial E - sequential: 7653, Serial E - portfolio: 20220




                                                                                  9
Table 9: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data
                                     Sequential SE                                                              Portfolio SE
                                         OLS               OLS                OLS                 FE                OLS         OLS           OLS             FE
Serial E Firm                          0.056***         -0.079***          -0.230***                              0.269***   -0.177***    -0.463***
                                        (0.010)          (0.015)            (0.013)                                (0.007)    (0.010)       (0.009)
Experience (time of firm)                               0.226***           0.106***           0.211***                       0.226***      0.099***        0.211***
                                                         (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)                        (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
Experience-squared                                      -0.020***          -0.009***          -0.021***                      -0.020***    -0.008***       -0.021***
                                                         (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)                        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
Experience of SE                                        0.101***           0.112***           0.119***                       0.255***      0.269***        0.277***
                                                         (0.012)            (0.011)            (0.012)                        (0.007)       (0.006)         (0.008)
Experience of SE-squared                                -0.012***          -0.013***          -0.015***                      -0.029***    -0.029***       -0.031***
                                                         (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)                        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
Married                                                 0.064***           0.012***                                          0.069***      0.016***
                                                         (0.004)            (0.003)                                           (0.004)       (0.003)
Years of Schooling                                      0.009***           0.002***                                          0.009***      0.003***
                                                         (0.001)            (0.001)                                           (0.001)       (0.001)
Male                                                    0.055***           0.010***                                          0.056***       0.007**
                                                         (0.005)            (0.003)                                           (0.005)       (0.003)
Business Experience (for                                -0.002***            -0.000                                          -0.003***       -0.000
entrepreneur)
                                                         (0.000)            (0.000)                                           (0.000)       (0.000)
Age                                                      0.001**            -0.000*                                          0.001***       -0.000*
                                                         (0.000)            (0.000)                                           (0.000)       (0.000)
Immigrant                                               -0.173***          -0.047***                                         -0.183***    -0.052***
                                                         (0.007)            (0.005)                                           (0.007)       (0.005)
Descendant                                              -0.101***          -0.047***                                         -0.111***    -0.051***
                                                         (0.015)            (0.012)                                           (0.015)       (0.012)
log(Capital)                                                               0.101***                                                        0.113***
                                                                            (0.002)                                                         (0.001)
Workforce Education                                                        0.006***                                                        0.010***
                                                                            (0.001)                                                         (0.001)
R-squared                                0.059            0.121              0.475              0.821               0.077      0.146         0.479           0.822
Number of observations                  406072           406072             406072             406072              457361     457361        457361          457361
Note: See footnote to Table 6. Sequential Entrepreneur: An entrepreneur opened an organic firm that has been closed again. After the firm was closed, the entrepreneur
opened a new firm. Portfolio Entrepreneur: An entrepreneur opened an organic firm that has been closed again. Before the firm was closed, the entrepreneur opened a new
firm. Number of Firms: All firms: 143199; Novice E: 115326; Serial E - sequential: 7653, Serial E - portfolio: 20220




                                                                                 10
Table 10: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data
                                      Vocational
                                                                                                              College
                                      and below
                                         OLS               OLS              OLS                FE               OLS               OLS              OLS                FE
Serial E Firm                         0.682***          0.685***         0.407***                             0.620***         0.553***          0.331***
                                       (0.010)           (0.013)          (0.011)                              (0.017)          (0.020)           (0.017)
Experience (time of firm)                               0.188***         0.047***           0.120***                           0.158***          0.014***          0.075***
                                                         (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)                            (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.003)
Experience-squared                                      -0.009***        -0.002***          -0.006***                          -0.006***         0.001***          -0.003***
                                                         (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)                            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Experience of SE                                          -0.007         -0.052***          0.022***                             0.005           -0.031***         0.044***
                                                         (0.005)          (0.004)            (0.004)                            (0.008)           (0.007)           (0.007)
Experience of SE-squared                                  0.000          0.003***           -0.001***                            -0.001          0.002***          -0.003***
                                                         (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)                            (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Married                                                 0.167***         0.065***                                              0.150***          0.060***
                                                         (0.008)          (0.005)                                               (0.014)           (0.009)
Years of Schooling                                      0.034***         0.016***                                              0.034***          0.011***
                                                         (0.003)          (0.002)                                               (0.005)           (0.003)
Male                                                    0.257***         0.162***                                              0.318***          0.171***
                                                         (0.010)          (0.006)                                               (0.015)           (0.010)
Business Experience (for                                  -0.001         0.004***                                              0.003***          0.004***
entrepreneur)
                                                         (0.001)              (0.000)                                            (0.001)           (0.001)
Age                                                     0.002***            -0.002***                                           -0.008***         -0.006***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)                                            (0.001)           (0.001)
Immigrant                                               -0.282***           -0.033***                                           -0.295***         -0.044***
                                                         (0.013)              (0.008)                                            (0.023)           (0.016)
Descendant                                              -0.122***             0.037*                                              0.007             0.011
                                                         (0.029)              (0.020)                                            (0.068)           (0.049)
log(Capital)                                                                 0.245***                                                             0.269***
                                                                              (0.003)                                                              (0.005)
log(Employment)                                                              0.606***                                                             0.590***
                                                                              (0.005)                                                              (0.008)
Workforce Education                                                          0.020***                                                               0.003
                                                                              (0.002)                                                              (0.002)
R-squared                                0.194               0.251             0.596           0.836              0.164           0.213             0.547              0.816
Number of observations                  636000              636000            636000          636000             241417          241417            241417             241417
Note: See note to Table 6. Educational attainment is split into vocational education and below as well as higher education. Number of Firms: Up to Vocational: All firms: 102721;
Novice E: 83800; Serial E: 18921; Higher Education: All firms: 40478; Novice E: 31526; Serial E: 8952




                                                                                       11
Table 11: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data
                                      Vocational
                                                                                                                College
                                      and below
                                          OLS                OLS                OLS              FE              OLS                 OLS             OLS               FE
Serial E Firm                          0.237***           -0.140***         -0.399***                          0.174***          -0.208***       -0.420***
                                        (0.007)             (0.010)           (0.009)                           (0.011)            (0.015)         (0.014)
Experience (time of firm)                                 0.232***           0.104***         0.214***                           0.206***         0.084***         0.204***
                                                            (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.003)                             (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.005)
Experience-squared                                        -0.021***         -0.009***        -0.021***                           -0.017***       -0.007***        -0.020***
                                                            (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)                             (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)
Experience of SE                                          0.223***           0.234***         0.248***                           0.215***         0.222***         0.220***
                                                            (0.008)           (0.007)          (0.008)                             (0.012)         (0.010)          (0.012)
Experience of SE-squared                                  -0.025***         -0.025***        -0.028***                           -0.024***       -0.024***        -0.024***
                                                            (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)                             (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)
Married                                                   0.072***           0.018***                                            0.056***           0.007
                                                            (0.005)           (0.003)                                              (0.008)         (0.006)
Years of Schooling                                        0.015***           0.006***                                            0.010***           -0.001
                                                            (0.002)           (0.001)                                              (0.003)         (0.002)
Male                                                      0.048***           0.013***                                            0.073***           -0.004
                                                            (0.006)           (0.004)                                              (0.008)         (0.006)
Business Experience (for                                  -0.003***            -0.000                                               -0.001          0.000
entrepreneur)
                                                            (0.000)           (0.000)                                              (0.001)         (0.000)
Age                                                       0.002***             0.000                                             -0.003***       -0.001***
                                                            (0.000)           (0.000)                                              (0.001)         (0.000)
Immigrant                                                 -0.178***         -0.054***                                            -0.162***       -0.030***
                                                            (0.008)           (0.006)                                              (0.013)         (0.009)
Descendant                                                -0.129***         -0.059***                                               -0.013          -0.029
                                                            (0.015)           (0.012)                                              (0.045)         (0.034)
log(Capital)                                                                 0.115***                                                             0.114***
                                                                              (0.002)                                                              (0.003)
Workforce Education                                                         -0.007***                                                             0.027***
                                                                              (0.002)                                                              (0.002)
R-squared                                0.073               0.146             0.486            0.819            0.079              0.141           0.457            0.826
Number of observations                  347015              347015            347015           347015           132724             132724          132724           132724
Note: See note to Table 7. Educational attainment is split into vocational education and below versus higher education of college. Number of Firms: Up to Vocational: All firms:
102721; Novice E: 83800; Serial E: 18921; Higher Education: All firms: 40478; Novice E: 31526; Serial E: 8952




                                                                                       12
Table 12:

Panel A: Distribution of Sales by Gender (1,000 USD)
Percentiles      1              5            10                     25              50               75              90               95              99             #observation
Male             0.4            1.5          2.5                    5.0             11               28              70               119             348            691,983
Female           0.4            1.2          1.8                    3.5             7.3              18              41               68              191            185,434
All              .4             1.4          2.3                    4.6             10               26              64               108             318            877,417

Panel B: Distribution of Sales by Employer Type (1,000 USD)
Percentiles      1              5            10          25                         50               75              90               95              99             #observation
Employer         0.7            2.9          5.0         11                         23               52              109              108             490            378,148
Non-employer 0.3                1.1          1.8         3.3                        6.1              12              23               37              115            499,269
All              0.4            1.4          2.3         4.6                        10               26              64               108             318            877,417

Panel C: Distribution of Employment by Employer Type
Percentiles      1            5           10                        25              50               75              90               95              99             #observation
Employer         0.5          0.5         0.6                       1.0             2.0              3.7             6.9              9.8             21             378,148
Non-employer 0.5              0.5         1.0                       1.0             1.0              1.0             1.3              2.1             5.1            499,269
All              0.5          0.5         0.9                       1.0             1.0              2.0             4.2              6.6             15             877,417

Panel D: Distribution of Productivity by Employer Type (1,000 USD)
Percentiles      1             5             10            25                       50               75              90               95              99             #observation
Employer         0.6           2.4           4.0           6.9                      11               19              35               53              144            378,148
Non-employer 0.3               1.1           1.8           3.3                      6.0              11              19               24              86             499,269
All              0.4           1.4           2.2           4.3                      8.0              14              26               41              115            877,417

Note: The percentiles are presented for averages of 5 firms around the specific percentile. This is done to fulfill Statistics Denmark’s regulations on anonymity.




                                                                                          13
Table 13: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data - Gender and Employers
                                         Male                                                                 Female
                                         OLS               OLS                 OLS                FE            OLS              OLS               OLS               FE
Serial E Firm                         0.249***           0.305***           0.265***                         0.339***         0.430***          0.405***
                                       (0.012)            (0.016)            (0.013)                          (0.028)          (0.036)           (0.032)
Experience (time of firm)                                0.169***             -0.003         0.126***                         0.137***            -0.002         0.095***
                                                          (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.003)                         (0.006)           (0.005)          (0.005)
Experience-squared                                      -0.008***           0.001***         -0.007***                        -0.006***         0.002***         -0.005***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)                         (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
Experience of SE                                        -0.019***           -0.046***           -0.006                         -0.026*          -0.070***          0.013
                                                          (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.005)                         (0.014)           (0.012)          (0.012)
Experience of SE-squared                                 0.001***           0.003***           0.001*                           0.002           0.005***           -0.001
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)                         (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
Married                                                  0.163***           0.064***                                          0.117***          0.046***
                                                          (0.012)            (0.008)                                           (0.021)           (0.014)
Years of Schooling                                       0.025***           0.014***                                           0.011**          0.010***
                                                          (0.003)            (0.002)                                           (0.005)           (0.003)
Male                                                       0.000              0.000                                             0.000             0.000
                                                             (.)                (.)                                               (.)               (.)
Business Experience (for                                 0.002***           0.005***                                          0.007***          0.006***
entrepreneur)
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)                                           (0.002)           (0.001)
Age                                                     -0.002***           -0.003***                                         -0.006***         -0.004***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.000)                                           (0.001)           (0.001)
Immigrant                                               -0.443***           -0.135***                                         -0.250***         -0.078***
                                                          (0.021)            (0.014)                                           (0.035)           (0.024)
Descendant                                              -0.239***             -0.023                                            -0.131            0.046
                                                          (0.046)            (0.032)                                           (0.108)           (0.080)
log(Capital)                                                                0.136***                                                            0.151***
                                                                             (0.003)                                                             (0.007)
log(Employment)                                                             0.751***                                                            0.746***
                                                                             (0.006)                                                             (0.012)
Workforce Education                                                         0.009***                                                            0.010***
                                                                             (0.002)                                                             (0.003)
R-squared                               0.093              0.139              0.515             0.812          0.112            0.150             0.503            0.822
Number of observations                 305480             305480             305480            305480          72668            72668             72668            72668
Note: See note to Table 6. Employers are firms that begin activities with a positive number of employees. Number of Firms: Male: All firms: 44345; Novice E: 29114; Serial E:
15231;: Female11647; Novice E: 9536; Serial E: 2111




                                                                                      14
Table 14: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data - Gender and Non-employers
                                         Male                                                                                   Female
                                         OLS                OLS               OLS               FE                               OLS               OLS              OLS           FE
Serial E Firm                         0.499***           0.325***          0.262***                                            0.519***        0.408***          0.302***
                                       (0.013)            (0.017)           (0.014)                                             (0.031)          (0.043)          (0.037)
Experience (time of firm)                                0.161***          0.038***         0.105***                                           0.149***          0.014***      0.085***
                                                          (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)                                             (0.004)          (0.004)        (0.004)
Experience-squared                                      -0.007***         -0.001***         -0.005***                                          -0.007***          0.001**      -0.004***
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)                                             (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)
Experience of SE                                         0.057***            0.004          0.062***                                             0.045**           -0.001      0.064***
                                                          (0.007)           (0.006)          (0.007)                                             (0.018)          (0.016)        (0.018)
Experience of SE-squared                                -0.004***           -0.001*         -0.003***                                           -0.003**           -0.001       -0.004**
                                                          (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)                                             (0.002)          (0.001)        (0.001)
Married                                                  0.123***          0.076***                                                               0.010            0.002
                                                          (0.008)           (0.006)                                                              (0.012)          (0.009)
Years of Schooling                                       0.016***          0.011***                                                              0.005**           0.004*
                                                          (0.002)           (0.001)                                                              (0.003)          (0.002)
Male                                                       0.000             0.000                                                                0.000            0.000
                                                             (.)               (.)                                                                  (.)              (.)
Business Experience (for                                 0.003***          0.004***                                                            0.005***          0.005***
entrepreneur)
                                                          (0.001)           (0.000)                                                              (0.001)          (0.001)
Age                                                     -0.006***         -0.004***                                                             -0.002**         -0.002***
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)                                                              (0.001)          (0.001)
Immigrant                                               -0.065***            0.010                                                                -0.006         0.047***
                                                          (0.014)           (0.011)                                                              (0.022)          (0.017)
Descendant                                                 -0.035            0.028                                                               0.142**           0.064
                                                          (0.030)           (0.023)                                                              (0.064)          (0.051)
log(Capital)                                                               0.332***                                                                              0.348***
                                                                            (0.004)                                                                               (0.009)
log(Employment)                                                            0.377***                                                                              0.352***
                                                                            (0.010)                                                                               (0.022)
Workforce Education                                                        0.019***                                                                               0.013**
                                                                            (0.003)                                                                               (0.005)
R-squared                               0.130              0.188             0.426            0.730                              0.156            0.206            0.428         0.741
Number of observations                 386503             386503            386503           386503                             112766           112766           112766        112766
Note: See note to Table 6. Non-employers are firms that begin activities without employees. Number of Firms: Male: All firms: 66789; Novice E: 57546; Serial E: 9243; Higher
Education: Female: 20418; Novice E: 19130; Serial E: 1288




                                                                                     15
Table 15: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data
                                   Non-Employer                                                              Employers
                                          s
                                        OLS                 OLS               OLS                FE              OLS             OLS                OLS                 FE
Serial E Firm                         0.025***          -0.319***          -0.359***                          0.095***        -0.061***          -0.127***
                                       (0.006)            (0.009)            (0.010)                            (0.009)        (0.013)            (0.011)
Experience (time of firm)                               0.083***            0.027***          0.091***                        0.433***           0.354***           0.413***
                                                          (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)                         (0.005)            (0.004)            (0.005)
Experience-squared                                      -0.005***          -0.001***         -0.006***                        -0.043***          -0.036***          -0.046***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)                         (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)
Experience of SE                                        0.186***            0.164***          0.218***                        0.101***           0.092***           0.110***
                                                          (0.009)            (0.008)           (0.010)                         (0.009)            (0.008)            (0.009)
Experience of SE-squared                                -0.017***          -0.015***         -0.019***                        -0.012***          -0.010***          -0.013***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.002)                         (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)
Married                                                   0.006**          -0.006***                                          0.095***           0.043***
                                                          (0.003)            (0.002)                                           (0.008)            (0.006)
Years of Schooling                                         -0.000          -0.002***                                          0.011***           0.008***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.000)                                           (0.002)            (0.001)
Male                                                    -0.013***          -0.021***                                          0.117***           0.043***
                                                          (0.003)            (0.003)                                           (0.009)            (0.007)
Business Experience (for                                   0.000            0.001***                                           -0.001*             0.000
entrepreneur)
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)                                           (0.001)            (0.000)
Age                                                     -0.002***          -0.002***                                            -0.000           -0.001***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)                                           (0.000)            (0.000)
Immigrant                                                -0.009**           0.014***                                          -0.264***          -0.083***
                                                          (0.004)            (0.004)                                           (0.012)            (0.009)
Descendant                                              -0.027***           -0.017**                                          -0.201***          -0.070***
                                                          (0.009)            (0.008)                                           (0.028)            (0.021)
log(Capital)                                                                0.026***                                                             0.188***
                                                                             (0.001)                                                              (0.002)
Workforce Education                                                         -0.005**                                                             0.016***
                                                                             (0.002)                                                              (0.002)
R-squared                               0.033              0.103              0.289             0.629            0.049          0.144              0.480              0.822
Number of observations                 275819             275819             275819            275819           203920         203920             203920             203920
Note: See note to Table 7. Note: Employers are firms that begin activities with a positive number of employees, whereas non-employers are firms that begin activities without
employees. Number of Firms: Employers: All firms: 55992; Novice E: 38650; Serial E: 17342; Non-employers 87207; Novice E: 76676; Serial E: 10531




                                                                                       16
Table 16: Number of Men and Women by Employer Type and Serial Status
                 Employer                                                Non-employers                                  Total
                 Male               Female              Total            Male            Female         Total
Serial E         15,231 (34%)*      2,111 (18%)*        17,342 (30%)*    9,243 (13%)*    1,288 (16%)*   10,531 (12%)*   27,873
Novice E         29,114             9,536               38,650           57,546          19,130         76,676          115,326
Total            44,345             11,647              55,992 (39%)     66,789          20,418         87,207          143,199 (39%)

* Percent of column total.




                                                                    17
Table 17: Duration-models - Hazard ratios - Monthly observations for firms started 2001-2013
                                   Weibull            Weibull            Weibull            Weibull
Serial E                          0.965***
                                    (0.010)
Serial E Second Firm                                 0.768***           0.817***            1.040**
                                                       (0.013)           (0.014)            (0.018)
Serial E First Firm                                  1.174***           1.295***           1.413***
                                                       (0.014)           (0.016)            (0.019)
Married                                              0.837***           0.864***           0.901***
                                                       (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.008)
Education                                            0.984***           0.957***           0.975***
                                                       (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.003)
Male                                                 0.808***           0.862***           0.924***
                                                       (0.007)           (0.009)            (0.009)
Business experience                                  0.988***           0.989***           0.991***
                                                       (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)
Age                                                  1.006***           1.005***           1.003***
                                                       (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)
Immigrant                                            1.257***           1.113***           1.091***
                                                       (0.017)           (0.016)            (0.017)
Descendant                                           1.486***           1.325***           1.370***
                                                       (0.046)           (0.041)            (0.045)
log(Capital)                                                            0.892***             1.005
                                                                         (0.002)            (0.003)
log(Employment)                                                         0.789***           1.079***
                                                                         (0.004)            (0.008)
Workforce education                                                     1.032***           1.009***
                                                                         (0.003)            (0.003)
log(Sales)                                                                                 0.589***
                                                                                            (0.002)
R-squared
Number of observations             6612076            6612076           6612076            6595381
Exponentiated coefficients. The standard errors are clustered at the owner level, and significance levels are based on original coefficients and standard errors., with
***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                                                 18
Table 18: Duration-models - Hazard ratios - Monthly observations for firms started 2001-2013, Education
                                Vocational                                           College
                                 and lower
                                  Weibull          Weibull           Weibull         Weibull          Weibull          Weibull
Serial E                            1.000                                           0.884***
                                   (0.012)                                            (0.016)
Serial E Second Firm                              0.890***          1.138***                         0.712***         0.868***
                                                   (0.018)           (0.023)                           (0.022)         (0.026)
Serial E First Firm                               1.308***          1.412***                         1.308***         1.422***
                                                   (0.019)           (0.023)                           (0.030)         (0.034)
log(Capital)                                      0.907***          1.030***                         0.873***         0.946***
                                                   (0.003)           (0.004)                           (0.003)         (0.005)
log(Employment)                                   0.774***          1.080***                         0.829***         1.069***
                                                   (0.004)           (0.010)                           (0.007)         (0.013)
Workforce education                               0.968***          0.967***                         1.103***         1.018***
                                                   (0.004)           (0.005)                           (0.006)         (0.005)
Married                                           0.850***          0.885***                         0.908***         0.941***
                                                   (0.008)           (0.009)                           (0.014)         (0.015)
Education                                         0.976***          0.985***                         0.943***            1.003
                                                   (0.003)           (0.003)                           (0.007)         (0.007)
Male                                              0.855***          0.913***                         0.883***         0.954***
                                                   (0.010)           (0.011)                           (0.016)         (0.017)
Business experience                               0.986***          0.989***                         0.995***          0.998**
                                                   (0.001)           (0.001)                           (0.001)         (0.001)
Age                                               1.005***          1.004***                         1.004***            1.000
                                                   (0.001)           (0.001)                           (0.001)         (0.001)
Immigrant                                         1.094***          1.083***                         1.108***         1.099***
                                                   (0.019)           (0.020)                           (0.031)         (0.031)
Descendant                                        1.331***          1.385***                            1.121           1.152*
                                                   (0.045)           (0.049)                           (0.092)         (0.097)
log(Sales)                                                          0.583***                                          0.602***
                                                                     (0.002)                                           (0.003)
Number of observations            4848707         4848707           4837563          1763369          1763369         1757818
Exponentiated coefficients. The standard errors are clustered at the owner level, and significance levels are based on original coefficients and standard errors., with
***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                                                 19
Table 19: Number of Now Serial Entrepreneurs After Adding Prior Years 1990-2000.
                                                                             Novice entrepreneurs      Serial entrepreneurs     Serial entrepreneurs
                           Truly New firms           Truly New firms
                                                                            2001-13 that established   2001-13 that did not   2001-13 that established
                          2001-2013 (Used in          1990-2000 and
                                                                               one or more firms        establish any firm       one or more firms
                                 paper)                 2001-2013
                                                                               during 1990-2000         during 1990-2000         during 1990-2000
Serial Entrepreneurs             19,118                    37,089                    17,971                   15,537                    3,581
                                                                             Novice entrepreneurs
                                                                              2001-13 that did not
                                                                               establish any firms
                                                                               during 1900-2000
Novice Entrepreneurs            171,716                   153,745                   153,745
All Entrepreneurs
                                190,834                   190,834
2001-2013




                                                                           20
Table 20: Robustness of Table 6 after Re-defining “Serial” to include novices who had started firms 1990-2000.
                                    OLS                          OLS                       OLS                      FE          FE
Serial E Firm                    0.571***                     0.543***                  0.326***
                                   (0.008)                     (0.009)                   (0.008)
Experience (time of
                                                              0.178***                  0.042***                 0.109***    0.046***
firm)
                                                               (0.002)                   (0.002)                   (0.002)     (0.001)
Experience-squared                                           -0.008***                   -0.001*                 -0/005***   -0.002***
                                                               (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)     (0.000)
Experience of SE                                                -0.003                 -0.038***                  0.013***   -0.029***
                                                               (0.004)                   (0.003)                   (0.003)     (0.003)
Experience of
                                                                -0.000                  0.002***                 -0.001***   0.002***
SE-squared
                                                               (0.000)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)     (0.000)
Married                                                       0.163***                  0.065***
                                                               (0.007)                   (0.004)
Years of Schooling                                            0.027***                  0.019***
                                                               (0.001)                   (0.001)
Male                                                          0.280***                  0.167***
                                                               (0.008)                   (0.005)
Business Experience
                                                               0.001*                   0.005***
(for entrepreneur)
                                                               (0.000)                   (0.000)
Age                                                          -0.002***                 -0.004***
                                                               (0.000)                   (0.000)
Immigrant                                                    -0.304***                 -0.041***
                                                               (0.011)                   (0.007)
Descendant                                                   -0.107***                    0.023
                                                               (0.027)                   (0.018)
log(Capital)                                                                            0.251***                             0.107***
                                                                                         (0.002)                              (0.002)
log(Employment)                                                                         0.570***                             0.512***
                                                                                         (0.004)                              (0.005)
Workforce Education                                                                     0.016***                             0.007***
                                                                                         (0.001)                              (0.000)
R-squared                           0.178                       0.231                     0.580                    0.829       0.851
Number of observations             877417                      877417                    877417                   877417      877417
Number of Firms: All firms: 143,199; Novice E: 102509: Serial E: 40690




                                                                             21
Appendix Table A1 – Number of Entrepreneurial Firms in Data for Different Restrictions
                   Unrestricted Sample:                Restricted Samples:
                                                                                         % of              # of firms with all    % of
                                                       # of firms in register data       unrestricted      background             unrestricted
                   # of firms             %            for sales                         sample            information            sample
       Serial E           43,929              100                 41,815                        95                 27,873               63
      Novice E           171,716              100                159,036                        93                115,326               67
            All          215,645              100                200,851                        93                143,199               66



Appendix Table A2: Probability of Becoming a Serial Entrepreneur – Linear Probability Model
                                          All              Sequential            Portfolio                  All            Sequential             Portfolio
Married                               0.012***                0.001              0.012***               0.009***             -0.000              0.010***
                                       (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.001)                (0.002)
Education                             0.005***              0.002***             0.004***               0.005***           0.002***              0.004***
                                       (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.000)                (0.000)            (0.000)                (0.000)
Male                                  0.082***              0.025***             0.065***               0.079***           0.023***              0.063***
                                       (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.001)                (0.002)
Age                                   0.011***              0.004***             0.008***               0.009***           0.003***              0.007***
                                       (0.001)               (0.000)              (0.000)                (0.000)            (0.000)                (0.000)
Age-squared                           -0.000***            -0.000***            -0.000***               -0.000***          -0.000***             -0.000***
                                       (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.000)                (0.000)            (0.000)                (0.000)
Experience                            -0.001***            -0.001***               -0.000
                                       (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.000)
Experience-squared                    -0.000***               0.000             -0.000***
                                       (0.000)               (0.000)              (0.000)
Immigrant                             -0.061***            -0.017***            -0.050***               -0.049***          -0.010***             -0.043***
                                       (0.003)               (0.002)              (0.003)                (0.003)            (0.002)               (0.002)
Descendant                              -0.001                -0.003                0.002                 0.003              -0.000                0.004
                                       (0.007)               (0.005)              (0.007)                (0.007)            (0.005)               (0.007)
R-squared                               0.019                 0.005                 0.016                 0.017              0.004                 0.015
Number of observations                 131745                120229               126842                 131745             120229                126842




                                                                                     22
Appendix Table A3: Sales of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data – Sectors – OLS ESTIMATION
                                        MANU             MANU            SERV           SERV         RETA            RETA             CONS           CONS
Serial E Firm                          0.620***         0.445***       0.660***       0.357***      0.624***       0.415***         0.724***       0.488***
                                        (0.037)          (0.038)        (0.010)        (0.011)       (0.016)         (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.019)
Experience (time of firm)                               0.078***                      0.028***                     0.060***                        0.063***
                                                         (0.006)                       (0.002)                       (0.003)                        (0.003)
Experience-squared                                      -0.003***                       -0.000                     -0.003***                      -0.003***
                                                         (0.000)                       (0.000)                       (0.000)                        (0.000)
Experience of SE                                        -0.066***                     -0.039***                    -0.073***                      -0.068***
                                                         (0.014)                       (0.004)                       (0.007)                        (0.007)
Experience of SE-squared                                0.004***                      0.002***                     0.005***                        0.004***
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.001)                        (0.001)
log(Capital)                                            0.230***                      0.265***                     0.224***                        0.205***
                                                         (0.009)                       (0.003)                       (0.004)                        (0.004)
log(Employment)                                         0.608***                      0.593***                     0.662***                        0.665***
                                                         (0.016)                       (0.005)                       (0.007)                        (0.008)
Workforce Education                                       -0.008                      0.011***                     0.008***                        0.040***
                                                         (0.007)                       (0.002)                       (0.003)                        (0.003)
Married                                                 0.067***                      0.051***                     0.037***                        0.112***
                                                         (0.018)                       (0.005)                       (0.009)                        (0.008)
Education                                                0.011**                      0.012***                     0.007***                        0.024***
                                                         (0.005)                       (0.001)                       (0.002)                        (0.003)
Male                                                    0.224***                      0.172***                     0.217***                        0.110***
                                                         (0.031)                       (0.006)                       (0.009)                        (0.019)
Business Experience (for                                0.006***                      0.003***                     0.003***                        0.007***
entrepreneur)
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.001)                        (0.001)
Age                                                       -0.001                      -0.003***                    -0.004***                      -0.004***
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.001)                        (0.001)
Immigrant                                                -0.079*                      -0.037***                    -0.075***                      -0.126***
                                                         (0.042)                       (0.008)                       (0.012)                        (0.025)
Descendant                                                0.021                         0.021                         -0.011                         0.075
                                                         (0.097)                       (0.020)                       (0.028)                        (0.053)
R-squared                                0.116            0.603          0.204          0.576         0.108           0.567           0.080          0.601
Number of observations                   52068            52068         639557         639557        235439         235439           155922         155922
Note: See note to Table 6 in main text. MANU: Manufacturing covers all manufacturing industries, SERV: Service covers all service industries, CONS: Construction: Division 43:
Specialized construction activities, Retail: RETA is 45-47 and 55-56. Number of Firms: MANU: All firms: 7850; Novice E: 6215; Serial E: 1635; SERV: All firms: 106874; Novice E:
86369; Serial E: 20505; RETA: All firms: 38686; Novice E: 31055; Serial E: 7631; CONS: All firms: 23798; Novice E: 19327; Serial E: 4471. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                      23
Appendix Table A4: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data – Sectors – OLS ESTIMATION
                                        MANU             MANU            SERV           SERV         RETA            RETA             CONS           CONS
Serial E Firm                          0.211***         -0.381***      0.200***       -0.406***     0.234***       -0.408***        0.294***      -0.381***
                                        (0.027)          (0.033)        (0.007)        (0.009)       (0.011)         (0.015)         (0.014)        (0.018)
Experience (time of firm)                               0.148***                      0.086***                     0.158***                        0.124***
                                                         (0.009)                       (0.002)                       (0.004)                        (0.004)
Experience-squared                                      -0.013***                     -0.007***                    -0.014***                      -0.010***
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.001)                        (0.001)
Experience of SE                                        0.197***                      0.225***                     0.245***                        0.232***
                                                         (0.023)                       (0.007)                       (0.011)                        (0.013)
Experience of SE-squared                                -0.021***                     -0.024***                    -0.025***                      -0.024***
                                                         (0.003)                       (0.001)                       (0.002)                        (0.002)
log(Capital)                                            0.160***                      0.107***                     0.159***                        0.123***
                                                         (0.008)                       (0.002)                       (0.003)                        (0.003)
Workforce Education                                       0.011                       0.012***                       0.004*                          0.004
                                                         (0.007)                       (0.001)                       (0.002)                        (0.004)
Married                                                   0.007                       0.011***                     0.032***                        0.025***
                                                         (0.013)                       (0.003)                       (0.006)                        (0.006)
Education                                                0.009**                      0.002***                        -0.001                       0.012***
                                                         (0.004)                       (0.001)                       (0.001)                        (0.002)
Male                                                      0.026                        0.007**                     0.036***                        0.050***
                                                         (0.021)                       (0.004)                       (0.006)                        (0.015)
Business Experience (for                                0.003***                        0.000                       0.001**                       -0.002***
entrepreneur)
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.000)                        (0.001)
Age                                                       -0.000                      -0.001***                    -0.001***                       0.002***
                                                         (0.001)                       (0.000)                       (0.000)                        (0.000)
Immigrant                                               -0.091***                     -0.054***                    -0.100***                         0.002
                                                         (0.028)                       (0.005)                       (0.008)                        (0.017)
Descendant                                                -0.073                      -0.070***                    -0.105***                         -0.027
                                                         (0.147)                       (0.012)                       (0.016)                        (0.032)
R-squared                                0.086            0.539          0.082          0.455         0.034           0.466           0.036          0.553
Number of observations                   28262            28262         350513         350513        128269         128269            84634          84634
Note: See note to Table 7 in main text. MANU: Manufacturing covers all manufacturing industries, SERV: Service covers all service industries, CONS: Construction: Division 43:
Specialized construction activities, Retail: RETA is 45-47 and 55-56. Number of Firms: MANU: All firms: 7850; Novice E: 6215; Serial E: 1635; SERV: All firms: 106874; Novice E:
86369; Serial E: 20505; RETA: All firms: 38686; Novice E: 31055; Serial E: 7631; CONS: All firms: 23798; Novice E: 19327; Serial E: 4471. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                      24
Appendix Table A5: Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Annual data – Sectors FIXED EFFECTS ESTIMATION
                                         MANU               MANU              SERV              SERV             RETA               RETA             CONS              CONS
Experience (time of firm)               0.274***           0.220***         0.196***          0.154***         0.282***           0.238***          0.238***          0.184***
                                         (0.011)            (0.010)          (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.005)            (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.005)
Experience-squared                      -0.028***          -0.022***        -0.019***         -0.015***        -0.029***          -0.023***        -0.024***         -0.018***
                                         (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)
Experience of SE                        0.208***           0.205***         0.238***          0.236***         0.252***           0.243***          0.244***          0.238***
                                         (0.028)            (0.026)          (0.008)           (0.007)           (0.013)            (0.012)          (0.016)           (0.015)
Experience of SE-squared                -0.023***          -0.023***        -0.026***         -0.026***        -0.028***          -0.027***        -0.028***         -0.027***
                                         (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)
log(Capital)                                               0.086***                           0.062***                            0.087***                            0.066***
                                                            (0.008)                            (0.002)                              (0.003)                            (0.002)
Workforce Education                                          0.006                            0.012***                            0.008***                              -0.004
                                                            (0.006)                            (0.002)                              (0.002)                            (0.004)
R-squared                                  0.842             0.864            0.823             0.842             0.823              0.844            0.813             0.846
Number of observations                    28262              28262           350513            350513            128269             128269            84634             84634
Note: See note to Table 7 in main text. MANU: Manufacturing covers all manufacturing industries, SERV: Service covers all service industries, CONS: Construction: Division 43:
Specialized construction activities, Retail: RETA is 45-47 and 55-56. Number of Firms: MANU: All firms: 7850; Novice E: 6215; Serial E: 1635; SERV: All firms: 106874; Novice E:
86369; Serial E: 20505; RETA: All firms: 38686; Novice E: 31055; Serial E: 7631; CONS: All firms: 23798; Novice E: 19327; Serial E: 4471. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Appendix Table A7: Employment in Different types of firms – Median and Mean
                      Calendar year         1st                    2nd                     3rd                       4st                    5st                  6st
Non-employer
Novice E              Median                1.0                    1.0                     1.0                       1.0                    1.0                  1.0
                      Mean                  1.0                    1.1                     1.2                       1.3                    1.4                  1.5
                      # firms               69,431                 53,119                  38,506                    29,046                 23,007               18,437
Serial E              Median                1.0                    1.0                     1.0                       1.0                    1.0                  1.0
                      Mean                  0.9                    1.2                     1.7                       1.9                    2.2                  2.5
                      # firms               9,229                  7,269                   5,736                     4,290                  3,243                2,463
Employer
Novice E              Median                1.3                    2.0                     2.1                       2.2                    2.3                  2.4
                      Mean                  2.0                    3.0                     3.5                       3.7                    4.0                  4.3
                      # firms               33,880                 30,365                  24,205                    19,691                 16,253               13,423
Serial E              Median                1.1                    2.1                     2.5                       2.6                    2.8                  3.0
                      Mean                  2.3                    3.7                     4.2                       4.6                    5.0                  5.5
                      # firms               15,275                 13,813                  10,829                    8,446                  6,749                5,284
Note: The percentiles are presented for averages of 5 firms around the specific percentile. This is done to fulfill Statistics Denmark’s regulations on anonymity.




                                                                                        25
Appendix Table A6: Sales and Employment of Novice and Serial Entrepreneurs - 6 years Semi-annual data – High-tech knowledge intensive services (HKIS)
                                                       Sales OLS                  Employment OLS            Employment Fixed Effects
Serial E Firm                                   0.592***       0.302***       0.167***      -0.438***        0.170***       0.139***
                                                 (0.028)        (0.033)        (0.019)        (0.026)         (0.008)        (0.008)
Experience (time of firm)                                        -0.004                     0.057***        -0.016***       -0.012***
                                                                (0.006)                       (0.009)         (0.001)        (0.001)
Experience-squared                                             0.003***                      -0.002*         0.231***       0.225***
                                                                (0.000)                       (0.001)         (0.023)        (0.022)
Experience of SE                                                 -0.021                     0.219***        -0.024***       -0.023***
                                                                (0.013)                       (0.020)         (0.003)        (0.003)
Experience of SE-squared                                         0.001                      -0.019***                       0.069***
                                                                (0.001)                       (0.003)                        (0.007)
log(Capital)                                                   0.291***                     0.167***                          -0.004
                                                                (0.011)                       (0.008)                        (0.005)
log(Employment)                                                0.515***
                                                                (0.017)
Workforce Education                                            0.012***
                                                                (0.002)                        -0.006
Married                                                        0.095***                       (0.004)
                                                                (0.016)                        0.017
Education                                                      0.018***                       (0.012)
                                                                (0.003)                     0.007***
Male                                                           0.070***                       (0.002)
                                                                (0.025)                        0.025
Business Experience (for entrepreneur)                         0.007***                       (0.016)
                                                                (0.001)                        -0.000
Age                                                              -0.001                       (0.001)
                                                                (0.001)                     -0.003***
Immigrant                                                        0.014                        (0.001)
                                                                (0.034)                        -0.032
Descendant                                                       0.038                        (0.023)
                                                                (0.084)                        -0.045
R-squared                                         0.065          0.472          0.024         (0.058)          0.812          0.821
Number of observations                            70212          70212          38857          38693           38857          38693
Note: See note to Table 6 in main text. HKIS: High-tech knowledge intensive services (HKIS): 59: Motion picture, video and television programme production, 60: sound recording
and music publish activities; 61: Programming and broadcasting activities; 62: Telecommunications; computer programming, consultancy and related activities; 63: Information
service activities; 72: Scientific research and development; HKIS: All firms: 12907; Novice E: 9934; Serial E: 2973. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                     26
