                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    RISK MANAGEMENT WITH SUPPLY CONTRACTS

                                         Heitor Almeida
                                    Kristine Watson Hankins
                                         Ryan Williams

                                      Working Paper 23331
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23331


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




This work was supported by the GARP Risk Management Research Award Program. We would
like to thank Sohnke M Bartram, Martijn Cremers, Andrea Gamba, Jose-Miguel Gaspar, Gerald
Gay, Michael Faulkender, Jayant Kale, Yelena Larkin, Omesh Kini, Harley (Chip) Ryan, Mark
Weinstein, and participants at Bristol University, University of Exeter, Florida State University,
HEC Paris, Ivey School of Business, Lehigh University, Michigan State University, the
University of Arizona, University of Florida, University of Iowa, New York University, the
University of Southern California Finance Organization and Markets Conference, UK/UT Jim
and Jack Conference, LUBRAFIN, 2016 Hannover Commodity Markets conference, 2016 EFMA
meetings, and 2017 AFA meetings for thoughtful comments. Send correspondence to Kristine
Watson Hankins, Gatton College of Business and Economics, University of Kentucky; telephone:
(859)257-7726. E-mail: kristine.hankins@uky.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Heitor Almeida, Kristine Watson Hankins, and Ryan Williams. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Management with Supply Contracts
Heitor Almeida, Kristine Watson Hankins, and Ryan Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 23331
April 2017
JEL No. G32

                                         ABSTRACT

Purchase obligations are forward contracts with suppliers and are used more broadly than traded
commodity derivatives. This paper is the first to document that these contracts are a risk
management tool and have a material impact on corporate hedging activity. Firms that expand
their risk management options following the introduction of steel futures contracts substitute
financial hedging for purchase obligations. Contracting frictions – such as bargaining power and
settlement risk – as well as potential hold-up issues associated with relationship-specific
investment affects the use of purchase obligations in the cross-section as well as how firms
respond to the introduction of steel futures.

Heitor Almeida                                 Ryan Williams
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign     Eller College of Management
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF               McClelland Hall
Champaign, IL, 61820                           The University of Arizona
and NBER                                       1130 E. Helen Street
halmeida@illinois.edu                          Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
                                               rwilliams@email.arizona.edu
Kristine Watson Hankins
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
kristine.hankins@uky.edu
       How do firms manage risk? Hedging is potentially beneficial in a world with capital

market frictions such as taxes and agency issues (Smith and Stulz, 1985; Froot, Scharfstein, and

Stein, 1993). But empiricists have struggled to map the rich theoretical predictions regarding risk

management to observed firm hedging behavior. One potential issue is that theory papers often

examine “hedging” without specifying how firms hedge (e.g., DeMarzo and Duffie, 1995) while

most empirical analysis focuses on traded derivatives usage (e.g., futures) as their proxy for

corporate hedging (e.g., Nance, Smith, and Smithson, 1993; Graham and Rogers, 2002;

Purnanandam, 2008).


       In this paper, we focus on a common yet overlooked hedging tool – the purchase

obligation. Purchase obligations are non-cancelable contracts with suppliers for materials or

services, generally over one to three year horizons. The vast majority of these contracts use fixed

price provisions. Thus, purchase obligations also are a forward contract with properties similar to

a tradable derivative. They can minimize input price volatility like a future, but these contracts

are not restricted to exchange-traded products. Accounting regulations treat a purchase obligation

(PO) as an off-balance sheet liability and, starting in 2003, the downstream firm must disclose

upstream purchase obligations with other major contractual obligations such as long term debt,

capital leases, and operating leases.

       We construct a comprehensive database of the use of purchase obligations and traded

derivatives by non-financial Compustat firms and document some key empirical regularities

regarding their usage. Of non-financial firms in Compustat during our sample period of 2003–

2010, 21.5% use purchase obligations and 15.8% use traded commodity derivatives. PO use

varies by industry as well as by firm; manufacturers can contract on raw material inputs whereas

retailers often contract on merchandise. Firms report up to 5 years of future purchase obligations


                                                                                                 1
and the average (median) firm using contracts reports an average contract length of 2.49 years (3

years). Moreover, these purchase obligations are economically significant contracts, averaging

11.8% of total assets and 21.4% of COGS for firms that use them.

       At least some firms appear to recognize that purchase obligations are a substitute for

futures contracts. For instance, Starbucks reports that 90% of its purchase obligations are green

coffee (unroasted coffee beans) purchase commitments and they report in the Commodity Price

Risk section of its 2014 10-K filing:


       “We purchase commodity inputs, including coffee, dairy products and diesel that
       are used in our operations and are subject to price fluctuations that impact our
       financial results. We use a combination of pricing features embedded within
       supply contracts and financial derivatives to manage our commodity price
       risk exposure” (emphasis added)


Firms, however, may have additional motivations to use purchase obligations. Supply contracts

can help avoid hold-up problems between suppliers and customers (e.g., Williamson, 1985;

Joskow, 1987; Costello, 2013). Thus, documenting the broad usage of POs does not sufficiently

prove that they have an important risk management role.


       To identify the risk management role of POs, we explore the introduction of steel futures

products on the London Metals Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in mid-2008.

The availability of steel futures should have no impact on purchase obligation (PO) use if POs

are not used for risk management purposes. We find that firms with an exposure to steel

simultaneously increase their financial hedging and decrease their use of purchase obligations

when the new derivative is introduced, relative to a control group of similar firms that do not

benefit from the introduction of steel derivatives. To our knowledge, this represents the first

evidence that purchase obligations are used as a hedging tool.


                                                                                               2
       Our interpretation for these results is that the introduction of steel derivatives causes a

reduction in the risk management demand for POs but this requires us to assume that, in the

absence of the introduction of new derivatives, treated firms (e.g., firms exposed to changes in

steel prices) would not have changed their usage of POs relative to control firms. We provide

several pieces of evidence consistent with this conclusion. Firms with an exposure to steel look

similar to control firms prior to the introduction of steel derivatives. Differential growth in usage

of POs across treated and control firms arises only in the aftermath of the event, and is not

observed around multiple placebo tests.


       We also exploit cross-sectional variation in the costs of using POs. First, firms may

refrain from using traded derivatives when collateral constraints bind near distress (Rampini and

Viswanathan, 2010). The evidence from the introduction of steel futures supports the importance

of collateral constraints. Only financially healthy firms or those with pledgeable collateral

increase their demand for futures and decrease PO use. Second, POs may become too expensive

or too risky for the downstream firm if suppliers have significant bargaining power or if there is

significant settlement risk. Consistent with this intuition, we show that the impact of traded

derivatives on POs is stronger when POs are less expensive or more reliable, and thus more

likely to be a viable substitute for traded derivatives.


       Demonstrating that forward contracts with suppliers are recognized as a hedging tool

contributes to the mounting theoretical and empirical evidence suggesting that traded derivatives

are only one part of risk management activity. Although exchange-traded derivatives may be

more efficient than individual forward contracts in the absence of transaction costs (as discussed

in Williamson, 1985), the availability of traded derivatives is limited and collateral constraints

can limit their use even when they are available (Rampini, Sufi, and Viswanathan, 2014).

                                                                                                   3
Previous literature focusing on traded derivatives shows that they are used mostly by large,

financially strong firms (Guay and Kothari, 2003; Purnanandam, 2008). Our summary statistics

show that these patterns do not hold for purchase obligations. Compared to derivative users, PO

users are more similar to the median firm in our sample across a number of dimensions such as

firm size, leverage, cash, and exposure of exchange traded inputs.


       Evidence that firms find alternative means to address cash flow volatility also lends

support to the models of Smith and Stulz (1985) and Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993), where

the goal of risk management is to minimize costly variance. Operational decisions can mimic the

benefits of hedging with traded derivatives (Smith and Stulz, 1985). Recent papers by Bolton,

Chen, and Wang (2011) and Gamba and Triantis (2014) expand the theoretical work in this area

while Bonaimé, Hankins, and Harford (2014), Disatnik, Duchin and Schmidt (2014), Hankins

(2011), and Hirshleifer (1988) document the operational hedging benefits of specific corporate

choices such as payout flexibility, cash, and vertical integration. A key contribution of this paper

is to expand the definition of hedging.


       The above evidence does not negate the role of supply contracts in alleviating hold up

problems between suppliers and customers, as the two motivations do not have to be mutually

exclusive. Some firms may be using POs both to manage risk and to mitigate hold up problems,

while other firms may use POs to address only one of those issues.              Relatedly, vertical

integration may be driven by hold-up or risk management concerns (Klein, Crawford, and

Alchian, 1978; Garfinkel and Hankins, 2011). We therefore consider both hold-up problems and

vertical integration in our tests. Our results suggest that IO motivations indeed play a role in the

PO decision. Crucially, though, the introduction of steel derivatives does not affect the usage of

POs in the sub-sample of firms that are likely to use POs for hold-up or organization design

                                                                                                  4
reasons. Further, vertical integration does not predict how firms respond to the introduction of

steel futures. These results suggest that POs are in fact the most relevant margin of adjustment

following the steel shock.



   I.      Theory of Risk Management Alternatives

        Central to firm value is the ability to undertake valuable projects and hedging can

increase the likelihood that adequate funds exist. However, multiple hedging choices may exist.

We develop a simple theoretical framework to understand the determinants of hedging through

purchase obligations, and the effects of the introduction of a new futures contract. We present

this model in Appendix A. We assume that the firm can use POs, futures, or liquidity (e.g., cash)

to manage its exposure to positions such as variation in input prices. Although we do not

explicitly examine liquidity policies in the empirics, the substitution between liquidity and risk

management is important to explain how firms manage risks when it is too expensive to use POs

and/or futures, or when futures are not available.

        We first characterize the model's equilibrium when futures are not available for hedging

and introduce three frictions which affect the usage of purchase obligations for hedging. Next,

we examine the effects of the introduction of a futures contract that expands the firm's risk

management set. The new contract will change firms' demand for POs but the effect will depend

on the firm's initial risk management choices. We explain the model's implications below while

Section II describes our proxies for the frictions and presents evidence on how they affect PO use

in the cross-section. After the main test of risk management substitution, we show how these

frictions in PO use affect the response to a new future contract.

        The first friction firms may face is a collateral constraint as in Rampini and Viswanathan

(2010). The collateral constraint creates a motivation for hedging, as a negative shock to cash

                                                                                                5
flow may cause inefficient liquidation of the firm’s investment. In addition, the collateral

constraint affects the firm’s choice of which tool it uses for hedging. The key difference between

futures and POs (forwards) is that the futures position requires the firm to post collateral initially

(at the time the futures position is opened), while the forward contract can be settled ex-post.1

Because of this wedge, hedging through forwards can alleviate the firm’s collateral constraint.

This mechanism reduces the desirability of futures for financially weak firms, as in Rampini and

Viswanathan (2010).


        Second, unlike exchange traded derivatives, POs are the product of a bargaining game

between customers and suppliers. The surplus of this bargaining game is allocated based on

negotiation power (Nash, 1950; Stigler, 1964), not a market. Some firms will have more or less

ability to negotiate favorable terms with their suppliers and this may affect the cost of using POs.


        Third, POs contain an element of settlement risk. The treatment of purchase obligations

and other supply contracts by bankruptcy courts has varied over time and by circuit court. While

the bankruptcy code was expanded in 1982 to protect forward contracts, the safe harbor for

counterparties was limited to financial derivatives. Throughout the 2000s, a series of circuit court

rulings (including Mirant, Kmart, and MBS Management) left the treatment of purchase

obligations and other executory contracts ambiguous. For example, SunEdison, a semiconductor

and solar energy firm, canceled purchase obligation contracts during a restructuring and expected

such cancelation to result in at least some litigation.


        “As part of our restructuring activities announced in the fourth quarter of 2011,
        we provided notice to several of our vendors with whom we had long-term supply

1
 As we show in the model, the ex-post settlement of purchase obligations relies on the supplier’s greater ability to
extract pledgeable income from the buyer. The trade credit literature relies on a similar rationale to motivate the
positive response of trade credit to negative financial shocks (Petersen and Rajan, 1997, Garcia-Appendini and
Montoriol-Garriga, 2013, Shenoy and Williams, 2017).

                                                                                                                  6
       contracts that we will no longer be fulfilling our purchase obligations under
       those contracts...We also included in our estimate of losses consideration around
       whether we believe the obligation will be settled through arbitration, litigation or
       commercially viable alternative resolutions or settlements.” (emphasis added)
Although the circuit courts appear to be shifting toward recognizing standard purchase

obligations as protected forward contracts, settlement risk is a potential additional cost of POs

relative to financial hedging with exchange-traded products. Like bargaining power, we expect

settlement risk to affect the use of purchase obligations.


       We derive the following implications from the model:


    1. Risk Management Substitution: The introduction of traded derivatives will reduce firms’
    demand for POs, on average.

    2. Collateral and financial distress: The impact of the introduction of traded derivatives on
    POs is stronger for firms that are financially healthy or have more tangible assets and thus
    better able to post collateral for the futures position. Firms with less collateral or those
    closer to financial distress will not reduce PO usage as much, due to collateral constraints.

    3. Expected PO Use: The impact of the introduction of traded derivatives on POs should
    vary with the cost of using PO to manage risk. This effect should be more important if the
    cost of using POs for hedging is low (settlement risk and supplier bargaining power are
    low), thus making POs a reasonable hedging option ex-ante. In contrast, the impact of the
    introduction of traded derivatives on POs is weaker when the cost of using POs is high (high
    settlement risk or high supplier bargaining power).

    In the model, purchase obligations are used only for risk management purposes. However,

as discussed in the introduction, POs also can be used to mitigate hold-up concerns related to

relationship-specific investments. When firms use purchase obligations to mitigate hold-up, such

contracts should be unaffected by the introduction of new risk management tools. This argument

leads us to the fourth implication that we test in the data:


                                                                                                    7
     4. Hold-up: POs used to address hold-up concerns are not written necessarily for the
     purpose of managing input price volatility. Such contracts should not respond to the
     introduction of an exchange traded derivative.




    II.      Purchase Obligations and Risk Management Tools

    To examine the role of purchase obligations in risk management, we build a comprehensive

database of the use of purchase obligations and traded derivatives by non-financial Compustat

firms. We then add data on the firm and supplier characteristics. We describe the construction of

our dataset in detail below.

          A. Purchase Obligations

          A purchase obligation is an executory contract where both parties have not yet performed

their duties. The agreement contractually obligates the customer to purchase a fixed or minimum

quantity at a fixed, minimum, or variable price from a supplier.2 All downstream firms are

required to report these contracts in 10-K filings since December 15, 2003, following SEC

requirements related to Sarbanes-Oxley. The only exception is for small businesses with

revenues and a public float less than $25 million. Thus, the sample consists of all Compustat

firm-years with a year-end between 12/15/2003–12/31/2010 and an available 10-K filing on the

SEC’s EDGAR site. After excluding financial firms (SIC codes between 6000 and 6999) and

firms which switch two-digit SIC industries, the eight-year panel dataset consists of 26,430 firm-

years.

          Firms disclose these commitments to their suppliers in a footnote table of off-balance

sheet liabilities. Using the scripting language Perl, we search the contractual obligations footnote


2
 In an informal survey of several hundred 10-K filings, we only rarely observe footnotes mentioning a material
effect of market risk/variable contracts. The vast majority use fixed pricing.

                                                                                                                 8
in relevant 2003–2010 10-K filings for the “Purchase obligation” line item, and create an

indicator variable, Purchase Obligation, which equals one for all firms which report purchase

obligations, and zero otherwise.3 As noted earlier, more than 21% of all firm-year observations

report purchase obligations in their 10-K filings. We also extract the aggregate dollar amounts of

the purchase obligations for the next five years from this footnote and report the dollar amounts

under contract scaled by either total assets (Aggregate Contractual Dollar Amount(t+1, t+6)/Total

Assetst) or current year cost of goods sold (Aggregate Contractual Dollar Amount(t+1,

t+6)/COGSt).   The average firm using contracts commits to purchase 12% of its COGS in year t+1,

7% in year t+2, 5% in year t+3, and less than 1% in future years.

        B. Traded Derivatives Use and Exposure

        We collect information on financial hedging, focusing on commodity derivatives to

parallel the potential hedging of input prices with purchase obligations. Again, we use Perl

scripts to collect information on derivatives use and report our search keywords in Appendix B.

Commodity Hedger is equal to one if a firm reports using commodity derivatives, zero

otherwise.4

        As the exposure to commodity prices varies by firm, we also compute % of Input Traded

to capture the percentage of a firm’s input which is traded on financial markets and proxy for the

availability of financial hedging. To construct this variable, we start with the 2002 Bureau of

Economic Analysis’ (BEA) benchmark Input-Output (IO) tables and the November 2009 issue of

Futures magazine to identify all six-digit Input-Output industries which are traded on a major



3
  Appendix B provides additional detail on this data collection process.
4
  To ensure that our automated data procedure used to populate Commodity Hedger accurately captures commodity
derivatives usage in firms, we compare our data to the hand collected data used in Emm, Gay, and Lin (2007). For
the 3,000 firm-years which overlap, over 99% of observations are coded identically. We read the 10-K filing for
observations which are inconsistent with Emm, Gay, and Lin (2007). A manual reading of the 10-K filings indicates
that the data used in our paper are correctly coded.

                                                                                                               9
financial exchange. The industries actively traded on an exchange are listed in Appendix C and

steel related industries are listed in bold. FuturesMarket is equal to one if the six-digit IO

industry output is traded actively on a futures market, zero otherwise. This variable is coded as

zero for steel-exposed industries as steel futures are introduced in the middle of the sample and

will be examined directly. For each downstream industry in the IO tables, we identify all six-

digit upstream industries and weight each upstream industry’s FuturesMarket value by the

percentage of input supplied to each customer industry. Thus, % of Input Traded is the weighted

sum of all upstream industries’ FuturesMarket value. We map this weighted-average supplier

industry variable from the BEA IO Tables to each firm’s two-digit NAICS industry in

Compustat. We then calculate % of Input Steel using the same methodology as % of Inputs

Traded using the steel exposed industries listed in Appendix C.

       C. Firm Variables

       We control for a variety of firm characteristics in the multivariate tests. Following

Purnanandam (2008), which demonstrates the non-monotonic relationship between debt and risk

management, we include both Market Leverage (the book value of debt divided by the sum of

the market value of equity plus book value of debt) and Leverage Squared. Following Nance,

Smith, and Smithson (1993), we control for growth options with R&D and sales, and control for

liquidity needs and operational hedging with cash and trade credit (e.g., Haushalter, Klasa, and

Maxwell 2007; Garcia-Appendini and Montoriol-Garriga, 2013; Disatnik, Duchin, and Schmidt,

2014). R&D Intensity is defined as a firm’s R&D expense divided by total assets while firms

which have not reported R&D expenses are assigned a R&D Intensity value of zero. Sales,

defined as sales scaled by total assets, controls for possible demand-side pressures faced by the

customer (i.e., Petersen and Rajan, 1997). Cash is cash holdings divided by total assets and



                                                                                              10
Trade Credit is accounts payable scaled by assets. Finally, we control for capital expenditures

and firm size. CapEx equals capital expenditures/total assets and Ln(Assets) is defined as the

natural logarithm of total book value of assets.

       D. Frictions in Purchase Obligation Use

       Section I describes how the use of purchase obligations may vary with bargaining power

and settlement risk.     Below we briefly describe both firm-level and supplier industry

characteristics that proxy for these frictions. While we are unable to identify the specific

suppliers on a firm’s purchase obligations, we can proxy for a firm’s supplier landscape using

data from the BEA IO tables. Appendix D provides more detail on the construction of each

variable.

       To capture variations in bargaining power, we calculate a weighted-average Supplier

Industry HHI measure - based on the composition of input industries - and identify firms above

the industry-year mean. These firms are categorized as facing ‘High’ Supplier Bargaining Power

and are expected to use PO less frequently. We also use firm profitability (ROA), following

Ahern (2012), as a firm-level proxy for bargaining power. High Profitability is predicted to

associate with higher PO use.


       We then use three proxies for settlement risk. Since settlement risk is a function of both

the likelihood of distress and the cost of that distress, we create measures based on both features.

Supplier Z-Score reflects the probability of distress and uses firm-year Z-scores to calculate the

median industry Z-scores, which are then aggregated using the same weighting procedure as in

Supplier Industry HHI. We create Supplier Tangibility to capture the cost component, using the

same input industry aggregation, with Tangibility computed following Almeida and Campello

(2007). For a firm-level measure of settlement risk, we assert that longer contracts correspond to


                                                                                                 11
lower perceived risk. If the firm believed that its suppliers are risky, there would be little risk

management benefit to writing long-term POs.5 Long PO Contract equals one if the firm has POs

lasting three or more years into the future. This three year threshold is just above the sample

average contract duration of 2.6 years. This variable, by construction, only is available to

examine the degree of purchase obligation use, not the existence. All proxies of settlement risk

are expected to associate with lower use of purchase obligations.


           E. Hold-up and Organizational Design Motivations

           Section I also notes that purchase obligation use should vary with hold-up concerns and

other organization design/industrial organization (IO) issues. To proxy for potential hold-up

problems, we present Supplier R&D and Supplier Differentiated Goods - each calculated in a

manner similar to Supplier Industry HHI. Fee, Hadlock, and Thomas (2006) argue that R&D

intensive environments generate situations where assets are more likely to be relationship-

specific assets while Giannetti, Burkart, and Ellingsen (2011) notes that differentiated goods are

considered more specialized and more difficult to resell. Thus, both should correlate with hold-

up concerns and higher PO use. ‘High’ for each variable is defined relative to the annual industry

mean. We also identify vertically integrated firms based on the methodology of Acemoglu,

Johnson, and Mitton (2009). Vertically Integrated equals one if the Vertical Relatedness is

greater than 1% and zero otherwise.

           F. Summary Statistics

           Table 1 presents summary statistics on our 2003–2010 panel of non-financial Compustat

firms with the mean, median, and standard deviation for the whole sample as well as the

subsample means for purchase obligation users (PO Users) and commodity hedgers (Comm


5
    Crocker and Masten (1988) note that increases in uncertainty lead to shorter contracts.

                                                                                                12
Hedgers). Of the 26,430 firm-year observations, the use of derivatives and purchase obligations

is common (15.8% and 21.5% of firm-year observations, respectively) and some firms use both.

We also find that the median firm has % of Inputs Traded of roughly 1% and a mean value of

3.9%, highlighting that a large portion of U.S. non-financial firms’ inputs cannot be hedged

directly using standard derivative contracts. This is consistent with Guay and Kothari (2003),

which notes that traded derivatives usage does not have a large economic impact on firms.


       Separating the sample by risk management choice, Column 4 summarizes the mean

variable values for firms which use purchase obligations and Column 5 reports the same for

firms which use commodity derivatives. Firms using traded derivatives are larger, have higher

leverage, lower cash, lower R&D intensity, and higher capital expenditures while PO firms

appear to be more similar to the average Compustat firm. The differences are economically large.

For example, derivatives users hold 7.6% of their assets as cash, while the average is 14.8% for

the average PO user and 15.3% for the average Compustat firm.

       Table 2 splits the sample based on expected cross-sectional variation in purchase

obligation use. Section I predicts that firm bargaining power should affect the cost of purchase

obligations. Panel A shows that PO use varies with our two proxies for bargaining power. When

Supplier Industry Concentration is ‘Low’ as well as when Firm Profitability is ‘High’, firms are

more likely to use these supply contacts (Purchase Obligations) and they use them at higher

levels (AggregatePO/Assets, AggregatePO/COGS). All differences between the two groups are

statistically significant. Section I further hypothesizes that settlement risk should matter. Panel B

presents three proxies for settlement risk – Supplier Z Score, Supplier Tangibility, and Firm PO

Contract Length. Supplier industries with lower Z scores or tangibility present higher settlement

risk. Longer PO contracts proxy for lower settlement risk. As expected, hedging with POs


                                                                                                  13
appears to be a function of the risk of the contract. Firms supplied by industries with lower Z

scores and lower tangibility use PO less often and at lower levels. Of the subset of firms with

POs,    longer    contract    length    is   associated   with   higher   AggregatePO/Assets   and

AggregatePO/COGS. As with the proxies for bargaining power, all differences based on proxies

for settlement risk are statistically significant.

        The last panel of Table 2 examines IO motivations. Firms facing hold-up concerns with

suppliers may use purchase obligations for reasons other than risk management. Indeed, we note

that firms operating in supply chains where they face more potential hold-up problems (proxied

by Supplier R&D or Supplier Differentiated Goods) use more POs. This supports Implication 4

from Section I. We confirm our Long PO Contract as a proxy for perceived settlement risk by

limiting the sample to firms with both ‘low’ Supplier R&D and purchase obligation use. Long

PO Contract, even in these firms with low hold-up concerns, still associates with higher

aggregate PO usage. We also show that Vertically Integrated firms use purchase obligations as

much as if not more so than non-integrated firms, indicating that supply contracts do not

perfectly substitute for vertical integration. We will return to these IO motivations later in the

paper to sharpen our evidence on the use of purchase obligations for risk management.

        G. Cross-sectional Evidence

    Next, we extend our analysis of purchase obligation use by exploring cross-sectional

variation.   We begin by investigating how the contracting frictions and IO motivations

introduced in Section I associate with PO use in the full sample. Table 3 Panel A presents a logit

regression predicting PO use with the variables we use to proxy for frictions in the costs and

benefits of POs. As many of these are collinear, we regress them individually. With the

exception of Supplier Industry Concentration, all have a statistically significant and positive



                                                                                                14
correlation with PO use.      As predicted, firm bargaining power (Firm Profitability), lower

settlement risk (Supplier Z Score, Supplier Tangibility), and more potential hold-up concerns

(Supplier R&D, Supplier Differentiated Goods) all are correlated with purchase obligations. This

holds both in the cross-section, and within industry. Although we use firm fixed effects in our

later tests when we focus on a causal relation, we exclude them here since our goal is to describe

which types of firms use purchase obligations not within firm variation.

   In Panel B, we use the specific indicator variables employed throughout this paper for

subsample analysis and regress them with and without firm level control variables to provide

more cross-sectional evidence. We observe consistent patterns. High Firm Profitability

associates with PO use both in the cross-section and within industry, keeping with the bargaining

power hypothesis. The proxies for lower settlement risk are significant and positive in the cross-

section, but not within industry where we should expect less variation. The proxies for hold-up

are not always related to PO use but it is difficult to infer whether this is due to collinearity or if

hold-up concerns are a secondary motivation. % Input Traded, the availability of financial

hedging, is negatively associated with PO use as would be expected if they are risk management

substitutes. Leverage also has a negative coefficient, consistent with the existing literature on

hedging in distress (Purnanandam (2008)). Lastly, Trade Credit is negatively associated with PO

use, consistent with trade credit reducing financial constraint and hedging needs. Both Cunat

(2007) and Garcia-Appendini and Monteriol-Garriga (2013) note that suppliers are liquidity

providers during periods of financial constraint.



   III.    Substitution of Purchase Obligations and Derivatives




                                                                                                    15
         If purchase obligation contracts are risk management tools, then other risk management

decisions may affect their use. The introduction of steel futures provides a natural setting in

which to examine risk management substitutions. In this section, we document that firms treat

purchase obligations and traded derivatives as alternative hedges for controlling input price

volatility.

         A. Evidence from the Introduction of Steel Futures

         In 2008, steel futures products were introduced on the London Metals Exchange in April

and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in August. Understanding the origination of the steel

futures market is important to the validity of the empirical strategy. If the futures were

introduced in response to an explicit dissatisfaction with purchase obligations, then this financial

innovation would not be exogenous to shifts in firms’ demand for purchase obligations.

However, this does not appear to be the case. News coverage of the rollout described highly

skeptical industry participants expressing concern about speculation. A 2007 GE Industry

Research Monitor report asserts, “[M]any steel producers remain reluctant to see the

development of a transparent exchange-based pricing system (which invites the bogeyman

speculator into the equation), preferring instead to offer direct forward-contract pricing (with raw

material surcharges in some cases) to their customers” (Aldrich, 2007).6

         Even if industry participants did not drive the creation of steel futures (Scinta, 2006), they

did encounter a different set of hedging tools after 2008 and could adjust their risk management

decisions. If purchase obligations are similar to an exchange-traded futures contract but not as

efficient, firms with steel exposure could switch to steel futures to manage input price volatility

(Implication 1 of the model). We identify firms with a non-trivial exposure to steel prices based

6
  Carlton (1984) describes several necessary conditions for the introduction of futures markets, such as price
uncertainty and large transaction values. These factors tend to be outside the control of individual participants and
thus exogenous to individual firms.

                                                                                                                  16
on their input industries. Steel Exposure equals one if the percentage of a firm’s input which is

steel is greater than 1%.7 The Futures Available indicator equals one after the introduction of

steel futures. The interaction of Futures Available and Steel Exposure captures the change in risk

management behavior for firms with steel exposure after the introduction of the new derivative.

        A range of firms and industries have steel exposure. Appendix E summarizes industry

level exposure based on the percent of observations with % of Input Steel greater than 1%. As

there are over 170 six-digit NAICS industries represented, we use Fama-French 48 industry

codes to aggregate the data.8 Not surprisingly, agriculture, food, soda, books, and the like had no

steel exposed observations. But more than half of the industry groups had non-trivial exposure.

There are some unexpected industries included, such as Toys and Retail. However, Toys

includes sectors such as fishing, hunting, and trapping; boat building and repair, musical

instruments, household AV. Likewise, Retail includes dealers of autos, RVs, boats, and mobile

homes. Also of note, the Fama French Steel category does not have 100% steel exposure because

that grouping also includes nonferrous metal production such as copper and aluminum.

        To motivate our empirical tests, we first present graphically how purchase obligation use

responded to the introduction of steel futures. We plot PO/Total Assets from 2006 to 2010,

segmented by steel exposure in Figure 1. PO/Total Assets is net of the 2008 PO/Total Assets so

that all firms’ PO usage is shown with respect to the shock year. To control for observables, we

use a matched sample to define the control group (see Section III.D for the details on the

matching procedure). Firms with a non-trivial steel exposure are represented by a blue line and

matched firms with little to no steel exposure are represented by a red line. The time trends in

our data match the intuition of the model. Firms seem to follow similar trends in PO usage until

7
 Our results are robust to alternative thresholds of steel exposure. These results are presented in Appendix F.
8
  In the difference-in-differences regressions below, we measure steel exposure at the original six-digit industry
classification

                                                                                                               17
2008, regardless of steel exposure. Following the introduction of steel futures, we observe steel-

exposed firms dramatically decrease PO/Total Assets, while observing no such effect among

firms with minimal steel exposure.

       We next compare firms affected by the introduction of steel futures to other firms. Table

4 presents summary statistics showing that steel exposed firms are somewhat similar to non-steel

firms across a number of dimensions even though the firms generally are in different industries.

There is no statistical difference in the mean or median size between the two groups. Median

Sales are higher for steel firms but there is no difference in the means. Likewise, CapEx differs

in the mean but not median. Leverage is slightly lower and statistically different for the steel

firms. Lastly, both the mean and median Cash and Trade Credit levels are different but in

offsetting manners. Steel exposed firms have lower mean Cash and Trade Credit but higher

median values. In noting the similarities, we are not dismissing the differences. We address the

differences between our treated and control sample three ways. First, we include firm fixed

effects to analyze within-firm responses. Second, we include basic and more extended control

variables in our multivariate regressions. Lastly, we conduct a nearest neighbor match to ensure

the robustness of our results.

       Table 5 presents the steel futures natural experiment results. Regressions are presented

with the inclusion of both firm and year fixed effects. As Steel Exposure is time invariant, it is

absorbed by the firm fixed effect. However, we can interpret the interaction with Steel Futures

Available. Consistent with expectations, the interaction coefficient shows that the introduction of

steel futures is associated with an increased likelihood of financial hedging for firms with steel

exposure. To address the concern of endogenous (post-event) right hand side variables, we

present three specifications. Column 1 excludes firm level control variables, presenting only the



                                                                                                18
steel future shock interaction with firm and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 3 include the base

and extended controls, where the post-event control variables are scaled by 2007 total assets to

minimize the endogeneity. In columns 4 through 6, Table 5 also documents a decrease in the use

of POs for steel exposed firms when steel futures become available. This decrease in operational

hedging following an increase in the availability of financial derivatives holds across all three

model specifications.

       Since both Steel Exposure and Steel Futures Available are dummies, the coefficient on

their interaction can be directly interpreted as the relative change in the usage of POs for treated

firms. Thus, Table 5 suggests that Aggregate PO/Assets decreased by 2.6% to 3% more for

treated firms, after the introduction of steel futures. Given that the average level of Aggregate

PO/Assets for PO users is 11.8% (Table 1), this relative change is economically highly

significant. These results suggest that the introduction of a new financial hedging product affects

both traded derivatives and purchase obligation use, consistent with firms using non-cancelable

supply contracts as alternative to exchange-traded derivatives (Implication 1 of the model).

       One potential concern may be that firms use over-the-counter (OTC) contracts prior to

the shock. In this case, the introduction of steel futures would not represent a shock to the

availability of financial derivatives as firms could simply switch from OTC contracts to futures.

To address this concern, we note that the OTC market for steel is rather small. The gross market

amounts of all non-gold commodity forward and swap contracts were 5.2% of the total OTC

market in June 2007 (Bank of International Settlements, 2008) and non-gold commodities

include a vast array of OTC contracts, including energy, agriculture, and metals. While we don’t

have specific information on the OTC steel market, the presence of any active OTC hedging

market for steel would minimize the impact of the shock to purchase obligations and bias our



                                                                                                 19
estimates towards zero. The availability of OTC steel contracts would mitigate the demand for

risk management with POs leading to lower overall PO use for steel exposed firms and a smaller

response to the introduction of steel futures.9

         B. Placebo Tests

         To further ensure that the above results are not affected by spurious correlation in either

the cross section or the time series, we consider two placebo tests in Table 6. First, we identify

two-digit SIC industries with no steel exposure (defined as steel comprising less than 0.01% of

industry input). We next flag these firms as placebo “steel” firms and re-estimate our tests from

Table 5, presenting again the identical base and extended control variables. The introduction of

steel futures has no material impact on purchase obligations by the placebo steel firms across all

specifications. That is, firms do not respond to the introduction of an unrelated derivative

product.

         In columns 3-6 of Table 6, we consider an additional falsification test related to the

timing of the introduction of steel futures. Specifically, we replace the indicator variable Steel

Futures Available, which equals one for years after the 2008 introduction of steel futures, with

Placebo Steel Futures Available which equals one if the year is 2006 or 2007 and zero otherwise.

We present these results for the whole sample as well as excluding the actual treated period of

2008 onwards. We find that firms with steel exposure are not changing in the pre-treatment

period. Combined with our parallel trends analysis and the results from Table 5, the falsification

tests in Table 6 provide additional evidence that the introduction of steel futures truly represents

a shock to hedging opportunities which affects firms’ usage of purchase obligations.

         C. Matching

9
  Further, OTC markets generally require collateral, implying that such contracts are less available in cases of severe
financial constraints (i.e., Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010). Our later results in Table 8 are therefore inconsistent
with OTC markets playing a major factor in our tests.

                                                                                                                    20
         Next, we revisit the steel futures introduction using nearest neighbor matching. Table 7

has three panels of results for this test. Panel A presents summary statistics for the treated and

matched control sample. They are similar but not perfectly matched. This is similar to the Table

4 broad sample results and, given the broad industry differences between firms with and without

steel exposures, some variation isn’t surprising. What we gain with the nearest neighbor match,

however, is an improvement in the control group observables. While Cash and CapEx differ

significantly between the two groups, a comparison of the means shows that the difference is in

the thousandth decimal place and likely not economically relevant.

         Panel B of Table 7 presents the difference-in-difference results of how the treated (Steel)

and control (matched non-steel firms) groups responded to the introduction of steel futures.

Aggregate PO use declines a statistically significant -0.012 relative to the control group’s

change. Panel C reports the nearest neighbor matching average treatment effect on the treated

(ATT) estimates for the same test which are very similar to the basic diff-in-diff results but make

an adjustment for the imperfect matching. The coefficient estimate is almost the same as with the

unadjusted diff-in-diff comparison of the treated and control groups. In total, the Table 7 nearest

neighbor matching process confirms the Table 5 firm fixed effects regressions. The introduction

of steel futures leads affected firms to decrease their use of purchase obligations.



   IV.      Cross-sectional Evidence from the Steel Futures Natural Experiment

   The introduction of steel futures provides a natural setting to test the hypothesis that purchase

obligations and financial hedging are substitute hedging tools. However, forward contracting

with purchase obligations can present distinct costs and risks. This section explores the various




                                                                                                 21
cross-sectional implications developed in the model in the context of the steel futures natural

experiment.

       A. Collateral and Financial Health

   An important implication of the model is that the choice between risk management

alternatives depends in part of the costs of the hedging tools. To use financial hedging, a firm

must be able to post collateral. Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) highlight that collateral costs

varies with the availability of collateral as well as the marginal value of cash, which increases as

firms approach distress. Table 8 explores this cross-sectional prediction (Implication 2 of the

model) by replicating the baseline Table 5 experiment, splitting the sample both on asset

tangibility as well as financial health. Financially stronger firms are better situated to bear these

costs and initiate derivatives programs while financially weaker firms are expected to continue to

use POs. Steel-exposed firms more able to post collateral – firms with Z scores above 3 or with

higher tangibility (above the industry year mean) - increase their use of financial hedging

following the introduction of steel futures, while more constrained firms and those with lower

tangibility do not. At the same time, firms more able to post collateral scale back their use of

purchase obligations, while the other firms do not. These results show that the patterns identified

in Table 5 are driven by firms able to post collateral, which is consistent with Implication 2 and

Rampini and Viswanathan (2010).

       B. Bargaining Power & Settlement Risk

    Implication 3 of the model suggests that firms should decrease their use of purchase

obligations only if they used POs as a hedge in the pre-treatment period. Purchase obligations are

less attractive for firms with less bargaining power. For such firms, we should expect little or no

response to the introduction of steel futures. Firms with low bargaining power (‘high’ Supplier



                                                                                                  22
Industry Concentration or ‘low’ Firm Profitability) are predicted to find PO obligations more

costly and these firms, as shown in Tables 2 and 3, use PO less. Consistent with this evidence,

Table 9 shows that use of POs decreases statistically only when firm bargaining power is high –

‘low’ Supplier Industry Concentration (Column 2) and ‘high’ Firm Profitability (Column 3) –

and firms with lower bargaining power do not respond to the shock.

    Relatedly, firms facing higher settlement risk are predicted to regard purchase obligations as

less attractive for risk management. Given this, we expect only firms with lower settlement risk

to respond to the natural experiment. We test this prediction in Table 10. Across our three

proxies for settlement risk – Supplier Z Score, Supplier Tangibility, and Long PO Contract –

only firms with lower settlement risk decrease their use of purchase obligation in response to the

introduction of steel futures (Columns 1, 3, and 5). Firms encountering less risky purchase

obligations appear to use PO for risk management and adjust in response to the new derivative.

Consistent with the evidence on bargaining power, these results support Implication 3 of the

model.

         C. Hold-up and Organizational Design Motivations

   To expand our understanding of purchase obligation use for risk management, we explore

alternative motivations for using these contracts. Firms may address hold-up problems associated

with relationship-specific investments with supply contracts as well as vertical integration (i.e.,

Williamson, 1985; Joskow, 1985; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Mitton, 2009). Implication 4 of our

model predicts that the introduction of a new hedging tool should only affect purchase

obligations used for hedging purposes. Therefore, purchase obligations written to address hold-

up problems should be unaffected by the introduction of steel future. In Table 11, we revisit our

steel futures experiment and document that firms using POs to address IO contracting issues do



                                                                                                23
not respond to the risk management shock. Potential hold-up issues increase when suppliers have

higher levels of relationship-specific investment and we find such firms (‘High’ Supplier R&D in

Column 1, ‘High’ Supplier Differentiated Goods in Column 3) do not decrease PO use around

the introduction of steel futures even if they have a steel exposure. We therefore document a

change in PO use only for firms more likely to use POs for hedging purposes.

         D. Vertical Integration and Trade Credit

    Finally, we explicitly consider how vertical integration interacts with a shock that expands

the firm’s risk management menu. We view this as an important robustness test given that

vertical integration has been considered in the extant hedging literature (i.e., Garfinkel and

Hankins, 2011). One also may worry that trade credit changes with PO usage and that this

parallel channel affects a firm’s risk management. We therefore look at whether trade credit is

an important margin of adjustment following the steel shock.

    In column 5 and 6 of Table 11, we examine whether vertical integration predicts a firm’s

response to the steel shock. We find that PO usage changes in a similar way for both VI and non-

VI firms. The coefficient on the interaction term is almost identical for both VI and non-VI

firms, though it is statistically insignificant for VI firms (possibly due to the smaller sample

size).

    Table 12 examines whether the futures introduction affect either trade credit or vertical

integration. Model 1 considers the effect on trade credit, whereas models 2 and 3 consider the

effects on Vertical Integration and Vertical Relatedness, respectively. We document no

economically or statistically significant relationship between the steel shock and the use of trade

credit or the level of vertical integration. Thus, we conclude that neither trade credit nor vertical

integration are significantly affected by the expansion of a firm’s risk management menu.



                                                                                                  24
Overall, these results are consistent with the argument that neither vertical integration nor trade

credit represents a good substitute for the risk management role of purchase obligations.




    V.      Conclusion

    We show that purchase obligations – non-cancellable futures contracts written with suppliers

– are a risk management tool and a substitute for financial hedging. Firms use purchase

obligations on average more broadly than traded commodity derivatives. However, following a

shock that increases the availably of traded derivatives for firms with steel exposure, these firms

increase financial hedging and decrease their use of purchase obligations. Firms more likely to

use POs as hedging tools adjust PO usage whereas other firms do not. Moreover, we explore

how collateral, bargaining power, settlement risk, and hold-up concerns all affect the propensity

to use purchase obligations and document that the response to the natural experiment is

concentrated in firms more likely to use purchase obligations for risk management. We also

document that there is no concurrent change in the level of vertical integration or use of trade

credit for treated firms.

    Overall, our research offers new insights into corporate risk management. We document that

purchase obligations are a widespread but overlooked hedging tool which closely mirrors the

structure of a futures contract. Further, we document that firms recognize the risk management

component of these supply contracts. This substantially expands the understanding of how firms

manage risk and the channels available for firms without exchange-traded exposures,

complementing the Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) discussion of how to manage

unmarketable risks.



                                                                                                25
References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and T. Mitton, 2009, Determinants of vertical integration: Financial
development and contracting costs, Journal of Finance 64, 1251-1290.

Ahern, K., 2012, Bargaining Power and Industry Dependence in Mergers, Journal of Financial
Economics 103, 530-550.

Aldrich, R., 2007, In focus: The “future” of steel?, GE Commercial Finance Research Industry
Research Monitor,1-4.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, 2007, Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and corporate
investment, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429-1460.

Altman, E. I., 1968, Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate
bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 23, 589–609.

Bank of International Settlements, 2008, Monetary and Economic Department: OTC derivatives
market activity in the first half of 2008, Research report.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2011, A unified theory of Tobin's q, corporate investment,
financing, and risk management, Journal of Finance 66, 1545–1578.

Bonaimé, A., K. Hankins, and J. Harford, 2014, Financial flexibility, risk management, and
payout choice, Review of Financial Studies 27, 1074-1101.

Carlton, D., 1984, Futures markets: Their purpose, their history, their growth, their successes and
failures, Journal of Futures Markets 4, 237-271.

Costello, A., 2013, Mitigating incentive contracts in inter-firm relationships: Evidence from
long-term supply contracts, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 56, 19-39.
Crocker, K. J. and S. E. Masten, 1988, Mitigating contractual hazards: Unilateral options and
contract length, RAND Journal of Economics 19, 27-343.
Cunat, V., 2007, Trade Credit: Suppliers as debt collectors and insurance providers, Review of
Financial Studies 20, 491-527.
DeMarzo, P. and D. Duffie, 1995, Corporate incentives for hedging and hedge accounting,
Review of Financial Studies, 8, 743-771.

Disatnik, D., R. Duchin, and B. Schmidt, 2014, Cash flow hedging and liquidity choices, Review
of Finance 18, 715-748.

Emm, E., G. Gay, and C. Lin, 2007, Choices and best practice in corporate risk management
disclosure, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 19, 82-93.


                                                                                                26
Fee, C. E., C. Hadlock, and S. Thomas, 2006, Corporate Equity Ownership and the Governance
of Product Market Relationships, Journal of Finance, 61, 1217-1252.

Froot, K., D. Scharfstein, J. Stein, 1993, Risk management: coordinating corporate investments
and financing policies, Journal of Finance 5, 1629-1658.

Gamba, A. and A. Triantis, 2014, Corporate risk management: Integrating liquidity, hedging, and
operating policies, Management Science 60, 246-264

Garcia-Appendini, E., Montoriol-Garriga, J., 2013. Firms as liquidity providers: Evidence from
the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 272-291.

Garfinkel, J., and K. W. Hankins, 2011, The role of risk management in mergers and waves,
Journal of Financial Economics 101, 515–532.

Giannetti, M., M. Burkart, and T. Ellingsen, 2011, What you sell is what you lend? Explaining
trade credit contracts, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1261-1298.

Graham, J. and D. Rogers, 2002, Do firms hedge in response to tax incentives, Journal of
Finance 57, 815-839.

Guay, W. and S. Kothari, 2003, How much do firms hedge with derivatives?, Journal of
Financial Economics 70, 423-461.

Hankins, K., 2011, How do financial firms manage risk? Unraveling the interaction of financial
and operational hedging, Management Science 57, 2197-2212.

Haushalter, D., S. Klasa, and W. Maxwell, 2007, The influence of product market dynamics on
the firm's cash holdings and hedging behavior, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 797-825.

Hirshleifer, D., 1988, Risk, Futures pricing, and the organization of production in commodity
markets, Journal of Political Economy 96, 1206-1220.

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole, 1998, Private and public supply of liquidity, Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1-40.

Joskow, P, 1985, Vertical integration and long-term contracts: The case of coal-burning electric
generating plants, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1, 33-80

Joskow, P, 1987, Contract duration and relationship specific investments: Empirical Evidence
from Coal Markets, American Economic Review, 77, 168-185

Kale, J. and H. Shahur, 2007, Corporate capital structure and the characteristics of suppliers and
customers, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 321-365.



                                                                                               27
Klein, B., R. Crawford, and A. Alchian, 1978, Vertical Integration Appropriable Rents and the
Competitive Contracting Process, Journal of Law and Economics, 21, 297-326.

Nance, D., C. Smith Jr., and C. Smithson, 1993, On the determinants of corporate hedging,
Journal of Finance 48, 267-284.

Nash Jr., J. 1950, The bargaining problem, Econometrica 18, 155-162.
Petersen, M. and R. Rajan, 1997, Trade credit: theories and evidence, Review of Financial
Studies 10, 661-691.

Purnanandam, A., 2008, Financial distress and corporate risk management: Theory and evidence,
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 706-739.

Rampini, A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the distribution of
debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293–2322.

Rampini, A., A. Sufi, and S. Viswanathan, 2014, Dynamic risk management, Journal of
Financial Economics 111, 271–296.

Rauch, James E. 1999, Networks Versus Markets in International Trade, Journal of International
Economics, 48, 7-35.

Scinta, C., 2006, Steel co execs aren't excited by idea of steel futures, Dow Jones Newservice,
June 20, 2006.

Shenoy, J. and R. Williams, 2017, Trade credit and the joint effects of supplier and customer
financial characteristics, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 29, 68-80.

Smith, C. and R. Stulz, 1985, The determinants of firms’ hedging policies, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 28, 391-405.

Stigler, G., 1964, The theory of oligopoly, The Journal of Political Economy 72, 44-61.

Williamson, O., 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York Free Press.




                                                                                            28
Appendix A: A Model of Risk Management Alternatives

        We use a simple liquidity management model along the lines of Holmström and Tirole

(1998). Start with an initial (date-0) investment = I, which is fixed. The firm also starts with net

worth A > 0. The investment produces a payoff R at the final date (date 2). At date-1, the firm

has to make an additional (random) investment to continue the project. If this investment is not

made, the project is liquidated and produces zero. With probability λ, the required investment is

ρ, and it is zero in the other state. We assume that ρ < R (so that continuation is efficient in state

λ), and that R > I + λ ρ (so the project is positive NPV). Everyone is risk-neutral, and the

discount rate is 1 for simplicity.

        The main friction is that the firm faces a collateral constraint, as in Rampini and

Viswanathan (2010). We model it by assuming that the firm can only borrow against the fixed

investment I (that is, the cash flow R is not pledgeable). The maximum amount that the firm can

borrow against fixed assets is given by τI. Thus, the firm faces a potential financing constraint.

We assume that τI < ρ. This assumption means that in the state associated with probability λ, the

firm will not have sufficient pledgeable income to continue the project.

        In addition to the shock in state λ, the firm is exposed to a (zero mean) additional shock.

With probability x = 0.5, there is a shortfall equal to −μ, and with probability 0.5 the firm gains

μ. The difference between λ and x is that the exposure associated with x can be hedged, either

with an operational hedge or derivatives. For example, we can assume that the variation in the

required investment ρ is not contractible (it is firm-specific and due to the firm’s own

performance), while the exposure μ is due to variation in input prices. State x is a state in which

input prices are high.




                                                                                                   29
        Since the exposure associated with λ cannot be hedged, the firm must hold liquidity to

withstand the shock. Suppose that the firm holds cash to manage the exposure to the shock λ.

The amount of cash that the firm must hold to withstand the shock λ is:

                                            Cmin = ρ – τI

Cmin because is the minimum amount of cash that the firm must hold to be able to continue in

state λ. Following Holmström and Tirole (1998), we assume that there is a liquidity premium q

associated with cash holdings (the firm pays a price q > 1 for cash at the initial date). Given this,

the firm will be able to continue in state λ if:

                                        A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1) Cmin

We assume that this condition holds (that is, the firm can always fund Cmin). The associated

payoff is:

                                        U = R – I - λ ρ - (q – 1) Cmin,

which we assume to be greater than zero (the project is still positive NPV after accounting for

the liquidity premium).

        A.      Hedgeable risk

        How does the exposure associated with x affect the firm? Notice that eliminating the

exposure in state 1 − λ is irrelevant. It reduces the variance of cash flows but has no effect on

investment policy or the firm’s payoff. On the other hand, in state λ, the firm must eliminate this

exposure because it will cause inefficient liquidation. If the firm holds cash equal to Cmin and

input prices go up (state x), then the firm will face a shortfall equal to −μ and will not have

sufficient pledgeable income to continue.

        One way to manage this risk is by holding additional cash. If cash goes up to:

                                             C = Cmin+ μ,



                                                                                                  30
then the firm has enough cash to continue the investment in all states of the world. However,

holding additional cash is costly. The additional cash will cause the firm to pay a liquidity

premium (q - 1)μ. This premium reduces the payoff of the project, and tightens the financial

constraint:

                                       Uc = U - (q – 1) μ,

which is feasible when:

                                       A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1) C

        The firm can also hedge the exposure. Assume first that derivatives (futures) are not

available. Then the firm can use purchase obligations (POs). If it is costless to use POs, then the

firm will always use POs rather than cash to eliminate the exposure μ. There are however several

possible sources for the cost of using POs.

       B.      Supplier bargaining power

       The pricing may not be efficient (actuarially fair), since suppliers may capture some of

the surplus through bargaining power (the average input price may go up for example). We can

capture this through a premium k, so that using POs has a deadweight cost of kμ. This

deadweight cost reduces the final payoff to R – kμ.

       With the forward premium, the firm’s payoff is:

                                       Uk = U – kμ.

       The forward is feasible when:

                                       A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1)Cmin,

which we assumed to hold. The forward relaxes the financial constraint relative to cash, because

the forward contract does not require a date-0 payment. In contrast, cash requires a fully

collateralized position at date-0 (the firm must hold an amount that is sufficient to eliminate the



                                                                                                31
entire exposure μ, from date-0 to date-1). In addition, notice that this formulation assumes that

the premium kμ can be paid off the non-pledgeable income R. This formulation reflects the

assumption that supplier are in a position to extract more pledgeable income from buyers,

relative to external investors. This assumption is also common in the trade credit literature.

       The firm will either use cash or POs to manage the hedgeable exposure, depending on the

relative costs k and q. If k < q – 1, then the firm uses POs to manage the hedgeable exposure.

This choice increases the firm’s payoff (Uk > UC). If k > q – 1, then the firm uses cash to

manage hedgeable risk provided that cash is feasible, that is:

                                        A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1) C

If the firm cannot finance the cash position C (A + τI < I + λρ + (q - 1) C), it will use POs to

manage the hedgeable exposure as long as the payoff is positive (Uk = U – kμ > 0 ). In this case

the firm chooses forwards because they relax the financial constraint, even though they are more

expensive overall than cash. Finally, if Uk = U – kμ < 0, then the firm will remain exposed to the

hedgeable exposure.

       C.      Settlement risk

       In addition, there may be settlement risk. We can capture this in the model through a

probability s that the supplier does not honor the contract. Thus, the firm is liquidated with a

probability equal to λs/2. This risk of liquidation will reduce the firm’s payoff and may cause the

firm to use cash rather than POs to manage the hedgeable risk. Suppose in addition that k = 0, to

isolate the role of settlement risk in the model.

       In this case, the firm’s payoff when using the purchase obligation is:

                                 Us = U – (λs/2)(R – ρ).




                                                                                                 32
Thus the payoff is reduced by the liquidation cost R – ρ. The firm will switch to cash if Uc > Us.10

If (λs/2)(R – ρ) > (q – 1) μ the firm will use POs, and if (λs/2)(R – ρ) < (q – 1) μ the firm will

prefer to use cash. However, as in the analysis above, cash must be feasible given the liquidity

premium. The required condition is the same as above:

                                   A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1) C

If this condition does not hold, then the firm will use POs instead to relax the financing

constraint. Notice that POs are always feasible despite the settlement risk:

                                   A + τI > I + λ(1 - s/2)ρ + (q - 1)Cmin.

Thus, similarly to the case above, the firm may choose to use forwards because they relax the

financial constraint, even though they reduce the firm’s payoff relative to a case when the firm

uses cash to manage the hedgeable risk.

        D.        General case with both a forward premium and settlement risk

        Given the analysis above, the general expression for a firm’s payoff when using forwards

is:

                                   Us,k = U – (λs/2)(R – ρ) – (1 - λs/2) kμ.

This expression follows directly from the analysis above. The only point to note is that this

expression assumes that the forward premium kμ is not paid when the firm is liquidated, given

that the forward is settled ex-post.11 The firm will use forwards either when Us,k > Uc, or when

Us,k < Uc , but the feasibility constraint binds so that the firm cannot afford to hedge with cash.

        E.        Introduction of Futures



10
   The firm will never use both cash and POs to manage hedgeable risk. If a firm switches to cash it needs to hold a
position that fully hedges the firm against liquidation (C = Cmin+ μ) and thus POs become unnecessary. The firm still
holds cash to manage the non-hedgeable risk in any case.
11
   We note that nothing substantial changes in the analysis if forward counterparties have greater than zero recovery
in the event of liquidation.

                                                                                                                  33
        Consider now traded derivatives (futures). Rather than forwards, the firm can open a

futures position equal to μ to eliminate the hedgeable exposure. However, this future position

will force the firm to open a margin account with the exchange. We assume that the required

amount is given by ζμ, with ζ < 1. The futures position should have negligible settlement risk,

thus the relevant cost for the futures is the cost of the margin account.

    In the model, the margin account will behave similarly to an increase in cash holdings (it

needs to be in place at date-0). Assuming that the exchange pays an interest rate on the margin

account that is equivalent to what the firm earns on liquid assets, the margin account will create a

liquidity premium equal to (q - 1)ζμ. Thus, when using futures the firm will achieve the

following payoff:

                                 Uf = U – (q - 1)ζμ.

    The futures position is feasible when:

                                 A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1)(Cmin + ζμ).

Notice that this solution is equivalent to an increase in cash holdings from Cmin to Cmin + ζμ.

    The key assumptions here are that: (i) the futures trade at a fair price, but require cash

collateral; (ii) the interest rate on the margin account is the same as what the firm earns on cash;

(iii) the cash collateral effectively belongs to the firm, though it is deposited at the exchange. If

the collateral is not used, it is returned to the firm.

    Only assumption (i) is crucial for the results in the model. Intuitively, futures collateral will

tighten the financial constraint relative to forwards, but it is likely to reduce overall hedging costs

for the firm (otherwise the introduction of futures would not matter).

    Consider now what happens if firms move from an equilibrium with no futures available, to

an equilibrium in which futures are available. There are essentially two cases to consider,



                                                                                                    34
depending on whether the firm used cash or forwards to manage the hedgeable exposure prior to

the introduction of futures. As we discuss above, firms can switch to cash either because of a

forward premium (k > 0) or because of settlement risk (s > 0).

    Suppose first that both k and s are small enough, so that firms use POs in equilibrium to

manage hedgeable risk. In that case, firms may move from POs to futures if the cost of using

futures, (q - 1)ζ, is small enough. This would happen when Us,k < Uf. However, the firm can only

move to futures if it has sufficient collateral (A + τI > I + λρ + (q - 1)(Cmin + ζμ) ). Otherwise it

will keep using forwards even when Us,k < Uf.

    If in contrast either k or s or both are large enough such that the firm uses cash rather than

forwards to manage hedgeable risk, then the firm will always switch from cash to futures after

futures are introduced. Futures strictly dominate cash in the model, since ζ < 1. In all of these

cases, the firm will continue to use cash to manage the non-hedgeable liquidity risk.




                                                                                                  35
Appendix B. Description of Data Collection

Purchase Obligations:

If a firm uses the text “purchase obligation” in its footnote, but reports $0 for the aggregate dollar
amount of the contracts, we code Purchase Obligation equal to zero. Using this definition,
roughly 20.8% of all Compustat firm-year observations are for firms which have entered into
purchase contracts with their suppliers. The raw data containing the dollar values of the
aggregate purchase obligations have several potential problems. One problem is that in addition
to columns for years t+1 to t+6, the footnote line item also includes a “Total” column; sometimes
this occurs before year t+1 and sometimes after t+6. We are able to automatically remove the
“Total” column through programming. A related problem exists for the data we collect on
contract length. Although many firms report the dollar amount of purchase obligations for years
t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4, t+5, t+6 and onward, some firms group years t+2 and t+3 together, years t+4
and t+5 together, etc. For these firms, the estimate for contract length will be systematically too
short. We are unable to solve this problem programmatically, although firms are unlikely to
systematically differ in reporting based on the hedging propensity. The third problem is that
firms use different scales (millions, thousands, etc.) when reporting footnote tables depending on
firm size. We use a combination of automated and manual techniques to identify the scale a firm
is using. First, we automatically search the contractual obligations footnote for common text
used to report scale (e.g., “in millions”, “in 000s”, etc.). Second, we manually examine the time-
series of the amount of each firm’s supplier purchase obligations and compare the scale in
consecutive years to ensure consistency. Lastly, we manually examine firms which have annual
purchase obligations that are higher than current year cost of goods sold to ensure that the scale
is correct and adjust the scale if necessary. The resulting unique database identifies the existence
of a firm’s contractual purchase obligations to its suppliers as well as estimates of the lengths and
amounts of these obligations.



List of Search Terms Used to Identify Commodity Derivatives Users:

hedge fuel, fuel hedge, fuel call option, commodity derivative, commodity contract, commodity
forward, commodity future, commodity hedge, commodity hedging, commodity option,
commodity swap, hedges of commodity price, uses derivative financial instruments to manage
the price risk, uses financial instruments to manage the price risk, uses derivative financial
instruments to manage price risk, uses derivatives to manage the price risk, uses derivatives to
manage price risk, forward contracts for certain commodities, forward contracts for commodities
derivatives to mitigate commodity price risk, futures to mitigate commodity price risk, options to
mitigate commodity price risk, swaps to mitigate commodity price risk, corn future, cattle future
commodity price swap




                                                                                                   36
Appendix C: List of Industries with Traded Futures

NAICS         Industry Name
111110        Soybeans
111120        Oilseeds
111140        Wheat
111150        Corn
111160        Rice
111920        Cotton
111930        Sugarcane
111991        Sugar beets
112110        Cattle
112210        Swine
112410        Sheep and wool
211111        Crude petroleum and natural gas
211112        Liquid natural gas
212112        Coal
212113        Anthracite coal
212221        Gold ores
212222        Silver ores
212231        Lead and zinc ores
212234        Copper and nickel ores
311222        Soybean oil
311223        Other oilseed
311225        Margarine
311310        Sugar
311512        Creamery butter
311611        Meat products (except poultry)
311920        Coffee and tea
311942        Spices and extracts
324110        Petroleum refinery products
325212        Synthetic rubber
331111        Iron and steel mills (only post-2008)
331112        Ferroalloy product manufacturing (only post-2008)
331210        Iron and steel pipe and tube manufacturing (only post-2008)
331221        Rolled steel shape manufacturing (only post-2008)
331222        Steel wire drawing (only post-2008)
331512        Steel foundries, investment (only post-2008)
331513        Steel foundries, non-investment (only post-2008)
332111        Iron and steel forging (only post-2008)
331312        Primary aluminum
331314        Secondary aluminum
331315        Aluminum sheets
331411        Primary copper
331419        Primary metals (except copper and aluminum)



                                                                            37
Appendix D: Proxies for Frictions in PO Use

Below is additional detail on the construction of our supplier-related proxies for bargaining

power, settlement risk, and hold-up/IO concerns, all of which may affect the use of purchase

obligations:



Bargaining Power: We calculate Industry HHI for each supplier industry using two-digit

NAICS codes, and then sales-weight them using the IO tables to calculate Supplier Industry

HHI. For each customer industry, we weight each six-digit supplier industry characteristic by the

percentage of input they supply to the customer industry according to the “Use” table from the

Input-Output tables.




where j is the firm’s primary six-digit IO industry, and i is the six-digit IO industry for each

supplier industry, n is the number of industries which sell inputs to the reference firm, Industry

HHI is the Herfindahl index of the industry and the Industry Input Coefficient is the percentage

of industry j’s input which comes from industry i.12 For example: if “Energy” has an HHI of

20% and it supplies 50% of a customer industry’s input, and “Retail” has an HHI of 10% and it

supplies the other 50% of a customer industry’s input, the weighted average supplier Herfindahl

index for that customer would be 15%. Supplier Bargaining Power is ‘High’ if the firm’s

Supplier Industry HHI is above the annual mean and ‘Low’ is below that threshold. Higher

Supplier Bargaining Power is predicted to correlate with lower use of purchase obligations.




12
  For example: if “Energy” has an HHI of 20% and it supplies 50% of a customer industry’s input, and “Retail” has
an HHI of 10% and it supplies the other 50% of a customer industry’s input, the weighted average supplier
Herfindahl index for that customer would be 15%.

                                                                                                              38
Settlement Risk: To construct the first proxy, Supplier Z-Score, we first calculate the Z-score

(Altman, 1968) for all firms in Compustat and then aggregate firm-year Z-scores by two-digit

NAICS code to construct industry characteristics, and define Industry Z-Score as the median

industry Z-score. The weighting procedure for all supplier-industry variables is identical as for

Supplier Industry HHI. Supplier settlement risk is high if the Supplier Z-Score is below the

sample mean and low if above that threshold.13



Alternative Settlement Risk: Supplier Tangibility is based on the same process as Supplier Z-

Score. Tangibility is computed following Almeida and Campello (2007), and it is sales-weighted

by supplier industry for each downstream customer industry.



Hold-up: Supplier R&D is calculated using aggregate R&D and Assets for each industry and

then aggregate similar to Supplier Industry HHI. Our methodology is similar to that of Kale and

Shahrur (2007). We first replace missing R&D values with zero and then aggregate firm-year

R&D by two-digit NAICS code to construct industry characteristics and define Industry R&D as

aggregate industry R&D divided by aggregate industry assets. Next, we link the industry-year

R&D to each six-digit IO industry from the 2002 BEA Input-Output tables. For each customer

industry, we use the “Use” table from the Input-Output tables and weight each six-digit supply

industry characteristic by the percentage of input they supply to the customer industry. We

construct Supplier R&D Intensity for each firm in industry j as follows:


                &                      ∑                                                                &




13
     We cannot use the traditional thresholds for distress here because of the weighting methodology.

                                                                                                            39
where j is the firm’s primary six-digit IO industry, i is the six-digit IO industry for each supplier

industry, n is the number of industries which sell inputs to the reference firm, Industry R&D is

the R&D/Assets of the industry and the Industry Input Coefficient is the percentage of industry

j’s input which comes from industry i.



Alternative Hold-up: Supplier Differentiated Goods is based on Giannetti, Burkart, and

Ellingsen (2011) and Rauch (1999), which classifies products as standardized or differentiated.

Standardized goods have mostly homogenous prices while differentiated goods have

heterogeneous pricing. We construct this variable similar to Supplier R&D above. Specifically,

we use the above definitions to define industries that produce differentiated good at the 2-digit

level and then constructed a sales-weighted average across all supplier industries to estimate the

percentage of a firm’s upstream industries that produce differentiated products. We estimate the

following formula, where Diff Goods takes a value of one for each differentiated goods industry:


                                         ∑




Vertical Integration: Finally, we identify vertically integrated firms based on the methodology

of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Mitton (2009). We identify all of a firm’s 6-digit NAICS operating

segments using the Compustat Segment tapes and then map the NAICS codes to the BEA’s 6

digit IO codes. Using the industry input-output flows in the BEA IO tables, we estimate the sales

weighted percentage of a firm’s inputs that it could hypothetically purchase from itself. We

define Vertical Relatedness as a continuous measure between 0 and 1 that captures this value.

Following Acemoglu et al. (2009), Vertically Integrated equals one if the Vertical Relatedness is

greater than 1% and zero otherwise.

                                                                                                  40
Appendix E: Steel Exposure by Industry
This table summarizes steel exposure across the Fama-French 48 industry categories. The left hand column lists the
industry number and label while the right-hand column reports the percentage of observations with steel exposure as
defined in Section II B. For brevity, all industries with zero steel exposure are reported together.

FF48 Industry                                                                            % Steel Exposed


1 Agriculture, 2 Food Products, 3 Candy & Soda, 4 Beer & Liquor,
5 Tobacco Products, 7 Entertainment, 8 Printing and Publishing, 13 Pharmaceutical
Products, 31 Utilities, 32 Communication, 33 Personal Services, 34 Business
Services , 40 Transportation, 41 Wholesale, 43 Restaurants, Hotels, Motels                             0.00

11 Healthcare                                                                                          0.01
35 Computers                                                                                           0.03
14 Chemicals                                                                                           0.10
48 Other/Almost Nothing                                                                                0.10
42 Retail                                                                                              0.11
10 Apparel                                                                                             0.13
15 Rubber and Plastic Products                                                                         0.14
16 Textiles                                                                                            0.15
30 Petroleum and Natural Gas                                                                           0.21
38 Business Supplies                                                                                   0.21
6 Recreation                                                                                           0.27
36 Electronic Equipment                                                                                0.28
39 Shipping Containers                                                                                 0.29
17 Construction Materials                                                                              0.51
9 Consumer Goods                                                                                       0.59
26 Defense                                                                                             0.67
19 Steel Works Etc                                                                                     0.74
25 Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment                                                                    0.78
37 Measuring and Control Equipment                                                                     0.83
23 Automobiles and Trucks                                                                              0.85
12 Medical Equipment                                                                                   0.87
22 Electrical Equipment                                                                                0.88
21 Machinery                                                                                           1.00
18 Construction                                                                                        1.00
20 Fabricated Products                                                                                 1.00
24 Aircraft                                                                                            1.00
27 Precious Metals                                                                                     1.00
28 Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining                                                            1.00
29 Coal                                                                                                1.00




                                                                                                                41
Appendix F: Robustness of Steel Exposure Threshold
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable in the OLS estimates is AggregatePO/Assets. Steel Futures Available is an indicator equal to one if the year
is after 2008, zero otherwise. Steel Exposure (median) is equal to one if percentage input from steel is greater than
the sample median, zero otherwise. Steel Exposure (mean) is equal to one if percentage input from steel is greater
than the mean, zero otherwise. Steel Exposure (0.5%) is equal to one if percentage input from steel is greater 0.5%,
zero otherwise. All control variables are as described in Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm
control variables (after 2007) are scaled by 2007 total assets. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are
calculated from robust standard errors clustered by firm. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **,
and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Aggregate PO/Assets
                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
Steel Futures Available                          0.009      0.006       0.008        0.009       0.006       0.008
                                               (1.018)     (0.830)     (0.998)     (1.080)      (0.838)     (1.044)
Futures Available*Steel Exposure (median)      -0.018*                             -0.018*
                                               (-1.896)                            (-1.942)
Futures Available*Steel Exposure (mean)                    -0.021*                             -0.021*
                                                           (-1.814)                            (-1.821)
Futures Available*Steel Exposure (0.5%)                               -0.023**                             -0.023**
                                                                      (-2.354)                             (-2.374)
Leverage                                        -0.020      -0.021      -0.020      -0.016      -0.015       -0.017
                                               (-0.881)    (-0.929)   (-0.895)     (-0.325)    (-0.307)    (-0.346)
Cash                                            -0.026      -0.027      -0.026      -0.027      -0.027       -0.027
                                               (-1.290)    (-1.331)   (-1.292)     (-1.319)    (-1.348)    (-1.322)
Firm Size                                       -0.000      -0.001     -0.001       -0.001      -0.001       -0.001
                                               (-0.040)    (-0.109)   (-0.109)     (-0.127)    (-0.176)    (-0.198)
Capex                                            0.007       0.008      0.008        0.009      0.010        0.011
                                               (0.118)     (0.142)     (0.145)      (0.162)    (0.177)      (0.190)
% Input Traded (non-steel)                                                           -0.032     -0.012       -0.030
                                                                                   (-0.611)    (-0.231)    (-0.557)
Leverage Squared                                                                    -0.003      -0.006      -0.002
                                                                                   (-0.048)    (-0.099)    (-0.032)
Sales                                                                                0.001       0.001       0.001
                                                                                    (0.177)    (0.183)      (0.143)
R&D Intensity                                                                        -0.006     -0.004       -0.007
                                                                                   (-0.191)    (-0.127)    (-0.207)
Trade Credit                                                                         -0.026     -0.026       -0.025
                                                                                   (-0.445)    (-0.440)    (-0.416)


Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Year Dummies                                     Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
# Observations                                  20,419     20,419       20,419      20,377      20,377      20,377


                                                                                                                   42
Figure 1: Aggregate POs, Steel Futures
Figure 1 presents the time series analysis of firms using purchase obligations. The y-axis is PO/Total Assets;
adjusted by the 2008 PO/Total Assets. The graph is centered on the 2008-09 introduction of steel futures. The blue
line plots the aggregate level of POs among firms with steel exposure and the orange line plots the aggregate level of
POs among firms with low/no steel exposure.

  0.03
  0.02
  0.01
     0
              2006           2007          2008           2009           2010
 ‐0.01
 ‐0.02                                                                                      POHigh Steel Exposure
 ‐0.03                                                                                      POLow Steel Exposure
 ‐0.04
 ‐0.05
 ‐0.06

 ‐0.07
 ‐0.08




                                                                                                                   43
Table 1
Summary Statistics
The tables presents summary statistics using all nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. Panel A presents
the mean, median, and standard deviation for the entire sample as well as the mean for purchase obligation users
(PO Users) and firms using commodity hedges (Comm. Hedgers). Purchase Obligation is equal to one if the firm
reports purchase obligations in its 10-K filing and zero otherwise. AggregatePO/Assets is the sum of the future
purchase obligations scaled by total assets. AggregatePO/COGS is the sum of the future purchase obligations
scaled by current cost of goods sold. Commodity Hedger is equal to one if a firm reports using commodity
derivatives, zero otherwise. % Input Traded is equal to the percentage of input which is traded on an active
futures exchange. % Input Steel is equal to the percentage of a firm's input accounted for by steel. Market
Leverage is the book value of debt divided by the sum of the market value of equity and the book value of debt.
Cash is cash holdings divided by total assets. Investment/Assets R&D + CAPEX + Advertising divided by total
assets. Sales/Assets is total net revenues divided by total assets. R&D Intensity is the firm's own RD/Assets.
CapEx is the firm’s capital expenditures divided by total assets. Firm Size is the natural logarithm of the firm's
book assets. Trade Credit is AP/Total Assets. In Panel B, Supplier Herf Index is the weighted average Herf Index
of all the firm’s supplier industries and Supplier Bargaining Power is ‘High’ if the Supplier Herf Index is above
than the annual mean.



                                                 All Firms                 PO Users     Comm. Hedgers
            Variable                   Mean         Median      StDev        Mean             Mean            N
                                        (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)
Purchase Obligation                    0.215         0.000      0.411        1.000            0.252         26,430
AggregatePO/Assets                     0.026         0.000      0.268        0.118            0.028         25,358
AggregatePO/COGS                       0.046         0.000      0.362        0.214            0.048         25,944
Commodity Hedger                       0.158         0.000      0.364        0.184            1.000         26,430
% of Input Traded                      0.039         0.009      0.087        0.040            0.092         26,430
% of Input Steel                       0.014         0.001      0.032        0.018            0.016         26,430
Market Leverage                        0.193         0.117      0.220        0.180            0.286         25,026
Cash/Assets                            0.153         0.088      0.180        0.148            0.076         24,935
Investment/Assets                      0.132         0.082      0.158        0.121            0.112         24,655
Sales/Assets                           1.021         0.851      0.824        1.039            0.996         25,099
R&D Intensity                          0.076         0.004      0.174        0.057            0.017         26,430
CapEx                                  0.050         0.029      0.066        0.052            0.086         24,655
Firm Size                              5.744         5.760      2.148        6.578            7.287         26,430
Trade Credit                           0.097         0.055      0.140        0.081            0.087         25,059




                                                                                                                     44
Table 2
Summary statistics – by Bargaining Power and Settlement Risk
The tables presents summary statistics using all nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. In Panel A, low
Supplier Industry Concentration (supplier HHI less than the annual mean) or high Profitability (ROA greater (less)
than the annual mean) proxy for higher bargaining power. In Panel B, higher Supplier Z-Score (greater than the
industry annual mean), higher Supplier Tangibility (greater than the industry annual mean), and longer contract
length proxy for lower settlement risk. Long PO Contract equals one if the firm has a purchase obligation written for
3 or more years. Panel C presents two proxies for hold-up as well as vertical integration. High (Low) Supplier R&D
is defined as having supplier R&D greater (less) than the industry annual mean. High (Low) Differentiated Goods is
defined following the methodology of Giannetti et al (2011). Vertical Integration is defined following the
methodology of Acemoglu et al. (2009). P-Values for the differences in means and medians are presented. Other
variables are as defined in Table 1.

Panel A: Bargaining Power

                                                      Supplier Industry Concentration
                                       High                            Low
                           # Obs     Mean St. Error         # Obs Mean St. Error                Diff      P Value
Purchase Obligation        11,147    0.201  0.004          15,283 0.225       0.003            0.024       0.000
AggregatePO/Assets         10,699    0.023  0.002          14,659 0.028       0.003            0.005       0.072
AggregatePO/COGS           10,964    0.038  0.001          14,981 0.046       0.001            0.009       0.000

                                                              Firm Profitability
                                       High                            Low
                           # Obs     Mean St. Error          # Obs Mean St. Error              Diff       P Value
Purchase Obligation        19,556    0.237  0.003            6,859 0.155         0.004        -0.082       0.000
AggregatePO/Assets         18,932    0.027  0.002            6,426 0.022         0.002        -0.005       0.090
AggregatePO/COGS           19,407    0.047  0.001            6,538 0.030         0.001        -0.016       0.000

Panel B: Settlement Risk

                                                                Supplier Z Score
                                        High                             Low
                           # Obs     Mean    St. Error        # Obs Mean St. Error                Diff      P Value
Purchase Obligation        14,640    0.233    0.003           11,787 0.193       0.004           -0.040      0.000
AggregatePO/Assets         14,053    0.029    0.003           11,302 0.021       0.002           -0.008      0.011
AggregatePO/COGS           14,334    0.047    0.001           11,608 0.038       0.001           -0.009      0.000

                                                              Supplier Tangibility
                                        High                             Low
                           # Obs     Mean    St. Error        # Obs Mean St. Error                Diff      P Value
Purchase Obligation        12,454    0.238    0.004           13,973 0.195        0.003          -0.044      0.000
AggregatePO/Assets         11,982    0.033    0.003           13,373 0.019        0.002          -0.013      0.000
AggregatePO/COGS           12,289    0.045    0.001           13,653 0.040        0.001          -0.005      0.004

                                                           Firm PO Contract Length
                                   High (3+ years)                     Low
                           # Obs     Mean     St. Error       # Obs    Mean      St. Error        Diff      P Value
AggregatePO/Assets         1,406     0.152     0.007          4,094    0.107      0.010          -0.045      0.005
AggregatePO/COGS           1,459     0.311     0.008          4,184    0.155      0.003          -0.156      0.000

                                                                                                                    45
Table 2 (Continued)

Summary statistics – by Bargaining Power and Settlement Risk
Panel C: IO Motivations



                                                              Supplier R&D
                                    High                              Low
                          # Obs    Mean    St. Error      # Obs    Mean      St. Error      Diff    P Value
Purchase Obligation       12,380   0.227    0.004         14,050   0.205      0.003        -0.022    0.000
AggregatePO/Assets        11,849   0.031    0.003         13,509   0.021      0.001        -0.010    0.001
AggregatePO/COGS          12,163   0.045    0.001         13,782   0.040      0.001        -0.006    0.001


                                                       Supplier Differentiated Goods
                                     Yes                               No
                          # Obs    Mean    St. Error      # Obs    Mean      St. Error      Diff    P Value
Purchase Obligation       10,675   0.235    0.004         15,755   0.202      0.003        -0.033    0.000
AggregatePO/Assets        10,145   0.028    0.004         15,213   0.024      0.002        -0.004    0.142
AggregatePO/COGS          10,367   0.049    0.001         15,578   0.039      0.001        -0.010    0.000


                                              Contract Length for Low Supplier R&D Firms
                               High (3+ years)                        Low
                          # Obs    Mean    St. Error       # Obs   Mean      St. Error      Diff    P Value
AggregatePO/Assets         769     0.166    0.011          2,010   0.078      0.004        -0.088    0.000
AggregatePO/COGS           797     0.314    0.011          2,051   0.147      0.004        -0.167    0.000


                                                           Vertically Integrated
                                     Yes                               No
                          # Obs    Mean    St. Error      # Obs    Mean      St. Error      Diff    P Value
Purchase Obligation        570     0.302    0.019         25,860   0.213      0.003        -0.088    0.000
AggregatePO/Assets         562     0.030    0.005         24,796   0.026      0.002        -0.005    0.344
AggregatePO/COGS           570     0.065    0.007         25,375   0.042      0.001        -0.023    0.000




                                                                                                          46
Table 3
Cross-sectional Evidence on Purchase Obligation Use
The tables presents cross-sectional evidence using all nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. Both panels estimate logit regressions, with and without
industry indicator variables and the independent variable is purchase obligation use (PO Indicator). In Panel A, firm and supplier characteristics, which proxy for
frictions in purchase obligation use and are described in Table 2, are regressed individually. In Panel B, the subsample indicators described in Table 2 are
regressed both with and without the control variables described in Table 1. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors
clustered by firm. All models include year indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A:
                                                                                           PO Indicator
                                                              OLS                                                                 Industry FE
                               (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)
Firm ROA                    0.677***                                                                      0.733***
                             (5.659)                                                                       (5.574)
Supplier Herf                             -1.649                                                                      5.691
                                         (-0.528)                                                                    (1.307)
Supplier Z Score                                    0.436***                                                                   0.206**
                                                     (6.504)                                                                   (2.120)
Supplier Tang                                                   3.334***                                                                  2.627**
                                                                 (4.402)                                                                  (2.076)
Supplier R&D                                                                30.791***                                                                11.462
                                                                             (6.326)                                                                 (1.419)
Supplier Diff Goods                                                                       0.680***                                                             0.578*
                                                                                           (3.509)                                                             (1.873)

Year Dummies                   Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
Industry Fixed Effects         No          No          No           No          No           No             Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes

# Obs                        26,415      26,430      26,427      26,427       26,430       26,430          26,415    26,430     26,427     26,427    26,430     26,430
Adjusted R2                   0.016      0.005        0.010       0.007       0.011         0.007          0.038      0.027     0.027      0.027     0.027      0.027




                                                                                                                                                                 47
Panel B:
                                                          PO Indicator
                                        Logit                               Industry Fixed Effects
                               (1)                 (2)                    (3)                 (4)
High Firm ROA               0.542***                0.092            0.583***                 0.080
                             (9.027)              (1.418)             (9.689)               (1.238)
High Supplier Herf            -0.019               -0.074              -0.051                -0.026
                             (-0.276)             (-1.008)           (-0.579)               (-0.288)
High Supplier Z Scores      0.150**             0.227***               -0.038                -0.012
                             (2.348)              (3.277)            (-0.515)              (-0.156)
High Supplier Tangibility   0.203***              0.147**               0.072                 0.105
                             (3.010)              (2.050)             (0.829)               (1.174)
High Supplier R&D             0.046                 0.055               0.036                 0.032
                             (0.767)              (0.878)             (0.548)               (0.474)
High Supplier Diff. Goods     0.073                 0.081             0.114*                  0.106
                             (1.186)              (1.241)             (1.766)               (1.569)
% Input Traded                                  -1.684***                                  -1.133**
                                                 (-3.615)                                   (-2.119)
Leverage                                         -1.090**                                  -1.083**
                                                  (-2.493)                                  (-2.436)
Leverage Squared                                    0.534                                     0.477
                                                   (0.885)                                  (0.778)
Cash                                                0.098                                     0.076
                                                   (0.522)                                  (0.400)
Sales                                           0.208***                                   0.164***
                                                   (4.440)                                  (3.033)
R&D Intensity                                       0.065                                    -0.081
                                                   (0.254)                                 (-0.279)
CapEx                                               0.065                                  1.481***
                                                   (0.139)                                  (2.805)
Firm Size                                       0.270***                                   0.280***
                                                 (13.937)                                  (13.934)
Trade Credit                                    -1.343***                                  -1.045**
                                                  (-3.370)                                  (-2.297)

Year Dummies                  Yes                  Yes                    Yes                Yes
Industry Fixed Effects        No                   No                     Yes                Yes
# Obs                        20,285              19,677                  20,285             19,677
Pseudo R2                     0.015              0.053                    0.035              0.072




                                                                                                   48
Table 4
Summary statistics – by Steel Exposure
The tables presents summary statistics using all nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The sample is split on steel exposure with exposure equaling one
if steel is greater than 1% of inputs as identified by the BEA IO tables. P-Values for the differences in means and medians are presented. Other variables are as
defined in Table 1.

                                   Steel Exposure                                No Steel Exposure
                                                                                                                     Diff in Means        Diff in Median
                     # Obs     Mean       Median      StdError         # Obs     Mean      Median      StdError         P Value              P Value
 Firm Size            6303     5.757       5.793        0.026          20127     5.740      5.752       0.015             0.59                 0.31
 Sales/Assets         5970     1.034       0.961        0.008          19129     1.017      0.801       0.006             0.18                 0.00
 CAPEX/Assets         5959     0.044       0.028        0.001          18696     0.052      0.029       0.001             0.00                 0.12
 Market Leverage      5941     0.165       0.097        0.003          19085     0.202      0.126       0.003             0.00                 0.00
 Cash/Assets          5934     0.144       0.093        0.002          19001     0.156      0.087       0.001             0.00                 0.01
 Trade Credit         5971     0.086       0.067        0.001          19088     0.101      0.051       0.001             0.00                 0.00




                                                                                                                                                              49
Table 5
Natural Experiment
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable in the logit estimates in models 1-3 is Commodity Hedger and the OLS estimates in models 4-6 is
AggregatePO/Assets. Steel Futures Available is an indicator equal to one if the year is after 2008, zero
otherwise. Steel Exposure is equal to one if percentage input from steel is greater than the 1%, zero otherwise.
All control variables are as described in Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm control
variables (after 2007) are scaled by 2007 total assets. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated
from robust standard errors clustered by firm. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and
*** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                  Commodity Hedger                          Aggregate PO/Assets
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)                (4)           (5)         (6)
 Steel Futures Available               0.710***      0.347**      0.305**          0.023***        0.008        0.009
                                        (4.760)       (2.305)     (1.985)           (3.186)       (1.092)      (1.110)
 Futures Available*Steel Exposure       0.467**        0.328      0.359*           -0.030***     -0.026**     -0.027**
                                        (2.515)       (1.609)     (1.750)           (-3.096)      (-2.468)    (-2.478)
 Leverage                                             -0.239       -0.757                          -0.020      -0.015
                                                     (-0.561)     (-0.744)                        (-0.895)    (-0.303)
 Cash                                                 0.221        0.322                           -0.026      -0.027
                                                      (0.408)     (0.567)                         (-1.294)    (-1.312)
 Firm Size                                             0.199      0.288**                          -0.001      -0.001
                                                      (1.495)     (2.063)                         (-0.091)    (-0.165)
 Capex                                                0.910        0.637                           0.006        0.008
                                                      (0.904)     (0.610)                         (0.103)      (0.144)
 % Input Traded (non-steel)                                        1.554                                       -0.017
                                                                  (1.509)                                     (-0.330)
 Leverage Squared                                                  0.780                                       -0.005
                                                                  (0.646)                                     (-0.086)
 Sales                                                            0.352**                                       0.001
                                                                  (2.233)                                      (0.142)
 R&D Intensity                                                     1.667                                       -0.005
                                                                  (1.503)                                     (-0.142)
 Trade Credit                                                      -0.746                                      -0.025
                                                                  (-0.601)                                    (-0.423)

 Firm Fixed Effects                       Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes
 Year Dummies                             Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes
 # Obs                                   4,437        3,160        3,150            25,358        20,419       20,377
 Pseudo/Adjusted R2                      0.038        0.053        0.057             0.176         0.198        0.197




                                                                                                                 50
Table 6
Placebo Tests
The table presents placebo tests based on the Steel shock. In the first two columns, we identify industries with no steel exposure (2-digit SIC codes 8, 9, 21, 31,
59, 81) and examine the reaction of firms in these industries (labeled ‘Placebo Exposure’) to the introduction of steel futures. In last four columns, the placebo
test uses the two years subsequent to the introduction of steel futures as the shock years (2006, 2007), labeled ‘Placebo Futures Available’. The firm control
variables are Leverage, Cash, Firm Size, and CapEx and are the same as in Columns 2 and 5 of Table 5. The ‘Extended Controls’, from Table 5 Columns 3 and
6, are % Input Traded, Leverage Squared, Sales/Assets, R&D Intensity, and Trade Credit. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by 2007 total
assets. These control variables are included in the regressions but omitted in the table for brevity. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and
*** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                        Aggregate PO/Assets
                                                            All Years                              All Years                     Exclude 2008+
                                                     (1)                  (2)              (3)                   (4)             (5)           (6)
Steel Futures Available                             0.008                0.009
                                                   (1.075)              (1.088)
Placebo Exposure*Futures Available                  0.030                0.030
                                                   (0.614)              (0.622)
Placebo Futures Available                                                                 0.002                 0.002          0.001           0.001
                                                                                         (0.285)               (0.301)        (0.219)         (0.232)
Exposure*Placebo Futures Available                                                        0.006                 0.006          -0.007          -0.006
                                                                                         (0.611)               (0.615)        (-0.900)        (-0.750)

Firm Controls                                        Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
Extended Controls                                    No                  Yes               No                   Yes             No              Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                   Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
Year Dummies                                         Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
# Obs                                              20,421               20,379           20,421                20,379          12,658          12,635
Adjusted R2                                         0.197               0.196             0.127                0.127           0.127           0.127




                                                                                                                                                                   51
Table 7
Natural Experiment - Matching
The table presents difference-in-difference results using a matched sample between treated and untreated firms using
the steel futures shock. We examine the change in average Aggregate PO/Assets from the 2006, 2007 pre-event
window to the 2009, 2010 post-event. In Panel A, we present average Cash, CAPEX, Firm Size, and Leverage for
the treated and control firms in the pre-event period (2006, 2007). Panel B presents the basic difference in difference
result for the matched sample while Panel C presents the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated with a bias
correction for the imperfect matching. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.


Panel A – Matched Samples
                                    Treated Obs                        Matched Controls
                            # Obs    Mean     Std Error           # Obs   Mean       Std Error      Diff      P Value
 Cash 2006,2007             604      0.126     0.005               604    0.122       0.005       -0.004***    0.001
 CAPEX 2006,2007            604      0.052     0.002               604    0.050       0.002       -0.001**     0.016
 Firm Size 2006,2007        604      6.129     0.076               604    6.145       0.074         0.016      0.266
 Leverage 2006,2007         604      0.148     0.007               604    0.147       0.007        -0.001      0.716


Panel B – Diff in Diff
                   Pre-Shock         Post-Shock          Difference
 Treated            0.028   ***       0.037   ***        0.009     *
                  (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.004)
 Control           0.016    ***       0.036   ***        0.021     ***
                  (0.002)           (0.008)            (0.006)
 Difference        0.012    **        0.001              -0.012    *
                  (0.005)           (0.008)            (0.007)


Panel C – ATT Results
                                    # Obs         Coef       Std Error        z         P Value
 Aggregate PO/Assets                2467       -0.012*            0.006      -1.92       0.055




                                                                                                                        52
Table 8
Natural Experiment by Collateral and Financial Health
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable in the logit estimates in models 1-4 is Commodity Hedger and the OLS estimates in models 5-8 is
AggregatePO/Assets. A firm’s Z Score is ‘high’ if Z>3 and low otherwise. Tangibility is ‘high’ if above the industry
year mean. Steel Futures Available and Steel Exposure are described in Table 6. All control variables are as
described in Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by
2007 total assets. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors clustered by
firm. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

                                  Commodity Hedger                                     Aggregate PO/Assets
                           Z Score                 Tangibility                    Z Score                   Tangibility
                      High       Low            High        Low            High         Low            High          Low
                       (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
Steel Futures         0.217      0.508*          0.123       0.355          0.008      0.009**        -0.002     0.012***
Available            (1.042)     (1.845)        (0.528)     (1.381)        (0.676)      (1.973)     (-0.121)      (3.892)
Steel Exposure        0.464*      -0.045       0.936***       0.134       -0.036**       0.004      -0.054**       -0.005
*Futures Avail.      (1.778)    (-0.110)        (2.705)     (0.432)       (-2.382)      (0.586)     (-2.186)     (-1.245)
% Input Traded         1.501       1.915         1.239        2.368         -0.047       0.016        -0.026       -0.020
                     (1.017)     (1.238)        (1.003)     (1.066)       (-0.550)      (0.643)     (-0.236)     (-0.806)
Leverage              -1.677      0.726          0.139       -2.458         0.059        -0.045       -0.000       -0.003
                     (-1.060)    (0.378)        (0.092)     (-1.438)       (0.674)     (-1.620)     (-0.000)     (-0.134)
Leverage Squared       1.516      -0.305         0.179        2.759         -0.181       0.048        -0.023       0.006
                      (0.603)   (-0.154)        (0.102)     (1.347)       (-1.299)      (1.585)      (-0.171)     (0.211)
Cash                   0.294       0.909         0.602        0.424         -0.033       -0.003       -0.083       -0.011
                      (0.400)    (0.730)        (0.506)     (0.556)       (-1.163)     (-0.201)     (-1.281)     (-1.569)
Sales                  0.220    1.078***        0.603**      0.458*         -0.003       0.006        -0.020        0.002
                      (1.168)    (2.694)        (2.212)     (1.650)       (-0.237)      (1.153)      (-1.128)     (0.548)
R&D Intensity          1.420       2.217         2.394        1.952         -0.011       0.011        -0.026       -0.002
                      (0.782)    (1.215)        (1.200)     (1.415)       (-0.190)      (0.623)      (-0.251)    (-0.191)
CapEx                  0.814       0.047          0.772       0.641         0.005        0.010         0.045     -0.072**
                      (0.514)    (0.028)        (0.471)     (0.325)        (0.055)      (0.355)      (0.407)     (-2.298)
Firm Size             0.398*      -0.161        0.657**       0.150         -0.002       0.002        -0.006       -0.002
                      (1.815)   (-0.641)        (2.504)     (0.705)       (-0.206)      (0.530)     (-0.337)     (-0.910)
Trade Credit           0.422      -2.998         -1.126      -3.635         -0.043       0.002        -0.111        0.033
                      (0.243)   (-0.974)        (-0.571)    (-1.577)       (-0.442)     (0.071)      (-0.902)     (1.203)
Year Dummies           Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
Firm Fixed Eff.        Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
# Obs                 1,801        913           1,385       1,184         14,414       5,963         9,705        9,842
Adjusted R2           0.064       0.065          0.095       0.053         0.157        0.470         0.121        0.487




                                                                                                                     53
Table 9
Natural Experiment by Bargaining Power
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable is AggregatePO/Assets. High (Low) Supplier Industry Concentration is defined as having a supplier HHI
greater (less) than the annual mean. High (Low) Firm Profitability is defined as having a ROA greater (less) than the
annual mean. Steel Futures Available and Steel Exposure are described in Table 6. All control variables are as
described in Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by
2007 total assets. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors clustered by
firm. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

                                                               Aggregate PO/Assets
                                          Supplier Ind Concentration                 Firm Profitability
                                             High               Low                 High            Low
                                              (1)                (2)                 (3)             (4)
Steel Futures Available                     0.005               0.009               0.007          0.019**
                                           (0.567)            (0.710)              (0.670)         (2.219)
Steel Exposure*Futures Available            -0.021            -0.027*             -0.032**          -0.016
                                           (-0.847)           (-1.789)             (-2.206)        (-1.356)
% Input Traded                               0.044             -0.018               -0.025           0.021
                                           (0.285)            (-0.278)             (-0.358)         (0.401)
Leverage                                     0.017             -0.045               -0.006          -0.036
                                           (0.288)            (-0.553)             (-0.075)        (-0.869)
Leverage Squared                            -0.052             0.048                -0.022           0.034
                                           (-0.718)           (0.438)              (-0.211)         (0.707)
Cash                                        -0.020             -0.030               -0.028          -0.020
                                           (-0.841)           (-0.923)             (-0.914)        (-1.329)
Sales                                       0.014*             -0.017               -0.007          0.010*
                                           (1.667)            (-1.155)             (-0.555)         (1.750)
R&D Intensity                               -0.023             0.006                 0.004           -0.025
                                           (-0.546)           (0.111)              (0.056)         (-1.390)
CapEx                                        0.025              0.008                0.010           0.019
                                           (0.360)            (0.082)              (0.116)         (0.414)
Firm Size                                   -0.002             -0.001                0.000         -0.009*
                                           (-0.266)           (-0.070)             (0.016)         (-1.693)
Trade Credit                                -0.026             -0.034               -0.055          -0.034
                                           (-0.401)           (-0.335)             (-0.548)        (-0.872)
Year Dummies                                 Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                           Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes
# Obs                                       8,691              11,686              15,280           5,097
Adjusted R2                                 0.238               0.143               0.149           0.394




                                                                                                                     54
Table 10
Natural Experiment by Settlement Risk
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable is AggregatePO/Assets. High (Low) Supplier Z Score is defined as having supplier Z score greater (less) than
the industry annual mean. High (Low) Supplier Tangibility is defined as having supplier tangibility greater (less) than
the industry annual mean. Long PO Contract equals one if the firm has a purchase obligation written for 3 or more
years. Steel Futures Available and Steel Exposure are described in Table 6. All control variables are as described in
Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by 2007 total
assets.. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors clustered by firm. All
models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                                                    Aggregate PO/Assets
                                        Supplier Z Score           Supplier Tangibility           Long PO Contract
                                        High         Low            High          Low            3+ Yrs       Shorter
                                         (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)          (6)
Steel Futures Available                 0.009       0.007          0.019         0.003            0.055        0.007
                                       (0.632)     (0.911)         (1.139)      (0.486)          (1.276)      (0.982)
Steel Exposure*Futures Available      -0.033**       0.002        -0.041**        0.001         -0.191**       -0.006
                                       (-1.985)    (0.116)        (-2.197)      (0.086)         (-2.378)     (-0.562)
% Input Traded                          -0.066       0.003          -0.012     -0.877***          -0.407       -0.031
                                       (-0.640)    (0.051)        (-0.167)      (-3.158)        (-1.112)      (-0.214)
Leverage                                -0.015      -0.014          -0.050        0.012           -0.003       -0.028
                                       (-0.169)    (-0.241)        (-0.512)      (0.236)         (-0.007)     (-0.487)
Leverage Squared                        -0.014      -0.015           0.036       -0.043           -0.120       -0.058
                                       (-0.122)    (-0.219)         (0.293)     (-0.686)         (-0.203)     (-0.716)
Cash                                    -0.031      -0.026          -0.060       -0.015          -0.361*     0.057**
                                       (-0.941)    (-1.067)        (-1.220)     (-0.891)         (-1.684)      (2.564)
Sales                                   -0.009       0.008          -0.003        0.005          -0.163*     0.038***
                                       (-0.592)     (0.862)        (-0.173)      (0.708)         (-1.870)     (4.115)
R&D Intensity                           -0.004      -0.027           0.002       -0.006           -0.004     -0.114**
                                       (-0.085)    (-0.554)         (0.017)     (-0.226)         (-0.010)     (-2.083)
CapEx                                   -0.006       0.016           0.013        0.011            0.413        -0.091
                                       (-0.052)     (0.307)         (0.112)      (0.200)          (0.696)     (-1.405)
Firm Size                               -0.007       0.000           -0.006       0.003            0.001       -0.009
                                       (-0.546)     (0.053)        (-0.380)      (0.434)          (0.018)     (-1.299)
Trade Credit                            -0.039       0.001           -0.121       0.026          -1.502*     0.395***
                                       (-0.379)     (0.017)        (-0.935)      (0.498)         (-1.788)      (5.270)
Year Dummies                             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                       Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes
# Obs                                  11,150       9,224          9,422        10,952            2,709        1,992
Adjusted R2                            0.135        0.215          0.145         0.227            0.280        0.716




                                                                                                                      55
Table 11
Natural Experiment by IO Motivations
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable is AggregatePO/Assets. High (Low) Supplier R&D is defined as having supplier R&D greater (less) than the
industry annual mean. High (Low) Differentiated Goods is defined following the methodology of Giannetti et al
(2011). Vertically Integrated is defined following the methodology of Acemoglu et al. (2009). Steel Futures
Available and Steel Exposure are described in Table 6. All control variables are as described in Table 1 and included
with a one year lag. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by 2007 total assets. t-Statistics are
presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors clustered by firm. All models include year and
firm indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                 Aggregate PO/Assets
                                         Supplier R&D            Differentiated Goods        Vertically Integrated
                                       High         Low            Yes          No              VI        No VI
                                        (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)
Steel Futures Available               0.002      0.020***         0.005      0.020***         0.020        0.009
                                      (0.286)      (4.886)       (0.691)        (5.247)       (0.954)     (1.075)
Steel Exposure*Futures Available       0.008     -0.022***         -0.000    -0.017***         -0.026    -0.027**
                                      (0.631)     (-3.998)       (-0.040)      (-3.288)      (-0.730)     (-2.420)
% Input Traded                         0.061        -0.016         -0.048        -0.005        -0.023      -0.018
                                      (0.489)     (-0.820)       (-0.349)      (-0.273)      (-0.293)     (-0.327)
Leverage                              -0.035       -0.023          0.006      -0.056**         -0.172      -0.012
                                     (-0.616)     (-0.895)        (0.111)     (-2.294)       (-1.218)    (-0.240)
Leverage Squared                       0.010        0.010          -0.046       0.052*         0.195        -0.009
                                      (0.131)      (0.326)       (-0.654)       (1.709)       (1.076)    (-0.139)
Cash                                  -0.022      -0.017*         -0.009     -0.027***       0.163**       -0.029
                                     (-0.961)     (-1.664)       (-0.410)      (-2.639)       (2.032)    (-1.387)
Sales                                  0.003        -0.004         0.008        0.008*       0.074**        0.001
                                      (0.337)     (-0.990)        (0.986)       (1.959)       (2.203)     (0.080)
R&D Intensity                          0.003        -0.000         -0.008        0.008         0.168       -0.007
                                      (0.079)     (-0.024)       (-0.227)       (0.468)       (1.138)    (-0.204)
CapEx                                  -0.012       0.021          0.010         -0.043        -0.168       0.011
                                     (-0.172)      (0.778)        (0.186)      (-1.382)      (-0.990)      (0.178)
Firm Size                              0.005        -0.001         0.002       0.007**         0.045        -0.002
                                      (0.638)     (-0.205)        (0.352)       (2.027)       (1.505)    (-0.234)
Trade Credit                           0.061        0.050          -0.023    0.115***        -0.398*       -0.025
                                      (0.951)      (1.572)       (-0.359)       (3.860)      (-1.683)    (-0.407)
Year Dummies                           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                     Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
# Obs                                 9,738       10,639          10,043      10,334           461        19,916
Adjusted R2                           0.780       0.378           0.777       0.416           0.279       0.194




                                                                                                                     56
Table 12
Natural Experiment and Firm Linkages
The table presents multivariate estimates using nonfinancial Compustat firms from 2003-2010. The dependent
variable is either Trade Credit or Vertically Integrated/Vertical Coefficient (binary or level of integration,
respectively). Steel Futures Available and Steel Exposure are described in Table 6. All control variables are as
described in Table 1 and included with a one year lag. Post-event firm control variables (after 2007) are scaled by
2007 total assets. t-Statistics are presented in parenthesis and are calculated from robust standard errors clustered by
firm. All models include year and firm indicator variables. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

                                                                              Vertically
                                                  Trade Credit
                                                                              Integrated        Vertical Coefficient
                                                       (1)                        (2)                   (3)
Steel Futures Available                               0.002                     -0.002                -0.000*
                                                     (1.235)                   (-0.600)              (-1.738)
Steel Exposure*Futures Available                      -0.002                     0.000                 0.000
                                                     (-0.921)                   (0.030)               (0.063)
% Input Traded                                         0.002                     -0.004                0.000
                                                      (0.142)                  (-0.218)               (0.423)
Leverage                                            0.071***                   -0.035**                -0.001
                                                      (6.785)                  (-2.068)              (-1.229)
Leverage Squared                                    -0.051***                  0.050**               0.002**
                                                     (-3.851)                   (2.341)               (2.087)
Cash                                                -0.021***                    0.003                 0.000
                                                     (-5.157)                   (0.490)               (0.697)
Sales                                               0.008***                     -0.004                -0.000
                                                      (5.271)                  (-1.435)              (-0.502)
R&D Intensity                                       0.062***                     -0.011                -0.000
                                                      (9.790)                  (-1.069)              (-1.172)
CapEx                                                  -0.016                    0.004                 -0.000
                                                     (-1.338)                   (0.224)              (-0.214)
Firm Size                                           -0.028***                    0.002                 0.000
                                                    (-20.568)                   (0.980)               (1.288)

Year Dummies                                           Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                     Yes                       Yes                    Yes
# Obs                                                20,721                     20,766                20,766
Adjusted R2                                          0.831                       0.645                0.651




                                                                                                                       57
