                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TRADABILITY AND THE LABOR-MARKET IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION:
                   THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S.

                                             Ariel Burstein
                                            Gordon Hanson
                                               Lin Tian
                                            Jonathan Vogel

                                         Working Paper 23330
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w23330


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2017, Revised Septemberr 2017




We thank Rodrigo Adao, Lorenzo Caliendo, Javier Cravino, Klaus Desmet, Ben Faber, Cecile Gaubert,
Michael Peters, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Peter Schott for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ariel Burstein, Gordon Hanson, Lin Tian, and Jonathan Vogel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tradability and the Labor-Market Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.
Ariel Burstein, Gordon Hanson, Lin Tian, and Jonathan Vogel
NBER Working Paper No. 23330
April 2017, Revised September 2017
JEL No. F0,J0

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we show that labor-market adjustment to immigration differs across tradable and
nontradable occupations. Theoretically, we derive a simple condition under which the arrival of
foreign-born labor crowds native-born workers out of (or into) immigrant-intensive jobs, thus
lowering (or raising) relative wages in these occupations, and explain why this process differs
within tradable versus within nontradable activities. Using data for U.S. commuting zones over
the period 1980 to 2012, we find that consistent with our theory a local influx of immigrants
crowds out employment of native-born workers in more relative to less immigrant-intensive
nontradable jobs, but has no such effect within tradable occupations. Further analysis of
occupation labor payments is consistent with adjustment to immigration within tradables
occurring more through changes in output (versus changes in prices) when compared to
adjustment within nontradables, thus confirming our model’s theoretical mechanism. Our
empirical results are robust to alternative specifications, including using industry rather than
occupation variation. We then build on these insights to construct a quantitative framework to
evaluate the consequences of counterfactual changes in U.S. immigration.

Ariel Burstein                                 Lin Tian
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365                               Columbia Univesity
Box 951477                                     420 West 118th Street
UCLA                                           New York, NY 10027
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                     lt2475@columbia.edu
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu                           Jonathan Vogel
                                               Department of Economics
Gordon Hanson                                  Columbia University 420
IR/PS 0519                                     West 118th Street New
University of California, San Diego            York, NY 10027 and
9500 Gilman Drive                              NBER
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                        jvogel@columbia.edu
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
1       Introduction
There is a large literature on the impact of international trade on wages, employment, and
other labor-market outcomes.1 By contrast, research on how trade conditions the adjustment
of labor markets to changes in factor supplies, including those induced by immigration, is
relatively sparse.2 One explanation for this asymmetry is that the mechanism classical trade
theory posits for how openness regulates such adjustment—most notably, the Rybcznkski
Theorem (Rybczynski, 1955) of the two-good, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin model—lacks em-
pirical support.3 The theorem’s counterfactural predictions that factor prices and industry
factor proportions are insensitive to changes in factor supplies, and that between-industry
factor movements are what deliver this insensitivity, help justify abstracting from trade when
studying how labor markets adjust to changes in factor availability.4
    In this paper, we present theoretical analysis and empirical evidence to show that the
tradability of goods and services affects how local labor markets accomodate inflows of foreign
labor. We intend not to resuscitate the rigid logic of the Rybczynski Theorem, but rather
to introduce a more general framework in which variation in tradability across productive
activities generates smoother and more realistic mechanisms through which workers and
regions respond to changes in labor market conditions.
    To motivate our analysis, consider an inflow of labor in the U.S. from Mexico. The liter-
ature would characterize the exposure of U.S. workers as varying across regions (e.g., Altonji
and Card, 1991; Card, 2001; Munshi, 2003), skill groups (e.g., Borjas, 2003; Ottaviano and
Peri, 2012), and (or) occupations (e.g., Friedberg, 2001; Ottaviano et al., 2013; Dustmann et
al., 2013). Given the labor forces of the two countries and historical migration patterns, we
would expect labor supplies in the U.S. to expand more for workers without a high-school
degree than for workers with a college education, more in cities with a long history of immi-
grant settlement such as Los Angeles than in nontraditional locales such as Pittsburgh, and
more in jobs that are relatively open to immigrants such housekeeping or textile-machine
operation than in those that attract few foreign-born workers such as firefighting.
    To these standard sources of variation in worker exposure to immigration, we add varia-
tion in the tradability of goods and services, as in recent models of offshoring (Grossman and
Rossi-Hansberg, 2008). Although textile production and housekeeping are each activities in-
tensive in immigrant labor, textile factories can absorb increased labor supplies by expanding
exports to other regions in a way that housekeepers cannot. More generally, we show that
    1
      For recent surveys of this work, see Harrison et al. (2011) and Autor et al. (2016).
    2
      Important exceptions include Ottaviano et al. (2013), which we discuss below.
    3
      In summarizing evidence against Rybczynski (1955), Freeman (1995) takes the memorable approach of
repeatedly misspelling Rybczynki’s name, as if to underscore the theorem’s lack of empirical relevance.
    4
      See Hanson and Slaughter (2002) and Gandal et al. (2004) for evidence that economies do not absorb
labor inflows by shifting output toward labor-intensive industries and related analysis in Bernard et al.
(2013) on regional covariation in factor prices and factor supplies. Card and Lewis (2007), Lewis (2011),
and Dustmann and Glitz (2015) find that absorption of foreign labor occurs instead through within-industry
changes in factor intensities. See Gonzalez and Ortega (2011) for recent analysis in a line of work dating
back to Card (1990) on how sudden inflows of immigrant labor do not discernibly affect native wages and
employment. For contrasting results on immigration and industry size, see Bratsberg et al. (2017). Empirical
work squarely in the trade tradition, and in the spirit of Rybczynksi, examines how national factor supplies
affect national specialization patterns (Harrigan, 1995; Bernstein and Weinstein, 2002; Schott, 2003).



                                                                                                          1
labor-market adjustment to immigration across tradable occupations differs from adjustment
across nontradable occupations. We derive a simple theoretical condition under which the
arrival of foreign-born labor crowds native-born workers into or out of immigrant-intensive
jobs and explain why this process differs within the sets of tradable and nontradable tasks.
Empirically, we find support for our model’s key implications using cross-region and cross-
occupation variation in changes in labor allocations, total labor payments, and wages for the
U.S. between 1980 and 2012; while our focus is on occupations, our results also hold across
industries separated according to their tradability. We then incorporate these insights into
a quantitative framework to evaluate how immigration affects regional welfare.
    Our model has three main ingredients. First, each occupation is produced using a com-
bination of immigrant and native labor, where the two types of workers may differ in their
relative productivities across occupations and may be imperfectly substitutable within oc-
cupations.5 Second, heterogeneous workers select occupations as in Roy (1951), giving rise
to upward-sloping labor-supply curves.6 Third, the elasticity of demand facing a region’s
occupation output with respect to its local price differs endogenously between more- and
less-traded occupations. In this framework, the response of occupational wages and employ-
ment to an inflow of foreign-born labor depends on two elasticities: the elasticity of local
occupation output to local prices and the elasticity of substitution between native and im-
migrant labor within an occupation. When the first elasticity is low, crowding in occurs, as
in the classic Rybczynski (1955) effect. Because factor proportions within each occupation
are insensitive to changes in factor supplies, market clearing requires that factors reallocate
towards immigrant-intensive occupations. By contrast, a low elasticity of local occupation
output to local prices means that the ratio of outputs across occupations is relatively insen-
sitive to changes in factor supplies. Now, factors reallocate away from immigrant-intensive
occupations, in which case foreign-born arrivals crowd the native-born out of these lines of
work. More generally, native-born workers are crowded out by an inflow of immigrants if
and only if the elasticity of substitution between native and immigrant labor within each
occupation is greater than the elasticity of local occupation output to local prices.7 Factor
reallocation, in turn, is linked to changes in occupational wages. Because each occupation
faces an upward-sloping labor-supply curve, crowding out (in) is accompanied by a decrease
(increase) in the wages of native workers in relatively immigrant-intensive jobs.
    The tradability of output matters in our model because it shapes the elasticity of local
occupation output to local prices. The prices of more-traded occupations are (endogenously)
less sensitive to changes in local output. In response to an inflow of immigrants, the increase
in output of immigrant-intensive occupations is larger and the reduction in price is smaller
for tradable than for nontradable tasks. That is, adjustment to labor-supply shocks across
   5
     In our quantitative analysis, we estimate a high degree of native-immigrant substitutability within occu-
pations, consistent with recent evidence on native-immigrant substitutability at an aggregate level (Ottaviano
and Peri, 2012; Borjas et al., 2012).
   6
     In marrying Roy with Eaton and Kortum (2002), our work relates to analyses on changes in labor-market
outcomes by gender and race (Hsieh et al., 2013), the role of agriculture in cross-country productivity differ-
ences (Lagakos and Waugh, 2013), the consequences of technological change for wage inequality (Burstein
et al., 2016), and regional adjustment to trade shocks (Caliendo et al., 2015; Galle et al., 2015).
   7
     The Rybczynski Theorem is a particular knife-edge case of our framework in which, amongst many other
restrictions, the elastcity of local occupation output to local prices is infinite.



                                                                                                             2
tradable occupations occurs more through changes in output when compared to nontrad-
ables.8 The crowding-out effect of immigration on native-born workers, whatever its sign,
is systematically weaker in tradable than in nontradable jobs. Since factor reallocation and
wage changes are linked by upward-sloping occupational-labor-supply curves, an inflow of
immigrants causes wages of more immigrant-intensive occupations to fall by less (or to rise
by more) within tradable occupations than within nontradable occupations.
    We provide empirical support for the adjustment mechanism in our model by estimating
the impact of increases in local immigrant labor supply on the local allocation of domestic
workers and payments to labor across occupations in the U.S. We instrument for immigrant
inflows into an occupation in a local labor market following Card (2001). Because we tar-
get adjustment across occupations within a region, we are able to control for regional time
trends and thus impose weaker identifying assumptions than in standard applications of the
Card approach. Using commuting zones to define local labor markets (Autor and Dorn,
2013), measures of occupational tradability from Blinder and Krueger (2013) and Goos et
al. (2014), and data from Ipums over 1980 to 2012, we find that a local influx of immigrants
crowds out employment of U.S. native-born workers in more relative to less immigrant-
intensive occupations within nontradables, but has no such effect within tradables. Stronger
immigrant crowding out in nontradables satisfies a central prediction of our model. We
confirm the mechanism behind this result—that adjustment within tradables occurs more
through changes in local output than through changes in local prices when compared to non-
tradables—by showing that in response to an immigrant inflow, occupation labor payments
(which we use to measure occupation revenue) expand more in more-immigrant-intensive
occupations within tradables as compared to within nontradables. Analysis of wage changes
in response to immigration—at the occupation level, at the region level, and between more-
and less-educated workers—provides additional support for our model.
    The empirical estimates guide the parameterization of an extended version of our model,
which incorporates multiple education groups and native labor mobility between regions,
building on recent literature in spatial economics (Allen and Arkolakis, 2014 and Redding
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2016). We use this model to characterize the full general-equilibrium
impacts of immigration. The two counterfactual exercises we consider are a reduction in
immigrants from Latin America, who tend to have relatively low education levels and to
cluster in specific U.S. regions, and an increase in the supply of high-skilled immigrants, who
tend to be more evenly distributed across space in the U.S. As expected, reducing immi-
gration from Latin America increases the relative wage of low-education workers, and this
effect is larger in high-settlement cities such as Los Angeles than in low-settlement cities such
as Pittsburgh. More significantly, this shock raises wages for native-born workers in more-
exposed nontradable occupations (e.g., housekeeping) relative to less-exposed nontradable
occupations (e.g., firefighting) by much more than for similarly differentially exposed trad-
able jobs (e.g., textile-machine operation versus computer and communications equipment
operation), a finding that captures the wage implications of differential immigrant crowd-
ing out of native-born workers within nontradables versus within tradables. Importantly,
reducing immigration raises the local price index, thereby lowering real wages for native-
   8
    This result is related to an idea discussed in the trade and wages literature of two decades ago, in which
greater openness to trade may make labor demand curves more elastic (Rodrik, 1997; Slaughter, 2001).



                                                                                                            3
born workers, except those in the most immigrant-intensive nontraded occupations in the
most-exposed regions.9
    Our second exercise clarifies how the geography of labor-supply shocks conditions the
nontradable-tradable contrast in labor-market adjustment. Because high-skilled immigrants
are not very concentrated geographically in the U.S. (compared to low-skilled immigrants),
increasing their numbers does not result in much variation in labor-supply changes across
regions. Adjustment is similar within the set of tradable and nontradables occupations, so
that the reduction of native wages in more exposed occupations is comparable within the two
sets of jobs. For the nontradable-tradable distinction in adjustment to be manifest, regional
labor markets must be differentially exposed to a particular shock.
    Previous literature establishes that employment in tradable and nontradable industries
responds nonuniformly to local-labor-market shocks, such as the post-2007 U.S. housing-
market collapse (Mian and Sufi, 2014). On immigration, Dustmann and Glitz (2015) find
that regional wages are more responsive to local changes in immigrant labor supply in non-
tradable versus tradable industries and Peters (2017) finds that the manufacturing share of
employment rises in regions that are more exposed to the inflow of refugees in post-World
War II Germany. In contrasting results, Hong and McLaren (2015) find that immigrant
inflows in U.S. regional economies are associated with increases in total native employment,
with no consistent difference in response between more and less tradable industries. Our
analysis, while encompassing such between-sector variation in immigration impacts, intro-
duces the new mechanism of differential adjustment within tradables when compared to
within nontradables. We thereby revive a generalized version of the Rybczynski effect for
the analysis of labor-market adjustment to external shocks.
    Much previous work studies whether immigrant arrivals displace native-born workers
(Peri and Sparber, 2011a). Evidence of displacement effects is mixed. On the one hand,
higher-immigration regions do not have lower relative employment rates for native-born
workers (Card, 2005; Cortes, 2008). On the other hand, regions that have larger inflows
of low-skilled immigrants have lower relative prices for labor-intensive nontraded services
(Cortes, 2008), pay lower wages to low-skilled native-born workers in nontraded industries
(Dustmann and Glitz, 2015), and employ fewer native-born workers in labor-intensive occu-
pations such as manicurist services (Federman et al., 2006) and construction (Bratsberg and
Raaum, 2012). Our analysis suggests that previous work, by imposing uniform adjustment
within tradable and within nontradable sectors, incompletely characterizes immigration dis-
placement effects. The relaxed Rybczynski logic of our framework explicitly accounts for the
distinctive adjustment of nontraded occupations noted in this empirical literature.
    In other related work, Peri and Sparber (2009) derive and estimate a closed-economy
model in which immigration pushes native-born workers into non-immigrant-intensive tasks
(i.e., crowding out), thereby mitigating the negative impact of immigration on native wages.
Ottaviano et al. (2013) study a partial equilibrium model in which firms in an industry may
hire native and immigrant labor domestically or offshore production to foreign labor located
abroad. Freer immigration reduces offshoring and has theoretically ambiguous impacts on
native-born employment, which in the empirics are found to be positive. Relative to the first
paper, our model allows for either crowding in or crowding out and we show theoretically,
  9
      Also on the consumption gains from immigration, see Hong and McLaren (2015) and Monras (2017).


                                                                                                       4
empirically, and quantitatively how the strength of these effects differs within tradable versus
within nontradable occupations; relative to the second paper, our work derives the general
equilibrium conditions under which crowding in (out) occurs and shows how the responses
of native employment and wages differ for more and less tradable jobs.
    Our analytic results on immigrant crowding out of native-born workers are parallel to
insights on capital deepening in Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) and on offshoring in Gross-
man and Rossi-Hansberg (2008). The former paper, in addressing growth dynamics, derives
a condition for crowding in (out) of the labor-intensive sector in response to capital deepening
in a closed economy; the latter paper demonstrates that a reduction in offshoring costs has
both productivity and price effects, which are closely related to the forces behind crowding
in and crowding out, respectively, in our model. As we show below, the forces generating
crowding in within Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) and the productivity effect in Grossman
and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) are closely related to the Rybczynski theorem. Relative to these
papers, we provide more general conditions under which there is crowding in (out), show
that crowding out is weaker where local prices are less responsive to local output changes,
and prove that differential output tradability creates differential local price sensitivity.
    Sections 2 and 3 outline our benchmark model and present comparative statics. Section 4
details our empirical approach and results on the impact of immigration on the reallocation
of native-born workers, changes in labor payments across occupations, and changes in wages
for native-born workers. Section 5 summarizes our quantitative framework and discusses
parameterization, while Section 6 presents results from counterfactual exercises in which we
examine the consequence of changes in immigration that mimic proposed changes in U.S.
immigration policy. Section 7 offers concluding remarks.


2     Model
The model that we present in this section combines three ingredients. First, following Roy
(1951) we allow for occupational selection by heterogeneous workers, inducing an upward-
sloping labor supply curve to each occupation and differences in wages across occupations
within a region. Second, occupational tasks are tradable, as in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2008), and we incorporate variation across occupations in tradability, which induces occupa-
tional variation in price responsiveness to local output. Third, as in Ottaviano et al. (2013),
we allow for imperfect substitutability within occupations between immigrant and domestic
workers. We perform comparative statics first abstracting from trade between regions and
then under the assumption that each region is a small open economy.

2.1    Assumptions
There are a finite number of regions, indexed by r ∈ R. Within each region there is a
continuum of workers indexed by z ∈ Zr , each of whom inelastically supplies one unit of
labor. Workers may be immigrant (i.e, foreign born) or domestic (i.e., native born), indexed
by k = {I, D}. The set of type k workers within region r is given by Zrk , which has measure
Nrk . Each worker is employed in one of O occupations, indexed by o ∈ O. In Section 5 we
extend this model by dividing domestic and immigrant workers by education and allowing


                                                                                              5
for imperfect mobility of domestic workers across regions. The empirical analysis in Section
4 implicitly allows for the regional mobility of domestic workers, too.10
    Each region produces a non-traded final good combining the services of all occupations,
                                                                        η
                                                                     ! η−1
                                          X         1          η−1
                                                    η
                                Yr =              µro (Yro )    η            for all r,
                                          o∈O

where Yr is the absorption (and production) of the final good in region r, Yro is the absorption
of occupation o in region r, and η > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between occupations
in the production of the final good. The absorption of occupation o in region r is itself an
aggregator of the services of occupation o across all origins,
                                               ! α
                                     X α−1 α−1
                              Yro =      Yjroα        for all r, o,
                                                 j∈R

where Yjro is the absorption within region r of region j’s output of occupation o and where
α > η is the elasticity of substitution between origins for a given occupation.
   Occupation o in region r produces output by combining immigrant and domestic labor,
                                                                               ρ
                                                ρ−1                  ρ−1  ρ−1
                        Qro =       AIro LIro      ρ
                                                        + AD   D
                                                           ro Lro
                                                                         ρ
                                                                                    for all r, o,        (1)

where Lkro is the efficiency units of type k workers employed in occupation o in region r, Akro
is the systematic component of productivity of any type k worker in this occupation and
region, and ρ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between immigrant and domestic labor
within each occupation. In our analytic results, we assume that any changes in productivity
are Hicks-neutral (i.e., equal in percentage terms across factors and occupations). While the
literature has varying results on the substitutability of domestic and immigrant workers in the
aggregate (Borjas et al., 2012; Manacorda et al., 2012; Ottaviano and Peri, 2012), we focus on
substitutability within occupations. We use our reduced-form estimation results to discipline
the choice of ρ in our quantitative model (and find a high degree of substitutability). In
Appendix B, we present a production function in which output is produced using a continuum
of tasks and in each task domestic and immigrant labor are perfect substitutes up to a
task-specific productivity differential, such that immigrant and native workers endogenously
specialize in different tasks within occupations; this setting yields an identical system of
equilibrium conditions and highlights the flexibility of our approach.
    A worker z ∈ Zrk supplies ε (z, o) efficiency units of labor if employed in occupation o.
       k
Let Zro  denote the set of type k workers in region r employed in occupation o, which has
  10
     Whereas in the model the supply of immigrant workers in a region is exogenous, in the empirical analysis
we treat it as endogenous; see Klein and Ventura (2009), Kennan (2013), di Giovanni et al. (2015), and
Desmet et al. (Forthcoming) for models of international migration based on cross-country wage differences.
In Appendix D we vary the model by allowing for an infinitely elastic supply of immigrants in each region-
occupation pair (which fixes their wage). We show that the implications of that model for occupation
wages of native workers and factor allocations in response to changes in the productivity of immigrants are
qualitatively the same as those in our baseline model for changes in the number of immigrants. We also use
this model to relate our results to those in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008).

                                                                                                           6
         k
measure Nro and must satisfy the labor-market clearing condition
                                           X
                                     Nrk =       k
                                               Nro .
                                                     o∈O

The measure of efficiency units of factor k employed in occupation o in region r is
                                   Z
                             k
                            Lro =         ε (z, o) dz for all r, o, k.
                                             k
                                          z∈Zro

We assume that each ε (z, o) is drawn independently  from a Fréchet distribution with cumu-
                                             −(θ+1)
lative distribution function G (ε) = exp −ε          , where a higher value of θ > 0 decreases
the within-worker dispersion of efficiency units across occupations.11
    The services of an occupation can be traded between regions subject to iceberg trade
costs, where τrjo ≥ 1 is the cost for shipments of occupation o from region r to region j
and we impose τrro = 1 for all regions r and occupations o. The quantity of occupation o
produced in region r must equal the sum of absorption (and trade costs) across destinations,
                                       X
                                 Qro =     τrjoYrjo for all r, o.
                                             j∈R

Although it plays little role in our analysis, we assume trade is balanced in each region.12
   All markets are perfectly competitive, all factors are freely mobile across occupations,
and, for now, all factors are immobile across regions (an assumption we relax in Section 5).

2.2     Equilibrium characterization
We characterize the equilibrium under the assumption that Lkro > 0 for all occupations o
and worker types k, since our analytic results are derived under conditions such that this
assumption is satisfied. Final-good profit maximization in region r implies
                                            y −η
                                             Pro
                                     Yro =          Yr ,                               (2)
                                             Pr
where                                                               1
                                                                 ! 1−η
                                              X
                                                         y 1−η
                                      Pr =         µro (Pro )                                            (3)
                                             o∈O
                                                y
denotes the final good price, and       where Pro
                                             denotes the absorption price of occupation o in
region r. Optimal regional sourcing of occupation o in region j implies
                                                  −α
                                           τrjoPro
                                  Yrjo =       y       Yjo,                              (4)
                                             Pjo
  11
     The assumption of a Fréchet distribution is convenient to derive our analytic comparative statics and to
parameterize the model (since it only requires one parameter, shaping how occupation wages change with
occupation employment). As is true of any parametric assumption, it is not without loss of generality. Adao
(2016) presents a non-parametric approach to estimate the distribution of ε (z, o).
  12
     In the empirics, regional trade imbalances are absorbed by region fixed effects. In the quantitative
analysis, this assumption allows us to back out (unobserved) trade shares by region and occupation.

                                                                                                           7
where                                                                     1
                                                                       ! 1−α
                                                X
                                      y
                                     Pro =            (τjro Pjo )1−α            ,                          (5)
                                                j∈R

and where Pro denotes the output price of occupation o in region r. Combining the previ-
ous two expressions, the constraint that output of occupation o in region r must equal its
absorption (plus trade costs) across all regions can be written as
                                                       y α−η
                                       X
                        Qro = (Pro )−α     (τrjo )1−α Pjo     (Pj )η Yj .             (6)
                                                j∈R

Profit maximization in the production of occupation o in region r implies
                                                                  1
                                   I
                                           1−ρ            1−ρ  1−ρ
                        Pro = Wro    /AIro         D
                                                + Wro /AD
                                                        ro                                                 (7)

and                                                                   −ρ
                                                                  k
                                                            
                                                     ρ−1       Wro
                                     Lkro   =   Akro                        Qro ,                          (8)
                                                                Pro
           k
where Wro    denotes the wage per efficiency unit of type k labor employed in occupation o
                                                                                            k
within region r, which we henceforth refer to as the occupation wage. A change in Wro
represents the change in the wage of a type k worker in region r who does not switch
occupations.13 Because of self-selection into occupations, Wro
                                                             k
                                                               differs from the average wage
earned by type k workers in region r who are employed in occupation o, W agekro . Changes in
region-occupation average wages W agekro reflect both changes in wages per efficiency unit in
region-occupation ro and the resorting of workers across occupations in region r. In Section
4.5 we show how we can use measures of changes in average wages across occupations at the
region level to infer indirectly how immigration affects occupation-level wages.
    Worker z ∈ Zrk chooses to work in the occupation o that maximizes wage income Wro    k
                                                                                           ×
ε (z, o). The assumptions on idiosyncratic worker productivity imply that the share of type
                                                                  k       k
k workers who choose to work in occupation o within region r, πro    ≡ Nro  /Nrk , is
                                                 k θ+1
                                                    
                                      k        W ro
                                    πro =P                ,                              (9)
                                                      k θ+1
                                             j∈O  W   rj

                         k
which is increasing in Wro . Total efficiency units supplied by workers in occupation o is
                                                   θ
                                     Lkro = γ πro
                                                k θ+1
                                                       Nrk ,                              (10)
               θ
                  
where γ ≡ Γ θ−1     and Γ is the gamma function. Finally, trade balance implies
                                 X
                                      Pro Qro = Pr Yr for all r.                          (11)
                                      o∈O

  13
     In response to a decline in an occupation wage, a worker may switch occupations, thus mitigating the
potentially negative impact of immigration on wages, as in Peri and Sparber (2009). However, the envelope
condition implies that given changes in occupation wages, koccupation switching does not have first-order
effects on changes in individual wages, which solve maxo Wro   × ε (z, o) . Because this holds for all workers,
it also holds for the average wage across workers, as can be seen in equation (27).

                                                                                                             8
                                                       y
                                                                                         k
    An equilibrium is a vector of prices {Pr , Pro , Pro }, occupation wages Wro               , quanti-
ties
 k kof occupation   services produced and consumed  {Y  r , Y ro , Y rjo , Qro }, and labor allocations
  Nro , Lro for all regions r ∈ R, occupations o ∈ O, and worker types k that satisfy (2)-(11).


3        Comparative statics
In this section we derive analytic results for changes in regional labor supply and show that
adjustment to labor supply shocks varies across occupations within regions. We examine the
impact of given infinitesimal changes in the population of different types of workers within a
given region, NrD and NrI , on occupation quantities and prices as well as factor allocation and
occupation wages. Lower case characters, x, denote the logarithmic change of any variable
X relative to its initial equilibrium level (e.g. nkr ≡ ∆ ln Nrk ).
    To build intuition and identify how particular assumptions affect results, we start with
the special case of a closed economy in Section 3.1. We then generalize the results, first in
Section 3.2 by allowing for trade between regions under the assumption that each region
operates as a small open economy, and then in Section 3.3 by allowing immigration to affect
aggregate regional productivity. Derivations and proofs are in Appendix A.

3.1      Closed economy
In this section we assume that region r is autarkic: τrjo = ∞ for all j 6= r and o. We
describe the impact of a change in labor supply first on occupation output, prices, and labor
payments and then on factor allocation and occupation wages.14
Changes in occupation quantities, prices, and labor payments. Infinitesimal changes
in aggregate labor supplies NrD and NrI within an autarkic region generate changes in relative
occupation output quantities across two occupations o and o′ that are given by
                                                  η (θ + ρ)      I     I
                                                                           
                                   qro − qro′ =             w̃r Sro − Sro′                                   (12)
                                                    θ+η
and changes in relative occupation output prices that are given by
                                 1                  θ+ρ       I    I
                                                                      
                   pro − pro′ = − (qro − qro′ ) = −     w̃r Sro − Sro′ ,                                     (13)
                                 η                  θ+η
                       I   I
where SroI
           ≡ W D LWDro+W
                       Lro
                          I  I  is defined as the cost share of immigrants in occupation o output
                ro ro    ro Lro
                                                        D     I
in region r (the immigrant cost share) and w̃r ≡ wro      −wro   denotes the log change in domestic
relative to immigrant occupation wages (which is common across occupations).15 The log
change in domestic relative to immigrant occupation wages is given by
                                          w̃r = nIr − nD
                                                         
                                                        r Ψr ,
    14                                                                                       k
     We focus on changes in occupation wages because to a first-order approximation wro        is equal to changes
in average income of workers employed in occupation o before the labor supply shock.
  15                                                         I
     In either the open or closed economy, variation in Sro     across occupations is generated by variation in
Ricardian comparative advantage of immigrant and native workers across occupations within a region. From
                    I        k      k
the definitions of Sro and πro ≡ Nro  /Nrk , we have Sro
                                                       I
                                                           ≥ SroI                   I    I      D    D
                                                                  ′ if and only if πro /πro′ ≥ πro /πro′ . Together
                                                                            I ρ−1  I ρ−1
                                                I     I                     Aro           A ′
with equation (9), we obtain the result that Sro  ≥ Sro  ′ if and only if
                                                                            AD        ≥ AroD       .
                                                                             ro           ro′



                                                                                                                 9
where
                                               θ+η
                  Ψr ≡                                           I ≥0
                                                        I     D
                                                  P
                         (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) 1 − j∈O πrj − πrj  Srj
is the absolute value of the elasticity of domestic relative to immigrant occupation wages to
changes in their relative supplies. That Ψr ≥ 0 is an instance of the law of demand. With
Ψr ≥ 0, an increase in the relative supply of immigrant workers in a region, nIr > nD  r , increases
the relative wage of domestic workers in a region, w̃r ≥ 0, and makes all occupations more
immigrant intensive. Despite common values of θ, η, and ρ, variation in Ψr across regions
arises through regional variation in factor allocations and immigrant cost shares.
     Consider two occupations o and o′ , where occupation o is immigrant intensive relative
to o′ (i.e., Sro
               I
                   > SroI
                          ′ ). According to (12) and (13), an increase in the relative supply of

immigrant workers in region r, nIr > nD       r , increases the output and decreases the price in o
relative to o′ . This result follows immediately from the fact that the occupation wage of
immigrant workers relative to domestic workers falls equally in all occupations.
P Occupationk    k
                    revenues, Pro Qro , are equal to occupation labor payments, denoted by LPro ≡
   k W age  ro ro We focus on labor payments because they are easier to measure in practice
              N    .
than occupation quantities and prices. Equations (12) and (13) imply that small changes in
aggregate labor supplies NrD and NrI within an autarkic region generate changes in relative
labor payments across two occupations o and o′ that are given by,

                                            (η − 1) (θ + ρ)      I     I
                                                                          
                         lpro − lpro′ =                     w̃r Sro − Sro′ .                   (14)
                                                θ+η

According to (14), an increase in the relative supply of immigrant workers in region r,
nIr > nD
       r , increases labor payments in relatively immigrant-intensive occupations if and only
if η > 1. Importantly for what follows, a higher value of the elasticity of substitution
across occupations, η, increases the size of relative output changes and decreases the size
of relative price changes. In response to an inflow of immigrants, nIr > nDr , a higher value
of η generates a larger increase (or smaller decrease) in labor payments within immigrant-
intensive occupations, as we show in Appendix A.2.
Changes in factor allocation and occupation wages. Infinitesimal changes in aggregate
labor supplies NrD and NrI within an autarkic region generate changes in relative labor
allocations across two occupations o and o′ that are given by
                                            θ+1
                           nkro − nkro′ =                    I     I
                                                                       
                                                (η − ρ) w̃r Sro − Sro′                         (15)
                                            θ+η
and changes in relative occupation wages that are given by

                    k     k       nkro − nkro′    1               I     I
                                                                           
                   wro − wro′ =                =     (η − ρ) w̃r Sro − Sro′ .                  (16)
                                     θ+1         θ+η

By (15) and (16), an increase in the relative supply of immigrant workers, nIr > nD
                                                                                  r , decreases
employment of type k workers and (for any finite value of θ) occupation wages in the relatively
immigrant-intensive occupation if and only if η < ρ. If η < ρ, we have crowding out: an


                                                                                                 10
inflow of immigrant workers into a region induces factor reallocation away from immigrant-
intensive occupations; if on the the other hand, η > ρ, we have crowding in: an immigrant
influx induces factors to move towards immigrant-intensive occupations.
    The direction of labor reallocation between occupations is governed by the extent to
which immigration is accomodated by expanding production of immigrant-intensive occupa-
tions or by substituting away from native towards immigrant workers within each occupation.
To provide intuition, consider three special cases. First, in the limit as η → 0, output ra-
tios across occupations are fixed. The only way to accommodate an increase in the supply
of immigrants is to increase the share of each factor employed in domestic-labor-intensive
occupations (while making each occupation more immigrant intensive). In this case, im-
migration induces crowding out. Second, in the limit as ρ → 0, factor intensities within
each occupation are fixed. The only way to accommodate immigration is to increase the
share of each factor employed in immigrant-intensive occupations (while disproportionately
increasing production of immigrant-intensive occupations). In this case, immigration induces
crowding in. Third, if η = ρ, the immigrant intensity of each occupation moves one-for-one
with the region’s aggregate ratio of immigrants to native workers. New immigrants are al-
located proportionately across occupations whereas the allocation of native workers remains
unchanged.16 More generally, a lower value of η − ρ generates more crowding out of (or less
crowding into) immigrant-labor-intensive occupations in response to an increase in regional
immigrant labor supply.
    Consider next changes in occupation wages. If θ → ∞, then all workers within each k
are identical and indifferent between employment in any occupation. In this knife-edge case,
labor reallocates across occupations without corresponding changes in relative occupation
wages within k (taking the limit of (15) and (16) as θ converges to infinity). The restriction
that θ → ∞ thus precludes studying the impact of immigration (or any other shock) on
the relative wage across occupations of domestic or foreign workers. For any finite value of
θ—i.e., anything short of pure worker homogeneity—changes in occupation wages vary across
occupations. It is precisely these changes in occupation wages that induce labor reallocation:
in order to induce workers to switch to occupation o′ from occupation o, the occupation
wage must increase in o′ relative to o, as shown in (16). Hence, factor reallocation translates
directly into changes in occupation wages. Specifically, if occupation o′ is immigrant intensive
                            I      I
relative to occupation o, Sro ′ > Sro , then an increase in the relative supply of immigrant labor

in region r decreases the occupation wage for domestic and immigrant labor in occupation
o′ relative to occupation o if and only if η < ρ.
Relation to the Rybczynski theorem. Our results on changes in occupation output and
prices and on factor reallocation strictly extend the Rybczynski (1955) theorem.17 In our
context, in which occupation services are produced using immigrant and domestic labor, the
theorem states that for any constant-returns-to-scale production function, if factor supply
curves to each occupation are infinitely elastic (θ → ∞ in our model and homogeneous labor
  16
      In Appendix A.2 we solve for the elasticity of factor intensities within each occupation with respect to
changes in relative factor endowments, nD         I        D     I
                                                                   
                                           ro − nro / nr − nr . Factor intensities are inelastic if and only
if η > ρ (and unit elastic if η = ρ). Moreover, a higher value of η decreases the responsiveness of domestic
relative to immigrant occupation wages, Ψr .
   17
      Also on relaxing the assumptions underlying Rybczynski, see Wood (2012), who uses a two-country,
two-factor, and two-sector model in which each country produces a differentiated variety within each sector.

                                                                                                            11
in the Rybczynski theorem), there are two occupations (O = 2 in our model), and relative
occupation prices are fixed (η → ∞ in our closed-economy model and the assumption of
a small open economy that faces fixed output prices in the Rybczynski theorem), then an
increase in the relative supply of immigrant labor causes a disproportionate “increase” in
the output of the occupation that is intensive in immigrant labor and a disproportionate
                                                                        I      I
“decrease” in the output of the other occupation. Specifically, if Sr1     > Sr2  and nIr > nD
                                                                                             r ,
then qr1 > nIr > nDr  >  qr2 ; a corollary of this result is nk
                                                              r1 = qr1 >  nI
                                                                           r >  nD
                                                                                 r  > qr2 = n k
                                                                                              r2
for k = D, I. Under the assumptions of the theorem, factor intensities are constant in each
occupation (as in the case of ρ → 0 discussed above) and factor prices are independent of
factor endowments, and factor-price insensitivity obtains (Feenstra, 2015). Hence, the only
way to accommodate an increase in the supply of immigrants is to increase the share of each
factor employed in the immigrant-intensive occupation. Taking the limit of equation (15) as
θ and η both converge to infinity and assuming that O = 2, we obtain
                                           1
                        qr1 = nkr1 =                      D
                                                              I        I
                                                                            D
                                        I     D
                                                     1 − πr1  nr − 1 − πr1  nr
                                       πr1 − πr1

and
                                                  1
                               qr2 = nkr2 =                D I     I D
                                                                       
                                               I     D
                                                        −π  n
                                                          r1 r + π  n
                                                                  r1 r
                                              πr1 − πr1
    I     I                    I      D
If Sr1 > Sr2 —which implies πr1   > πr1 in the case of two occupations—then we obtain the
Rybczynski theorem and its corollary. As we show in Appendix C, in a special case of our
model that is, nevertheless, more general than the assumptions of the Rybczynski Theorem,
we obtain a simplified version of our extended Rybczynski theorem above—immigration in-
duces crowding in or crowding out depending on a simple comparison of local elasticities—in
the absence of specific functional forms for production functions. Hence, our result extends
the Rybczynski theorem under strong restrictions in our model.18

3.2     Small open economy
We extend the analysis by allowing region r to trade. To make progress analytically, we
impose two restrictions. We assume that region r is a small open economy, in the sense that
it constitutes a negligible share of exports and absorption in each occupation for each region
j 6= r, and we assume that occupations are grouped into two sets, O (g) for g = {T, N}, where
region r’s export share of occupation output and import share of occupation absorption are
common across all occupations in the set O (g).19 We refer to N as the set of occupations
that produce nontraded services and T as the set of occupations that produce traded services;
all that is required for our analysis is that the latter is more tradable than the former.
  18
      Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) assume that factor supply curves to each occupation are infinitely elastic
(θ → ∞ in our model), there are two occupations (O = 2 in our model), and the elasticity of substitution
between factors is one (ρ = 1 in our model). They show that there is crowding in if η > 1 and crowding out
if η < 1. In Appendix D, we relate our framework and results to Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008).
   19
      Our results hold with an arbitrary number of sets. In the empirical analysis, we alter the effective
number of sets by varying the size of occupations of intermediate tradability which are excluded from the
analysis (from zero to one-fifth of the total number of categories). See the Appendix F.



                                                                                                           12
    The small-open-economy assumption implies that, in response to a shock in region r only,
prices and output elsewhere are unaffected in all occupations: pyjo = pjo = pj = yj = 0 for all
j 6= r and o. As we show in Appendix A.3, in this case the elasticity of region r’s occupation
o output to its price—an elasticity we denote by ǫro —is a weighted average of the elasticity of
substitution across occupations, η, and the elasticity across origins, α > η, where the weight
on the latter is increasing in the extent to which the services of an occupation are traded,
as measured by the export share of occupation output and the import share of occupation
absorption in region r. Therefore, more traded occupations feature higher elasticities of
regional output to price (and lower sensitivities of regional price to regional output).
    The assumption that the export share of occupation output and the import share of
occupation absorption are each common across all occupations in O (g) in region r implies
that the elasticity of regional output to the regional producer price, ǫro , is common across
all occupations in O (g).20 In a mild abuse of notation, we denote by ǫrg the elasticity of
regional output to the regional producer price for all o ∈ O (g), for g = {T, N}.
    Infinitesimal changes in aggregate labor supplies NrD and NrI generate changes in occu-
pation outputs, output prices, labor payments, factor allocations, and wages across pairs of
occupations that are either in the set T or in the set N (i.e. o, o′ ∈ O (g)), which are given
by equations (12), (13), (14), (15) and (16) except now η is replaced by ǫrg .
Changes in occupation quantities, prices, and labor payments. If o, o′ ∈ O (g), then
changes in relative occupation quantities and prices are given by
                                             ǫrg (θ + ρ)       I      I
                                                                          
                               qro − qro′ =              w̃r Sro − Sro  ′
                                               θ + ǫrg
                                                θ+ρ          I     I
                                                                       
                               pro − pro′   =−         w̃r Sro  − Sro′ ,
                                               θ + ǫrg
where, again, the log change in domestic relative to immigrant occupation wages, w̃r ≡
  D     I
wro −wro  , is common across all occupations (both tradable and nontradable). In the extended
                                                                                            D
version of the model in this section we do not provide an explicit solution for w̃r ≡ wro     −
  I
wro . However, we assume that conditions on parameters satisfy the following version of the
law of demand: nIr ≥ nD    r implies w̃r ≥ 0. The results comparing changes in occupation
output and prices across any two occupations obtained in Section 3.1 now hold for any two
occupations within the same set: an increase in the relative supply of immigrant workers,
nIr > nD
       r , increases the relative output and decreases the relative price of immigrant-intensive
occupations. Moreover, we can compare the differential output and price responses of more
to less immigrant-intensive occupations within T and N. Because ǫrT > ǫrN , the relative
output of immigrant-intensive occupations increases relatively more within T than within
N, whereas the relative price of immigrant-intensive occupations decreases relatively less in
T than in N. Similarly, if o, o′ ∈ O (g), then changes in relative labor payments are given by

                                            (ǫrg − 1) (θ + ρ)      I     I
                                                                            
                          lpro − lpro′ =                      w̃r Sro − Sro′ .                      (17)
                                                 θ + ǫrg
  20
     By assuming that export shares in region r are common across all occupations in O (g), we are assum-
                                              I
ing that variation in immigrant intensity, Sro  , is the only reason why occupations within O (g) respond
differently—in terms of quantities, prices, and employment— to a region r shock.

                                                                                                      13
Because ǫrT > ǫrN , relative labor payments to immigrant-intensive occupations increase
relatively more within T than within N in response to an inflow of immigrants.
Changes in factor allocation and occupation wages. If o, o′ ∈ O (g), then changes in
relative labor allocations and occupation wages are given by
                                            θ+1
                             nkro − nkro′ =                       I     I
                                                                           
                                                   (ǫrg − ρ) w̃r Sro − Sro′ ,                             (18)
                                           ǫrg + θ
                             k     k         1
                                                   nkro − nkro′ .
                                                               
                            wro − wro′   =                                                                (19)
                                           θ+1
The results comparing changes in allocations across any two occupations obtained in Section
3.1 now hold for any two occupations within the same set: for a given elasticity between
domestic and immigrant labor, ρ, the lower is the elasticity of regional output to the regional
producer price, ǫrg , the more that a positive immigrant labor supply shock causes workers to
crowd out of (equivalently, the less it causes workers to crowd into) occupations that are more
immigrant intensive. Because ǫrT > ǫrN , we can compare the differential response of more to
less immigrant-intensive occupations in T and N: within T , immigration causes less crowding
out of (or more crowding into) occupations that are more immigrant intensive (compared to
the effect within N). The intuition for the pattern and extent of factor reallocation between
any two occupations within a given set g = T or g = N is exactly the same as described in
the closed economy presented in Section 3.1. On the other hand, the pattern and extent of
factor reallocation between T and N depend on the full set of model parameters.21
    Similarly, the result comparing changes in wages (for continuing workers) across two
occupations obtained in Section 3.1 now holds for any two occupations within the same set.
Because ǫrT > ǫrN , we can compare the differential response of more to less immigrant-
intensive occupations in T and N: within traded occupations T , immigration decreases
occupation wages less (or increases occupation wages more) in occupations that are more
immigrant intensive (compared to the effect within nontraded occupations N).

3.3     Aggregate productivity
Immigration may also affect aggregate regional productivity. For example, an increase in
immigrants could result in local congestion externalities (e.g., Saiz, 2007), thereby reducing
productivity, or local agglomeration externalities (e.g., Kerr and Lincoln, 2010), thereby
increasing productivity.22 Because the results in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 are proven allowing
for arbitrary values of ar , changes in regional productivity do not qualitatively affect the
relative outcomes within a region studied above.23
    Of course, changes in regional productivity do shape regional outcomes. In two specifica-
tions of our model, it is straightforward to characterize the aggregate implications of changes
  21
     Comparisons between T and N have been the focus on previous empirical work, as described in our
Introduction.
  22
     Peters (2017) shows that post-war refugee inflows in Western Germany increased local productivity.
  23
     A similar logic applies to incorporating non-labor factors in the occupation production function. If our
labor aggregate and these factors are combined in a Cobb-Douglas aggregator with common shares across
occupations, changes in the supplies of these factors have the same effect as changes in aggregate productivity.


                                                                                                             14
in aggregate productivity within region r: (i) if region r is autarkic, or (ii) if region r is a
small open economy and α = ∞ (i.e., for any occupation, the services from all origins are
perfect substitutes). In either case, resulting changes in equilibrium prices and quantities
satisfy the following conditions: nkro = pyro = pro = w̃r = 0 and wrok
                                                                        = qro = yr = ar . La-
bor allocations and relative occupation wages, prices, and quantities are all unaffected by
a change in aggregate productivity, whereas the real wage, output, and absorption in each
occupation move one-for-one with changes in aggregate productivity. Hence, although the
effects of immigration on the real wage and aggregate output in a given region are sensitive
to the impact of immigration on aggregate productivity, the effects of immigration on the
allocation of labor as well as on relative changes across occupations in wages, prices, and
quantities in a given region are not. We parameterize the relationship between regional
productivity and population in our extended model in Section 5.


4     Empirical Analysis
Guided by our theoretical model, we aim to study the impact of immigration on labor market
outcomes at the occupation level in U.S. regional economies. We begin by showing how to
convert our analytical results on labor market adjustment to immigration into estimating
equations. We then turn to an instrumentation strategy for changes in immigrant labor
supply, discussion of data used in the analysis, and presentation of our empirical findings.
    Our analytical results include predictions for how occupational labor allocations, total
labor payments, and wages adjust to immigration. As discussed in Section 2.2, measuring
changes in occupation-level wages is difficult because changes in observable worker wages
reflect both changes in occupation wages and self-selection of workers across occupations
according to unobserved worker productivity. Correspondingly, we begin this section with
the more straightforward analysis of estimating the impact of immigration on occupational
labor allocations and total labor payments and then address wage impacts.

4.1    Specifications for Labor Allocations and Labor Payments
Equation (18) provides a strategy for estimating the impact of immigration on the allocation
of native-born workers across occupations. It can be rewritten as
                                   θ+1
                    nD     D
                     ro = αrg +
                                                         I
                                          (ǫrg − ρ) w̃r Sro for all o ∈ O (g) ,
                                  ǫrg + θ
         D
where αrg  is a fixed effect specific to region r and the group (i.e., tradable, nontradable) to
which occupation o belongs. If the only shock in region r between time t0 and t1 > t0 is to
the supply of immigrants, then w̃r = ψr nIr , where ψr > 0 by our assumption that parameters
satisfy the law of demand. Hence, we have
                                  θ+1
                   nD     D
                    ro = αrg +           (ǫrg − ρ) ψr nIr Sro
                                                           I
                                                              for all o ∈ O (g) .
                                 ǫrg + θ
This can be expressed more compactly as
                             nD     D     D        D
                              ro = αrg + βr xro + βN r Io (N) xro ,                        (20)

                                                                                             15
                I I
where xro = Sro   nr is the immigration shock to occupation o in region r (i.e., the immigrant
cost share of occupation o at time t0 times the percentage change in the supply of immigrant
workers in region r) and Io (N) equals one if occupation o is nontradable..24
    A value of βrD < 0 in equation (20) would imply crowding out of native-born workers
by immigrant labor in tradables: in response to an inflow of immigrants into region r,
native-born employment in tradable occupations with higher immigrant cost shares contracts
relative to those with lower immigrant cost shares. In the model of Section 3.2, βrD < 0 if
and only if ǫrT < ρ (the price elasticity of regional output in tradables is less than the
elasticity of substitution between native- and foreign-born labor within occupations). A
value of βrD + βND
                   r < 0 would imply crowding out in nontradables, which in our model occurs
if and only if ǫrN < ρ (where ǫrN is the price elasticity of regional output in nontradables).
                        D
Finally, a value of βN   r < 0 implies that crowding out is stronger in nontradables than in
tradables: in response to an inflow of immigrants, native-born employment in nontradables
contracts more (or expands less) in occupations with high relative to low immigrant cost
                                                   D
shares compared to tradables. In Section 3.2, βN     r < 0 if and only if ǫrT > ǫrN (the price
elasticity of regional output is higher in tradable than in nontradable occupations).
    Equation (17) generates the corresponding specification for occupation labor payments,

                                  lpro = αrg + γ r xro + γN r Io (N) xro ,                              (21)
where the left-hand side of (21) is the log change in total labor payments for occupation o
in region r and and αrg is a fixed effect specific to region r and the group (i.e., tradable,
nontradable) to which occupation o belongs. From section 3.2, we know that a value of
γr > 0 in (21) implies that ǫrT > 1, a value of γr + γN r > 0 implies that ǫrN > 1, and a value
of γN r < 0 implies that ǫrT > ǫrN , which provides an additional test of the hypothesis that
crowding out is stronger in nontradables than in tradables.25
    To apply (20) and (21) empirically, we must address several issues that are suppressed in
the theory but likely to matter in estimation. By abstracting away from observable differences
in worker skill, we have assumed in the model that all workers, regardless of education level,
draw their occupational productivities from the same distribution within each k = D, I.
To allow the distribution of worker productivities across occupations to be differentiated by
the level of schooling, we estimate (20) by education group (while estimating (21) for all
education groups combined, consistent with that equation’s connection to occupation total
revenues). Relatedly, changes over time in the educational attainment of immigrant workers
may change the profile of immigrant comparative advantage across occupations within a
region. We thus define the immigration shock xro expansively as
                                                                  I
                                                  X
                                                        I     ∆Nre
                                          xro ≡        Sreo     I
                                                                    ,                                   (22)
                                                   e
                                                               Nre
  24
      As we discuss in Appendix J, a logic similar to that underlying (20) applies to how an immigrant inflow
affects the allocation of foreign-born workers across occupations. In Appendix J, we present results on the
immigrant-employment allocation regressions that are the counterparts to (23) and Table 1 below.
   25
      In our model the labor share of revenue within each occupation is assumed to be fixed (and equal to
one). The empirical relationship discussed above holds as long as changes in the occupation labor share
are uncorrelated with xro (conditional on covariates), as would be the case if the production function is
Cobb-Douglas between our labor aggregate and other inputs, as discussed in footnote 23.

                                                                                                          16
            I
where Nre     is the population of immigrants with education e within region r in period t0 ,
      I                                                           I
∆Nre    is the change in this population between t0 and t1 , and Sreo is the share of total labor
payments in occupation o and region r that goes to immigrants with education e in period
t0 .26 In (22), we apportion immigrant flows into a region to occupations according to the
education-group-specific change in immigrant labor supplies and the education-group- and
occupation-group-specific cost shares for immigrants in the initial time period t0 .27
     Summarizing the above discussion, regression specifications for changes in native-born
employment and total labor payments derived from our analytical results take the form

                           nD     D     D    D       D               D
                            ro = αrg + αo + β xro + βN Io (N) xro + νro ,                               (23)

                            lpro = αrg + αo + γxro + γN Io (N) xro + νro ,                              (24)
where nD  ro is the log change in employment for native-born workers (disaggregated by ed-
ucation group) for occupation o in region r, lpro is the log change in labor payments for
occupation o in region r (across all education groups and including both foreign- and native-
born workers), we define xro using (22), and we incorporate occupation fixed effects, αoD and
αo , to absorb changes in labor market outcomes that are specific to occupations and common
across regions (due, e.g., to economy-wide changes in technology or demand).28 In (23) and
(24) we impose common impact coefficients β D , βN   D
                                                       , γ, and γN , such that the estimates of
these values are averages of their corresponding region-specific values (βrD , βN D
                                                                                   r , γ, γN ) in
(20) and (21). When estimating (23) and (24), we weight by the number of native-born
workers employed or total labor payments within r, o in period t0 .
     The regression in (23) allows us to estimate whether immigrant flows into a region induce
on average crowding out or crowding in of domestic workers in relatively immigrant-intensive
occupations separately within tradable and within nontradable occupations. It also allows
us to test whether crowding-out is weaker (or crowding-in is stronger) in tradable relative to
nontradable jobs. The regression in (24) allows us to estimate whether immigrant flows into
a region induce on average an increase or decrease in labor payments in relatively immigrant-
intensive occupations separately within tradable and within nontradable occupations. This
allows us to test the mechanism in our model that generates differential crowding out within
tradable and nontradable occupations, which is that quantities are more responsive and
prices less responsive to local factor supply shocks in tradable than nontradable activities.

4.2     An instrumental variables approach
In the theory, we treat immigrant inflows into a region as an exogenous event. In the
estimation, unobserved shocks to productivity or demand may affect both the employment
and wages of native-born workers and the attractiveness of a region to immigrant labor.
  26                                                                   I I
     With only one education group, the only difference between Sro      nr and xro is the use of log changes
versus percentage changes, which makes little difference for our results.
  27
     Consistent with Peri and Sparber (2011b) and Dustmann et al. (2013), we allow foreign- and native-born
workers with similar education levels to differ in how they match to occupations.
  28
     Since the immigration shock in (22) is normalized by initial population levels (and not current values),
the specification in (23) avoids concerns over division bias (Peri and Sparber, 2011a). And since we estimate
(23) by education group, the occupation fixed effects control for national changes in the demand for skill
that vary across occupations (due, e.g., to occupation-specific changes in preferences or technology).

                                                                                                          17
Consider region r that attracts high-education immigrants between periods t0 and t1 . This
region will have a higher value of xro , especially in occupations that are intensive in high-
education immigrants. The inflow of high-education immigrants may have been induced
in part by region-and-occupation-specific demand or productivity shocks, implying that xro
                          D
may be correlated with νro  in (23) and with νro in (24). Measurement error in xro may also
be an issue, given small sample sizes for workers in some occupation-region cells.
    To identify the causal impact of immigrant inflows to a region on native outcomes, we
follow Altonji and Card (1991) and Card (2001) and instrument for xro using
                                                                      I∗
                                                   X              ∆Nre
                                          x∗ro ≡            I
                                                           Sreo     I
                                                                                                        (25)
                                                   e
                                                                   Nre
          I∗
where ∆Nre   is a variant of the standard Card instrument that accounts for education-group
and region-specific immigration shocks,
                                             X
                                        I∗             −r
                                    ∆Nre   ≡    fres ∆Nes .
                                                       s
            −r
Here, ∆Nes     is the net immigrant inflow in the U.S. (excluding region r) from immigrant-
source-region s and with education e between t0 and t1 , and fres is the share of immigrants
from source s with education e who lived in region r in period t0 .29 We allow immigrants
with different education and sources to vary in their spatial allocation, and allow immigrants
with different education levels within a region to vary in their occupational allocation.
    The Card instrument, while widely used, is subject to criticism. One is that it may be
invalid if regional labor-demand shocks persist over time (Borjas et al., 1997). Helpfully, this
concern is less pressing in our context. In (23) and (24) we identify the parameters β, βN ,
γ, and γN using variation across occupations within regions in the change in employment or
                                                               D
labor payments. By including region-group fixed effects (αrg     , αrg ) in regressions in which
the dependent variable is a long-period change, we control for time trends that are specific
both to the region (r) and to tradable or nontradable occupations as a group (g). Our
analysis is thereby immune to region, occupation-group specific innovations that may drive
immigration, such as long-run shocks to aggregate regional productivity or amenities.30

4.3     Data
In our baseline analysis, we study changes in labor-market outcomes between 1980 and 2012.
In sensitivity analysis, we use 1990 and 2007 as alternative start and end years, respectively.
  29
      Regarding measurement error, small cell sizes in Ipums data may imply that the immigrant cost share
 I
Sreo   used to construct xro may be subject to sampling variation. In Appendix F, we report results using
             I
values of Sreo  averaged over the initial sample year (1980) and the preceding time period (1970), to help
attenuate classical measurement error. The coefficient estimates are very similar to our main results.
   30                                                                                                     D
      A remaining concern is possible correlation between innovations to employment or labor payments (νro  ,
                                                                                   I
νro ) and the initial share of immigrants in region-occupation labor payments (Sreo ), which is used in the
instrument in (25) and which may occur if the region-occupations that experience larger subsequent native
employment growth are ones in which immigrants were initially more concentrated. To address this threat
                                                                                      I         I
to identification, in Appendix F we construct the instrument in (25) by replacing Sreo    with S−reo , which
is the share of immigrant workers in labor payments for occupation o and education group e in the U.S.,
excluding region r. Results again are qualitatively similar to those we report below.

                                                                                                          18
All data, except for occupation tradability, come from the Integrated Public Use Micro
Samples (Ipums; Ruggles et al., 2015). For 1980 and 1990, we use 5% Census samples; for
2012, we use the combined 2011, 2012, and 2013 1% American Community Survey samples.
Our sample includes individuals who were between ages 16 and 64 in the year preceding
the survey. Residents of group quarters are dropped. Our concept of local labor markets
is commuting zones (CZs), as developed by Tolbert and Sizer (1996) and applied by Autor
and Dorn (2013). Each CZ is a cluster of counties characterized by strong commuting ties
within and weak commuting ties across zones. There are 722 CZs in the mainland U.S.
    For our first dependent variable, the log change in native-born employment for an occu-
pation in a CZ shown in (23), we consider two education groups: high-education workers are
those with a college degree (or four years of college) or more, whereas low-education workers
are those without a college degree. These education groups may seem rather aggregate.
However, note that in (23) the unit of observation is the region and occupation, where our
50 occupational groups already entail considerable skill-level specificity (e.g., computer sci-
entists versus textile-machine operators).31 We measure domestic employment as total hours
worked by native-born individuals in full-time-equivalent units (for an education group in an
occupation in a CZ) and use the log change in this value as our first regressand. We measure
our second dependent variable, the change in total labor payments, as the log change in total
wages and salaries in an occupation in a commuting zone.
    We define immigrants as those born outside of the U.S. and not born to U.S. citizens.
The aggregate share of immigrants in hours worked in our sample rises from 6.6% in 1980 to
16.8% in 2012.32 We construct the occupation-and-CZ-specific immigration shock in (23) and
(24), xro , defined in (22), as the percentage growth in the number of working-age immigrants
for an education group in CZ r times the initial-period share of foreign-born workers in that
education group in total earnings for occupation o in CZ r, where this product is then
summed over education groups. In constructing our instrument shown in equation (25), we
consider three education groups and 12 source regions for immigrants.33
    Our baseline data include 50 occupations (see Table 7 in Appendix E).34 We measure
  31
     We simplify the analysis by including two education groups of native-born workers. Because the divide in
occupational sorting is sharpest between college-educated and all other workers, we include the some-college
group with lower-education workers. Whereas workers with a high-school education or less tend to work in
similar occupations, the some-college group may seem overly skilled to fit in this category. Results are very
similar if we exclude some-college workers from the low-education group.
  32
     Because we use data from the Census and ACS (which seek to be representative of the entire resident
population, whether in the U.S. legally or not), undocumented immigrants will be included to the extent
that are captured by these surveys. An additional concern is that the matching of immigrants to occupations
may differ for individuals who arrived in the U.S. as children (and attended U.S. schools) and those who
arrived in the U.S. as adults. In Appendix F, we report results limiting immigrants to those who arrived in
the U.S. at age 18 or above. Our results are substantially unchanged.
  33
     The education groups are less than a high-school education, high-school graduates and those with some
college, and college graduates. Relative to native-born workers, we create a third education category of less-
than-high-school completed for foreign-born workers, given the preponderance of undocumented immigrants
in this group (and the much larger proportional size of the less-than-high-school educated among immigrants
relative to natives). The source regions for immigrants are Africa, Canada, Central and South America,
China, Eastern Europe and Russia, India, Mexico, East Asia (excluding China), Middle East and South and
Southeast Asia (excluding India), Oceania, Western Europe, and all other countries.
  34
     We begin with the 69 occupations from the 1990 Census occupational classification system and aggre-


                                                                                                           19
occupation tradability using the Blinder and Krueger (2013) measure of “offshorability,”
which is based on professional coders’ assessments of the ease with which each occupation
could be offshored. Goos et al. (2014) provide evidence supporting this measure. They
construct an index of actual offshoring by occupation using the European Restructuring
Monitor and find that it is strongly and positively correlated with the Blinder-Krueger
measure.35 We group occupations into more and less tradable categories using the median
so that there are 25 tradable and 25 nontradable entries (see Table 8 in Appendix E). The
most tradable occupations include fabricators, financial-record processors, mathematicians
and computer scientists, and textile-machine operators; the least tradable include firefighters,
health assessors, therapists, and vehicle mechanics.
    In Table 9 in Appendix E, we compare the characteristics of workers employed in trad-
able and nontradable occupations. Whereas the two groups are similar in terms of the
shares of employment of workers with a college education, by age and racial group, and
in communication-intensive occupations, tradable occupations have relatively high shares of
employment of male workers and workers in routine- and abstract-reasoning-intensive jobs.
High male and routine-task intensity arise because tradable occupations are strongly over-
represented in manufacturing. In robustness checks, we use alternative cutoffs for tradables
and nontradables; drop workers in agriculture, manufacturing, mining; and drop workers in
routine-task-intensive jobs. In further robustness checks, we use industries in place of oc-
cupations and measure industry tradability using three approaches, including that in Mian
and Sufi (2014).
    Our analysis of changes in wages requires measures of wages by occupation, education
group, and CZ. To obtain these, we first regress log hourly earnings of native-born workers in
each year on a gender dummy, a race dummy, a categorical variable for 10 levels of education
attainment, a quartic in years of potential experience, and all pair-wise interactions of these
values (where regressions are weighted by annual hours worked times the sampling weight).
We take the residuals from this Mincerian regression and calculate the sampling weight and
hours-weighted average value for native-born workers for an education group in a CZ (or for
an occupation-education group in a CZ). Finally, we use these values to calculate changes in
education-level wages in each CZ (or in each occupation-CZ).

4.4     Empirical Results on Labor Allocations and Labor Payments
The specification for the impact of immigration on the allocation of native-born workers
across occupations within CZs is given in (23). We run all regressions separately for the
low-education group (some college or less) and the high-education group (college education
or more). The dependent variable is the log change in CZ employment (hours worked) of
native-born workers in an occupation and the independent variables are the CZ immigration
shock to the occupation, shown in (22), this value interacted with a dummy for whether
gate up to 50 to concord to David Dorn’s categorization (http://www.ddorn.net/) and to combine small
occupations that are similar in education profile and tradability but whose size complicates measurement.
  35
     Given limited data on intra-country trade flows in occupation services, we use measures of offshorability
at the national level to capture tradability at the regional level, a correspondence which is admittedly
imperfect. In the sensitivity analysis we show that our results are robust to using alternative measures of
industry tradability.


                                                                                                           20
the occupation is nontraded, and dummies for the occupation and the CZ-occupation group.
Regressions are weighted by initial number of native-born workers (by education) employed
in the occupation in the CZ, and standard errors are clustered by state. We instrument for
the immigration shock using the value in (25), where we disaggregate the sum in specifying
the instrument, such that we have three instruments per endogenous variable.
     Table 1 presents results for (23). In the upper panel, we exclude the interaction term for
the immigration shock and the nontraded dummy, such that we estimate a common impact
coefficient across occupations; in the lower panel we incorporate this interaction and allow the
immigration shock to have differential effects on tradable and nontradable occupations.36 For
low-education workers, column (1a) reports OLS results, column (2a) reports 2SLS results,
and column (3a) reports reduced-form results in which we replace the immigration shock with
the instrument in (25), a pattern we repeat for high-education workers. In the upper panel,
all coefficients are negative: on average the arrival of immigrant workers in a CZ crowds
out native-born workers at the occupational level. The impact coefficient on xro is larger in
absolute value for high-education workers than for low-education workers, suggesting that
crowding out is stronger for the more-skilled.
     In the lower panel of Table 1, we add the interaction term between the immigration shock
and an indicator for whether the occupation is nontraded, as in (23), which allows for differ-
ences in crowding out within tradables and within nontradables. There is a clear delineation
between these two groups. In tradable occupations, the impact coefficient is close to zero
(0.009 for low-education workers, −0.03 for high-education workers) with narrow confidence
intervals. The arrival of immigrant workers crowds native-born workers neither out of nor
into tradable jobs. In nontradable occupations, by contrast, the impact coefficient—the sum
of the coefficients on xro and the xro Io (N) interaction—is strongly negative. For both low-
and high-education workers, in either the 2SLS or the reduced-form regression, we reject the
hypothesis that this coefficient sum is zero at a 1% significance level. In nontradables, an
influx of immigrant workers crowds out native-born workers. For low-education workers, a
one σ increase in occupation exposure to immigration leads to a reduction in native-born
employment in nontradables of 0.08 (-0.3 × 0.18/0.64) σ, whereas for high-education workers
a one σ increase in occupation exposure to immigration leads to a reduction in native-born
employment in nontradables of 0.15 (-0.37 × 0.22/0.55) σ (using 2SLS estimates).37 These
results are consistent with our theoretical model, in which the crowding-out effects of immi-
gration are stronger within nontradable versus within tradable jobs.
     The specification for the log change in total labor payments in (24) tests for the mech-
anism underlying differential immigrant crowding out of native-born workers in tradables
versus nontradables. In Table 2, we report results for estimates of γ, which is the coefficient
on the immigration shock, xro , and γN , which is the coefficient on the immigration shock
interacted with the nontradable-occupation dummy, Io (N) xro . In all specifications, the co-
efficient on xro is positive and precisely estimated, which is consistent with the elasticity of
local output to local prices in tradables being larger than one (ǫrT > 1). Similarly, in all
  36
     This specification, which does not separate occupations by tradability, is similar to the wage regression
in Friedberg (2001) used to examine national adjustment to the 1990’s Russian immigration in Israel.
  37
     For reference, the standard deviation of immigration exposure across occupations and CZs for low (high)
education workers is 0.18 (0.22) and the standard deviation of the log change in native-born employment
across occupations and CZs for low (high) education workers is 0.64 (0.55).


                                                                                                           21
 Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                        region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                                Panel A
                                (1a)        (2a)          (3a)        (4a)         (5a)         (6a)
                                           Low Ed                                High Ed
                                OLS         2SLS          RF          OLS         2SLS          RF
  xro                           -.088      -.148**      -.099**     -.130*** -.229*** -.210***
                               (.065)       (.069)       (.041)       (.040)   (.047)   (.037)
  Obs                          33723        33723        33723       26644        26644        26644
  R-sq                          .822         .822         .822        .68          .68          .679
  F-stat (first stage)                     129.41                                 99.59
                                                Panel B
                                (1b)        (2b)         (3b)         (4b)         (5b)         (6b)
                                           Low Ed                                High Ed
                                OLS         2SLS          RF          OLS         2SLS          RF
  xro                          .089*     .009     .005                 .022     -.034    -.021
                               (.049)   (.088)   (.061)               (.036)   (.066)   (.060)
  Io (N) xro                 -.303*** -.303*** -.238***             -.309*** -.373*** -.330***
                               (.062)   (.101)   (.091)               (.097)   (.126)   (.113)
  Obs                          33723        33723        33723       26644        26644        26644
  R-sq                          .836         .836         .836        .699         .699         .699
  Wald Test: P-values           0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00
  F-stat (first stage)                     105.08                                 72.28
Notes: The estimating equation is (23). Observations are for CZ-occupation pairs (722 CZs×50
occupations). The dependent variable is the log change in hours worked by native-born workers in a
CZ-occupation; the immigration shock, xro , is defined in (22); Io (N ) is a dummy variable for the
occupation being nontradable. All regressions include dummy variables for the occupation and the
CZ-group (tradable, nontradable). Columns (1) and (4) report OLS results, columns (2) and (5) report
2SLS results using (25) to instrument for xro , and columns (3) and (6) replace the immigration shock(s)
with the instrument(s). Low-education workers are those with some college or less; high-education
workers are those with at least a bachelor’s degree. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by
state. For the Wald test, the null hypothesis is that the sum of the coefficients on xro and Io (N ) xro is
zero. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.

            Table 1: Allocation for domestic workers across occupations




                                                                                                              22
   Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)
                                                       OLS          2SLS            RF
                         xro                         .3918***  .3868**   .3266**
                                                      (.1147)   (.1631)   (.1297)
                         Io (N) xro                 -.3512*** -.4009*** -.3287***
                                                      (.1157)   (.1362)   (.0923)
                         Obs                          34892         34892         34892
                         R-sq                          .897          .897          .897
                         Wald Test: P-values           0.38          0.89          0.98
                         F-stat (first stage)                       127.82
      Notes: The estimating equation is (24). Observations are for CZ-occupation pairs. The dependent
      variable is the log change in total labor payments in a CZ-occupation; the immigration shock, xro , is in
      (22); Io (N ) is a dummy variable for the occupation being nontradable. All regressions include dummy
      variables for the occupation and the CZ-group (tradable, nontradable). Column (1) reports OLS
      results, column (2) reports 2SLS results using (25) to instrument for xro , and column (3) replaces the
      immigration shocks with the instruments. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. For
      the Wald test, the null hypothesis is that the sum of the coefficients on xro and Io (N ) xro is zero.
      Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.

                            Table 2: Labor payments across occupations


specifications the coefficient on Io (N) xro is negative and highly significant, which implies
that immigrant crowding out of natives is stronger within nontradables than within trad-
ables (i.e., ǫrT > ǫrN ), thus confirming the results in Table 1. Finally, we see that the sum
of these two coefficients is approximately zero in all specifications, which is consistent with
the elasticity of local output to local prices in nontradables, ǫrN , being close to one. These
bounds on coefficients values will be useful for model parameterization in Section 5.
    Together, the results in Tables 1 and 2 verify both differential crowding out within trad-
ables versus within nontradables and the key mechanism in our model through which this
difference is achieved. In our model the arrival of immigrant labor results in an expansion
in output and a decline in price of immigrant-intensive tasks both within tradables and
within nontradables. Compared to nontradables, however, adjustment in tradables occurs
more through output changes than through price changes. Consequently, revenues and labor
payments of immigrant-intensive occupations increase by more within tradable than within
nontradable jobs, as does native employment. Consistent with this logic, Tables 1 and 2 show
that, within tradables, an immigration shock generates null effects on native employment
and an expansion in total labor payments for immigrant-intensive activities. In contrast,
within nontradables, the immigration shock has a negative impact on native employment
and no change in labor payments in more immigrant-intensive occupations.
    One concern about our estimation is that, by virtue of using the Card (2001) instrument,
we are subject to the Borjas et al. (1997) critique that regional immigrant inflows are the
result of secular trends in regional employment growth, which could complicate using past
immigrant settlement patterns to isolate exogenous sources of variation in future regional
immigrant inflows. To examine the validity of this critique for our analysis, we check whether


                                                                                                                  23
our results are driven by pre-trends in occupational employment adjustment patterns. We
repeat the estimation of equation (23), but now with a dependent variable that is defined
as the change in the occupational employment of native workers over the 1950-1980 period,
while keeping the immigration shock defined over the 1980-2012 period. This exercise, which
is reported in the Appendix F, allows us to assess whether future changes in immigration
predict past changes in native employment, which would indicate the presence of confounding
long-run regional-occupational employment trends in the data.
    In the Appendix we see that for low-education workers, the 2SLS coefficient on the immi-
gration shock for nontradable occupations is negative and insignificant, as opposed to zero in
Table 1, and the 2SLS coefficient on the immigration shock interacted with the nontradable
dummy is also positive and insignificant, as opposed to negative and precisely estimated
in Table 1. For high-education workers, the 2SLS coefficient on the immigration shock is
negative and significant, as opposed to zero in Table 1, indicating that future immigrant
absorption is higher in tradable occupations with lower past native employment growth;
the 2SLS coefficient on the immigration shock interacted with the nontradable dummy re-
verses sign from Table 1 and is positive and significant, which indicates that immigration
crowds in native-born workers, as opposed to the pattern of crowding out that we observe
in contemporaneous comovements. These exercises reveal no evidence that current impacts
of immigration on native-born employment are merely a continuation of past employment
adjustment patterns. The null effects of immigration on native-born employment in tradable
occupations and the crowding-out effect of immigration on native-born employment in non-
tradable occupations are not evident when we examine the correlation of current immigration
shocks with past changes in native-born employment.38
    In the regressions in Table 1, we divide occupations into equal-sized groups of tradables
and nontradables. In Appendix F, we explore alternative assumptions about which occupa-
tions are tradable and which are not. The corresponding regression results are very similar
to those in Table 1.39 Results are also similar, as reported in Appendix F, when we redo the
analysis for region-industries, rather than for region-occupations and identify the tradability
of industries following an approach akin to Mian and Sufi (2014). Immigration induces crowd-
ing out of native-born employment in nontradable industries but not in tradable industries,
while leading to an expansion (contraction) of labor payments in tradable (nontradable) in-
dustries. We also experiment with changing the end year for the analysis from 2012 to 2007,
which falls before the onset of the Great Recession. Using this earlier end year yields similar
results, as in our baseline sample period, of strong immigrant crowding out of native-born
  38
      An explanation for the coefficient estimates in Table 1 having the opposite sign from those for the
regression in which the native employment change is for 1950-80 and the immigration shock is for 1980-2012
is that the immigration shock for 1980-2012 is negatively correlated with that for 1950-80 (this correlation,
conditional on occupation and group-CZ fixed effects, is -0.165 and statistically significant). Of the 682 CZs
experiencing an increase in the share of immigrant workers between 1980 and 2012, 347 had a decrease in
the share of immigrants between 1950 and 1980. This implies that the proper specification for the 1950-1980
native employment change would be to regress it on the immigration shock for the same time period. When
we use instead the leading period to measure the immigration shock, we correspondingly obtain coefficient
estimates opposite in sign to those in Table 1.
   39
      In the Appendix F, we also examine whether our results on tradable occupations are driven by manu-
facturing industries. When we exclude workers in the manufacturing sector, we obtain results on tradable
versus nontradable occupations that are materially the same as those we report in Table 1.


                                                                                                           24
workers in nontradable occupations and no crowding out in tradable occupations. When
we alternatively change the start year from 1980 to 1990, the crowding-out effect weakens
for low-education workers in nontradables, but remains strong for high-education workers in
nontradables. Finally, when we drop the very largest commuting zones from the sample, for
which concerns about reverse causality from local labor demand shocks to immigrant inflows
may be strongest, we see little qualitative change in our impact-coefficient estimates.

4.5     Wage Changes for Native-born Workers
Our analytical results predict how occupation wages per efficiency unit of native-born workers
adjust to an inflow of foreign workers. Equation (19) yields a regression specification that
takes the form
                          D     D
                        wro = α̃rg + α̃oD + χD xro + χD                D
                                                      N Io (N) xro + ν̃ro ,               (26)
following the same steps—incorporating occupation fixed effects, imposing common slope
parameters across regions, and measuring xro using (22)—that led from equation (18) to
regression specification (23). A positive value of χD would imply that an inflow of immi-
grants raises native occupation wages relatively more in immigrant-intensive occupations
within tradables whereas a negative value of χD  N would imply that an inflow of immigrants
reduces immigrant-intensive native occupation wages more within nontradables than within
tradables.
    In the data we observe not changes in wages per efficiency unit at the occupation level,
wro , but rather changes in average wages by occupation, wageD
  D
                                                                   ro . Under crowding out, an
immigrant influx would tend to drive down the wage per efficiency unit in more-immigrant-
intensive occupations and also to drive out native-born workers whose unobserved charac-
teristics give them relatively low productivity in these jobs. Because the latter effect works
against the former, the prediction for the estimated impact of immigration on measured
changes in occupation-level wages is unclear.40
    To confirm this ambiguity empirically, Table 3 presents results from estimating a version
                                                                D
of equation (26) in which we replace the dependent variable, wro  , with observed change in the
                                              D
average wage for a region-occupation, wagero (separately for low and high education work-
ers). The results show no consistent impact of immigration on occupation wages. In the 2SLS
regressions in column (2) immigration impacts are close to zero and statistically insignificant
within tradables and within nontrables, both for low-education and high-education work-
ers. In the reduced-form regressions in column (3), average wage impacts of immigration
are negative and significant for native-born workers within nontradables—indicating larger
average wage reductions in more-immigrant intensive occupations—but these results hold
only for low-education workers; for high-education workers within nontradables, the impact
of immigration on wages is near zero.
    As a solution to the theoretically ambiguous impact of immigration on observed occupation-
level average wages, we derive an estimating equation that allows us to use observed changes
in average wages (across education groups) at the region level to infer indirectly the model’s
predictions for occupation-level wage changes, χD and χD  N . Log-linearizing the average wage
  40
     With a Fréchet-distribution of idiosyncratic productivity draws, these two forces exactly balance out,
implying that changes in average wages are equal across occupations.


                                                                                                        25
         Dependent variable: change in the average wage of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                           (1)         (2)             (3)       (1)      (2)        (3)
                                                     Low Ed                             High Ed
                                          OLS         2SLS         RF           OLS      2SLS        RF
           xro                        .0382*** .0461** .0376**                   .003   -.0075  .0012
                                       (.0136) (.0231) (.0172)                  (.021) (.031) (.0295)
           Io (N) xro                 -.0565** -.0828 -.0762**                  .0073   -.0223 -.0189
                                       (.0276) (.0521) (.0374)                 (.0279) (.0365) (.0311)
           Obs                            33723       33723       33723        26644     26644     26644
           R-sq                            .639        .639        .639         .613      .613      .613
           Wald Test: P-values            0.34         0.38        0.18         0.64      0.36      0.52
           F-stat (first stage)                       105.08                              72.28
      Notes: Observations are for CZ-occupation pairs. The dependent variable is the log change in the
      average CZ-occupation wage for native-born workers; the immigration shock, xro , is in (22); Io (N ) is a
      dummy variable for the occupation being nontradable. All regressions include dummy variables for the
      occupation and the CZ-group (tradable, nontradable). Column (1) reports OLS results, column (2)
      reports 2SLS results using (25) to instrument for xro , and column (3) replaces the immigration shocks
      with the instruments. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. For the Wald test, the
      null hypothesis is that the sum of the coefficients on xro and Io (N ) xro is zero. Significance levels: *
      10%, ** 5%, ***1%.

                     Table 3: Average occupation wage for domestic workers


change of native workers in region r and taking into account that occupation switching does
not have first-order effects on changes in individual wages (see footnote 13), yields
                                               X
                                     wageDr =
                                                    D D
                                                   wro πro ,
                                                          o∈O

The change in average wages across workers in a region is an average of changes in occupation
wages weighted by initial employment shares. In our extended model of Section 5.1, in which
there are multiple education groups e of native workers, the previous expression holds as
                                             X
                                   wageDre =
                                                   D D
                                                 wro πreo ,                              (27)
                                                          o∈O


where wageD re is the change in average wages of native workers with education e in region r
      D
and πreo is the allocation across occupations of these workers in the base year. Combining
(26) and (27), we obtain
                               X X                  X
                     wageDre =
                                          D D
                                        α̃rg πreo +   α̃oD πreo
                                                            D
                                                                                        (28)
                                      g   o∈O(g)                 o∈O
                                          X                      X
                                 + χD                 D
                                                 xro πreo + χD
                                                             N
                                                                                    D
                                                                        xro Io (N) πreo     D
                                                                                        + ν̃re
                                          o∈O                    o∈O

                                                         D
We estimate (28) proxying for region-group time trends α̃rg (which cannot be identified since

                                                                                                                   26
                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                             OLS            2SLS             RF
                                       D
                             P
                                o∈O   πreo Io (N) xro     -.8265***      -1.629***       -1.691***
                                                            (.1535)       (.1779)         (.2439)
                                       D
                             P
                                o∈O   πreo xro             .602***       .8986***        .9678***
                                                            (.1101)        (.139)         (.1617)
                             Obs                             1444           1444            1444
                             R-sq                            .979           .976            .979
                             Wald Test: P-values             0.00            0.00           0.00
        Notes: The estimating equation is (28). Observations are by CZ and education group (some college and
        less, bachelor’s and more). The dependent variable is the education-group-specific log change in average
        wages for native-born      workers in (27). Reported coefficientsP       are for the immigration shock to
                                   D                                                     D
                        P
        nontradables, P    o∈O   πreo Io (N ) xro , and  to all occupations,       o∈O πreo xro . Coefficient estimates on
                                     D                      D                       D
                                               P                      P
        other variables ( o∈O πreo , x̄rT o∈O(T ) πreo , x̄rN o∈O(N ) πreo ) are suppressed. Column (1) reports
        OLS results, column (2) reports 2SLS results using (25) to construct instruments for the immigration
        shocks, and column (3) replaces the immigration P          shocks with the instruments.   P ForDthe Wald test, the
                                                                             D
        null hypothesis is that the sum of coefficients on o∈O πreo             Io (N ) xro and o∈O πreo      xro are zero.
        F-stats for  the first-stage    are 76.53,  41.87,  115.63  and  86.6  for  the endogenous     variables
                 D                          D                         D                           D
        P                         P                       P                           P
           o∈O πreo Io (N ) xro ,    o∈O πreo xro , x̄rT     o∈O(T ) πreo , and x̄rN     o∈O(N ) πreo , respectively.
        Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.

              Table 4: Change in average wage for native-born workers, 1980-2012


there are as many parameters as observations) using γg x̄rg + ζr for g = T, N, where x̄rg is
the simple average value of xrg in region r across occupations in group g.41
P We presentD regression results for equation (28) in Table 4. The coefficient on the term
   xro Io (N) πreo , which captures the differential impact of immigration on changes in re-
gional education-group average wages in nontradable compared to tradable occupations, is
negative and precisely estimated in both 2SLS and reduced-form specifications.42 This find-
ing is consistent with immigrant crowding out of native-born workers within nontradables
being strongerPthan within tradables. For tradable occupations, by contrast, the coefficient
                        D
on the term        xro πreo is positive and precisely estimated in the reduced-form and 2SLS
specifications. Consistent with the employment-allocation regressions—in which crowding
out is stronger in nontradable than in tradable occupations—the negative impact of immi-
gration on regional wages appears to work more strongly through nontradables than through
tradables. However, the positive coefficient on the tradable component of the immigration
shock in the wage regressions is distinct from the employment regressions in which there are
null effects of immigration on crowding out (in) of the native-born.
  41
      In Appendix I we use data generated by our extended model of Section 5.2 to verify that there is a tight
link between estimates of χD and χD       N based on equations (26) and (28), and that the slopes of the wage
regressions are roughly equal to 1/ (θ + 1) times the slope of the allocation regression, as implied by our
analytic expression (16).
   42
      After proxying for α̃D                                                                                  D
                                                                                                       P
                            rg , we construct instruments for the four endogenous variables in (28)— xro πreo    ,
                 D                    D                       D
P                          P                       P
    xro Io (N ) πreo , x̄rT o∈O(T ) πreo , and x̄rN o∈O(N ) πreo —using instruments for xro ’s as defined in (25).
We first instrument x̄rg by calculating the simple averages of the instrument x∗ro across occupations within
g = T, N . We then replace xro , x̄rN, , and x̄rT in the four endogenous variables with their corresponding
instruments to construct the instruments used in the 2SLS and reduced-form regressions.


                                                                                                                              27
    As a final exercise on earnings, we relate our analysis to the voluminous empirical liter-
ature on immigration and wage outcomes. The specification in (28) is roughly analogous to
the cross-area-study approach to estimating immigration wage effects, which tends to find
null or small negative impacts of local-area immigrant inflows on wages for the native born
(Blau and Mackie, 2016). Our specification differs in important respects from commonly
estimated regressions, which do not distinguish shocks within tradable versus within non-
tradable occupations, as we do above by aggregating earning shocks across occupations into
the O(T ) and O(N) sets. To contrast our approach with standard approaches, which tend
to assume a single aggregate production sector, we estimate the regression,

                       wageD        D              I     I
                                                            
                           re − wagere′ = β0 + β1 xre − xre′ + β2 zr + υr .                            (29)
The dependent variable in (29) is the difference in the change in average log earnings be-
tween high-education group e and low-education group e′ native-born workers, where raw
earnings are residualized as in (28) before averaging. The regressors are the   difference in
                                                                       I    I
immigration exposure between high- and low-education workers xre − xre′ , and a vector
of controls zr for initial regional-labor-market conditions.43 Immigration exposure xIre is the
percentage growth in immigrant labor supply for group e in region r times the initial share of
immigrant labor in group e earnings in total labor payments in region r. This specification
is a reduced-form version of the main wage equation in Card (2009), where instead of using
the change in relative labor supply for all workers in groups e and e′ we use the weighted
change in relative labor supplies for immigrant workers (instrumented as above using the
Card approach). Differencing changes in log earnings between groups e and e′ helps remove
from the specification region-specific shocks that affect workers across education groups in a
common manner (such as changes in the regional price level).
    Appendix I reports results in which we estimate (29) using college educated workers for e
and less-than-college educated workers for e′ . We find a negative but small and insignificant
effect of immigration on relative earnings, consistent with the many studies in the cross-area-
regression approach. The difference between these results and those in Table 4 highlight how
the correlation between earnings and immigrant-driven labor supply shocks in the aggregate
may hide substantial variation across occupations in the impact of these shocks, as well as
differential adjustment within tradable and nontradable activities.
Summary. The empirical results show that, consistent with our theoretical model, there
are differences in adjustment to labor supply shocks across occupations within tradable and
within nontradable tasks. The allocation and wage regressions are consistent with immigrant
crowding out of native-born workers within nontradables (ǫrN < ρ) and with less crowding
out within tradables (ǫrN < ǫrT ). Whereas the allocation regression is consistent with neither
crowding in nor crowding out within tradables (ǫrT ≈ ρ), the average wage regression is
consistent with crowding in within tradables (ǫrT > ρ).
  43
   These initial-period controls are the shares of manufacturing, routine occupations, and women in regional
employment, and the log ratio of college-educated to non-college educated adults.




                                                                                                         28
5        A Quantitative Framework
We next present an extended quantitative model, in which we impose less restrictive as-
sumptions than in Section 3 (large shocks, large open economies, multiple labor skill groups,
geographic mobility of native-born workers), evaluate changes in real wages by occupation
and region, and perform comparisons across CZs and between the sets of tradable and non-
tradable occupations, which are not the focus of our empirical and theoretical analyses.
In this section, we describe how we parameterize our quantitative model; in the following
section, we use the model to conduct counterfactual exercises regarding U.S. immigration.

5.1      An Extended Model
We extend our simple model of Section 2 in two ways. First, type k ∈ {D, I} workers are now
differentiated by their education level, indexed by e ∈ E k . The set of type k workers with
                             k                         k
education e in region r is Zre , which has measure Nre   and which is endogenously determined
for domestic workers as described below. The measure of efficiency units of type k workers
with education e employed in occupation o within region r is
                                      Z
                           k       k
                         Lreo = Treo        ε (z, o) dz for all r, e, o, k,
                                               k
                                            z∈Zreo

         k
where Treo  denotes systematic productivity for any type k worker with education e employed
                                                                                k       k
in occupationPo and region r. We assume that productivity is given by Treo         = T̄reo Nrλ ,
                      k
where Nr =       k,e Nre is the population in region r and λ governs the extent of regional
agglomeration (if λ > 0) or congestion (if λ < 0). We maintain the same assumptions as in
the one-education-group model on the distribution from which ε (z, o) is drawn, where for
simplicity the parameter θ that controls the dispersion of idiosyncratic productivity draws
is common across education groups, e. Within each occupation, efficiency units of type
k workers are perfect substitutes across workers of all education levels.44 The measure of
efficiency P
           units of type k workers employed in occupation o within region r is thus given
by Lkro = e Lkreo . Output of occupation o in region r is produced according to (1). These
assumptions imply that, for any ρ < ∞, within each occupation immigrants and domestic
workers are less substitutable than are type k workers with different levels of education.
     Under these assumptions, the share of type k workers with education e who choose to
                                         k
work in occupation o within region r, πreo  , is
                                                      k    k
                                                                θ+1
                                        k            Treo Wro
                                       πreo =P                      θ+1 ,                                (30)
                                                         k
                                                  j∈O   Trej Wrjk
          k
where      is the wage per efficiency unit of type k labor, which is common across all education
         Wro
groups of type k employed in occupation o within region r. The efficiency units supplied by
    44
    This simplifying assumption, which allows us to avoid further nesting of workers with yet more substi-
tution elasticities to calibrate, does not imply that education groups within nativity categories are perfectly
substitutable at the aggregate level. We elaborate on this point below. Borjas (2003) and Piyapromdee
(2017), among others, obtain related results for the impact of immigration on education-group wages by al-
ternatively assuming that education and nativity groups are imperfect substitutes in an aggregate production
function that does not specifically model heterogeneous tasks or occupations.

                                                                                                            29
these workers in occupation o is
                                                                  θ
                                        Lkreo = γTreo
                                                  k    k                k
                                                                θ+1
                                                      πreo             Nre .                               (31)

The average wage of type k workers with education e in region r (i.e., the total income of
these workers divided by their mass) is
                                                  "                            1
                                                                            # θ+1
                                                                    k θ+1
                                                      X
                                   W agekre = γ              k
                                                                     
                                                            Trej Wrj                                       (32)
                                                      j∈O


which is also the average wage for these workers within each occupation.45
    The second extension is that domestic workers now choose in which region r to live. We
follow Redding (2016) and assume that the utility of a worker z living in region r depends on
her real wage, a systematic amenity for region r, AD    re , which is common across all domestic
workers with education e, and an idiosyncratic amenity shock from residing in that region,
εr (z, r), which is distributed Fréchet with shape parameter ν > 1. Each worker first draws
her amenity shocks across regions and chooses her region, and then draws her productiv-
ity shocks across occupations and chooses her occupation. Under these assumptions, the
measure of domestic workers with education e in region r is given by
                                                       ν
                                                W ageD
                                            AD
                                             re Pr
                                                     re
                                   D
                                 Nre =P                 D
                                                             ν NeD ,
                                                 D W ageje
                                          j∈R Aje Pj


where NeD denotes the measure of education e domestic workers across all regions and
W ageD re /Pr denotes the average real wage of education e workers in region r.
    In Appendix H.1 we specify a system of equations to solve for changes between two time
periods in prices and quantities in response to changes in exogenously specified regional sup-
plies of immigrant workers. These changes are not restricted to be infinitesimal as in the
analytic results above. The inputs required to solve this system are: (i) initial period alloca-
                                                                               k
tion of wage income across occupations for each worker type in each region, πreo  , wage income
                                                                      k ×W agek
                                                                    Nre
of each worker type in each region as a share of total income, P N k′ ×W agek′ , allocations
                                                                              re
                                                                                    e′ k′   re′   re′
                                                             k
of workers across y
                      regions for each worker type,             ,
                                                         absorption shares by occupation in each
                                                            Nre
region, P Y′ ro ×Pro
                     y , and bilateral exports relative to production and relative to absorption
          o Yro′ ×Pro′
by occupation in each region; and (ii) values of parameters η (the substitution elasticity
between occupations in production of the final good), α (the substitution elasticity between
services from different regions in the production of a given occupational service), ρ (the
substitution elasticity between domestic and immigrant workers in production within an oc-
cupation), θ (the dispersion of worker productivity), ν (the dispersion of worker preferences
  45
    Taking as given changes in the population of domestic workers by education in each region, the equilib-
rium occupation price and quantity changes then coincide with those in our baseline model if there are no
agglomeration forces, λ = 0, and if education groups within each k are allocated identically across occupa-
              k      k
tions (i.e., πreo = πro for all e ∈ E k ) — with the aggregate supply of type k workers in region r in the single
                                          Sk k
education model set to nkr = e∈E k Sre
                                 P
                                           k nre .
                                       r



                                                                                                              30
for regions), and λ (the elasticity of aggregate productivity to population in each region);
                                                          I
and (iii) changes in immigrant labor supply by region, N̂re . In Appendix H.3 we extend the
analytic results of Section 3 to multiple education groups, providing conditions under which
immigration neither crowds in nor crowds out native workers within tradable jobs.
    We define a measure of the aggregate exposure of region r to a change in immigration as
                                                             I
                                               X         ∆Nre
                                       xIr =        I
                                                   ψre     I
                                                                                                       (33)
                                               e
                                                         Nre
        I       I                       k′               ′
                  × W ageIre / e′ k′ N × W agekre′ is the share of immigrant workers with
                                P
where ψre  ≡ Nre                        re′
                                                                              I
education e in region r in total labor payments in region r and where ∆Nre      is the change
between the initial and final periods in education e labor supply of immigrants in region r.
This measure xIr captures the size of the change in effective labor supply in CZ r caused by
changes in the local supply of immigrants.

5.2    Calibration
We calibrate the model based on the same U.S. data used in our empirical analysis. We
consider 722 regions (each of which corresponds to a given CZ) within a closed national
economy, 50 occupations (half tradable, half nontradable), two domestic education groups
(some college or less, college completed or more), and three immigrant education groups (high
school dropouts, high school graduates and some college, and college graduates). The values
             k      agekre
    k
of πreo , P NreN×W               k
                k′ ×W agek′ and Nre in the initial equilibrium are obtained from Census and ACS
          e′ k′   re′   re′
data. Given the absence of bilateral regional trade data by occupation, we make assumptions
that allow us to construct bilateral trade shares and absorption shares by occupation using
only information on labor payments (equal to the value of output in our model) by region and
occupation, Pro Qro , which we obtain from Census and ACS data. Specifically, in addition to
assuming that regional trade is balanced, we assume that tradable occupations are subject
to zero trade costs (τrjo = 1 for all r and j), whereas nontradable occupations are subject to
prohibitive trade costs (τrjo = ∞ for all j 6= r). Further details are provided in Appendix H.
The trade shares that are backed out from this approach imply that the elasticity of regional
output to the regional producer price for nontradables, ǫrN , is equal to η (since trade shares
are zero for nontradable occupations), and, correspondingly, that the elasticity of regional
output to the regional producer price for tradables, ǫrT , is very close to α (since trade shares
are large for tradable occupations, owing to each region being small in the aggregate).
    We assign values to the parameters α, ν, θ, λ, η, and ρ as follows. The parameter α − 1 is
the partial elasticity of trade flows to trade costs. We set α = 5, yielding a trade elasticity of
4, in the middle of the range of estimates seen in the international trade literature surveyed
by Head and Mayer (2014). The parameter ν is the elasticity of native spatial allocations
                                                                   nD −nD
with respect to native real wages across regions, ν = wD −wreD −prr′e+p ′ . We set ν = 1.5, which is
                                                        r    r′        r
in the middle of the range of estimates in the geographic labor mobility literature reviewed by
Fajgelbaum et al. (2015). The parameter θ + 1 is the elasticity of occupation allocations with
                                                             nkro −nkro′
respect to occupation wages within a region, θ+1 =            k −w k
                                                             wro
                                                                           . We set θ = 1 following analyses
                                                                  ro′
on worker sorting across occupations in the U.S. labor market in Burstein et al. (2016) and

                                                                                                         31
                                                  θ α      ρ  η    ν           λ
                            Parameter values      1 5      5 1.93 1.5         0.05

                         Table 5: Parameter values in quantitative analysis


Hsieh et al. (2013).46 We set λ = 0.05, in line with estimates in the local agglomeration
economics literature reviewed in Combes and Gobillon (2015).
    Since estimates of the elasticity of substitution between occupations, η, and the elasticity
of substitution between native and immigrant workers within occupations, ρ, are not readily
available from existing research,47 we calibrate them as follows. Starting in 1980 we feed into
the model changes in immigrant supply by region between 1980 and 2012 predicted by the
                                   I∗
Card instrument, N̂re I
                        = 1 + ∆N  re
                                Nre
                                      , where ∆NreI∗
                                                     is defined in Section 4. Using data generated
by the model, we then run the reduced-form employment-allocation regression in (23).48 We
choose η and ρ to target the extent to which immigration crowds in or crowds out native
employment within tradables and within nontradables. Specifically, we target β D = 0 and
β D + βN D
            = −0.295 (the latter is the average of the reduced-form estimates across high-
and low-education native workers), so that our model replicates our empirical finding that
immigration neither crowds in nor crowds out native employment in tradables and crowds
out native employment in nontradables. The resulting values are ρ = 5 and η = 1.93.
    The intuition for our calibration yielding the result that ρ = 5 follows from the analytics
in Section 3.2. Targeting β D = 0 in the employment-allocation regression (no crowding out
in tradables for low- and high-education natives) requires that the elasticity of regional out-
put to the regional producer price within tradables, ǫrT , equals the elasticity of substitution
between native- and foreign-born workers within each occupation, ρ. Moreover, since trad-
able occupations have trade shares close to one in most regions, and ǫrT is a weighted average
of α and η (where the weight on α is one when trade shares are one), we also have ǫrT ≈ α.
Because we set α = 5, it follows that ρ = 5. A higher value of ρ would imply crowding out in
tradeables, which is inconsistent with our reduced-form estimates. Similarly, setting η < 5
                             D
is intuitive. Targeting βN     < 0 in the employment-allocation regression (crowding out in
nontradables for low- and high-education natives) requires that ǫrN < ρ. Since trade shares
are zero in nontradables, we have ǫrN = η. Hence, we must have η < ρ.
    To better understand how the allocation regression shapes our choice of η beyond requir-
ing η < ρ, the left panel of Figure 1 displays the model-implied values of β D and βN    D
                                                                                           against
                                                                         49
the value of η if we fix all other parameters at their baseline levels. As described above, β D
is largely insensitive to η because ǫrT , which is a weighted average of η and α, places almost
                                            D
all weight on α. On the other hand βN         is highly sensitive to η because ǫrN places almost
  46
      Our parameter θ corresponds to θ + 1 in Burstein et al. (2016) and Hsieh et al. (2013).
  47
      The latter elasticity is an occupation-level version of the aggregate immigrant-native substitution elas-
ticity estimated in Ottaviano and Peri (2012).
   48
      We cannot estimate the elasticity using 2SLS in model-generated data since the model only uses the
predicted inflow of immigrants, not the observed inflow. In the calibration, we elect to target our employment-
allocation regression results and not our wage regression results, given that our wage results allow only for
indirect inference on crowding in (out) at the occupation level.
   49
      Consistent with the analytic results in Section 3.2, the model predicts that β D and βND
                                                                                                are both approx-
imately equal to 0 when η = ρ = α (so that ǫrT = ǫrN ).


                                                                                                             32
                              Allocation regression                          Labor payment regression
                         Low education High education
               βD           -0.001            0.000
                 D
               βN           -0.302            -0.288
               γ                                                                            0.515
               γN                                                                          -0.241
               R-sq             0.991                   0.996                               0.995

                         Table 6: Regression results using model-generated data
Calibration targets: average low & high education for native workers β = 0; Average low & high education for native workers
                                                      β D + βN
                                                             D = −0.295.




  Figure 1: Estimates from allocation, labor payments regressions (model generated data)
Both figures vary η from 1 to 7 and hold all other parameters at their baseline levels. The vertical lines represents the baseline
                                         value of η = 1.93 and the value of η = α = 5.



                                                          D
all weight on η. Therefore, the estimated valued of βN       guides our choice of η. The right
panel of Figure 1 displays the model-implied values of γ and γN in the wage-bill regressions
against the value of η. Consistent with our analytic results, γ is positive (since ǫrT > 1) and
is largely insensitive to η (since ǫrT places almost all weight on α), while γN is increasing in
η and changes sign approximately when η = α (that is, when ǫrT ≈ ǫrN ).
    Table 5 reports calibrated parameter values and Table 6 reports the employment-allocation
and labor-payments regressions using data generated by the model.50 Although we do not
directly target the labor-payments regression coefficients, the estimated coefficients are not
too far from corresponding reduced-form labor-payments regression results reported in col-
umn 3 of Table 2. The resulting R-squared values for the allocation and labor payment
  50
   In Appendix I we report estimates for the wage regressions (26) and (28) using data generated by the
model.


                                                                                                                              33
regressions run on model-generated data are above 0.99. Because these regressions are not
structural, the tight fit does not follow directly from our modeling assumptions. Instead,
the fit reflects the ability of the reduced-form employment-allocation and labor-payments
regressions to summarize equilibrium occupational employments in the model.


6     Counterfactual Changes in Immigration
Using data for 2012 as the initial period, we consider two counterfactual changes in the
                                 I
supply of immigrant workers, N̂re  , which we motivate using proposed reforms in U.S. im-
migration policy. One frequently discussed change is to tighten U.S. border security, which
would reduce immigration from Mexico and Central America, the two source regions that
account for the vast majority of undocumented migration flows across the U.S.-Mexico bor-
der. We operationalize this change by reducing the immigrant population from Mexico,
Central America, and South America by one half. Following the logic of the Card instru-
ment, this labor-supply shock will differentially affect commuting zones that historically have
attracted more immigration from Latin America. Local-labor-market adjustment to the im-
migration shock will take the form of changes in occupational output prices and occupational
wages, a resorting of native-born workers across occupations within CZs, and movements of
native-born workers between CZs. The second shock we consider is expanded immigration of
high-skilled workers. The U.S. business community, and the technology sector in particular,
has advocated for expanding the supply of H1-B visas, the majority of which go to more-
educated foreign-born workers (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010). We operationalize this immigration
shock via a doubling of the supply of immigrants with a college education, which we assume
is implemented proportionally across source regions for immigration.

6.1    50% Reduction of Latin American Immigrants
                                          LA
                           I
In this scenario, we set N̂re = 1 − 0.5×N
                                        I
                                       Nre
                                          re          I
                                             , where Nre corresponds to the total number of
                                                 LA
immigrants with education e in region r and Nre corresponds to the number of immigrants
from Latin America with education e in region r, both in the period 2012. Because Latin
American immigrants tend to have relatively low education levels, reducing immigration
from the region amounts to a reduction in the relative supply of less-educated labor. In
2012, 67.4% of working-age immigrants from Mexico, Central America, and South America
had the equivalent of a high-school education or less, as compared to 26.0% of non-Latin
American immigrants and 34.0% of native-born workers.
    By design, the magnitude of the shock is proportional to the initial size of a CZ’s popu-
lation of Latin American immigrants. To characterize regional variation in exposure to the
shock, consider quantiles of our aggregate exposure measure xIr in (33), which captures the
change in labor supply in CZ r caused by the immigration shock. At the 90th percentile of
exposure to the shock, a commuting zone would see its supply of workers decline by 3.0 per-
centage points, which grows to 8.6 percentage points at the 99th and 18.1 percentage points
at the 100th percentile. The CZs that are most exposed to a reduction in immigration from
Latin America include El Paso, TX, Los Angeles, CA, Miami, FL, and Yuma, AZ. At the
10th percentile of exposure a commuting zone would see a decline in effective labor supply of

                                                                                            34
   Figure 2: 50% reduction in Latin American Immigrants: change in real wage of low
 education domestic workers and change in education wage premium of domestic workers,
                                      across CZs


only 0.14 percentage points. Of course, these shocks do not represent equilibrium changes in
regional labor supplies. Because native-born workers are mobile, the shock to foreign labor
is accompanied by a reallocation of domestic workers across CZs.
    To summarize the labor market consequences of a reduction in immigrants from Latin
America, we show changes in average real wages (i.e., the change in average consumption
for workers who begin in the region before and remain in the region after the the counter-
factual change in immigrant labor supply),51 which capture differences in CZ-level exposure
to immigration, and changes in wages at the occupation level, which capture region- and
occupation-specific exposure to the shock. Figure 2 plots, on the y-axis, the log change in
average real wages for less-educated native-born workers in the left panel and the log change
in the education wage premium for native-born workers (college-educated workers versus
workers with some college or less) in the right panel, where in each graph the x-axis is CZ
exposure to the immigration shock, xIr . In CZs more exposed to the immigration decline,
there is a larger fall in average real wages for less-educated natives. At the 99th and 100th
percentiles of exposure, the real wage falls by 1.9 and 3.3 log percentage points, respectively,
as compared to decrease of only 0.2 percentage points for CZs at the 10th percentile of expo-
sure. This real wage impact arises both because of agglomeration externalities and because
native and immigrant workers are imperfect substitutes, so that reducing Latin American
immigrants reduces native real wages.52 At calibrated parameter values, this effect is largely
transmitted through changes in region price indices rather than changes in nominal wages
(see Figure 8 of Appendix H).
    Moving to the right panel of Figure 2, we see that because the immigration shock re-
duces the relative supply of less-educated immigrant labor in a CZ and because less-educated
  51
     To a first-order approximation, this equals the change in utility of workers initially located in that region.
  52
     In the absence of agglomeration externalities, λ = 0, at the 99th and 100th percentiles of exposure the
real wage falls by 1.3 and 2.2 log percentage points, respectively, instead of 1.9 and 3.3 in our baseline.



                                                                                                                35
immigrants are relatively substitutable with less-educated natives, the education wage pre-
mium falls by more in CZs that are exposed to larger reductions in immigration from Latin
America. Less-educated foreign-born workers substitute more easily for less-educated na-
tives than for more-educated natives because less-educated native- and foreign-born workers
tend to specialize in similar occupations and because ǫrg ≤ ρ (which implies that native- and
foreign-born workers are more substitutable within occupations than across occupations).
That is, our Roy model in which education groups are perfect substitutes within occupa-
tions endogenously generates aggregate patterns of imperfect substitutability between more-
and less-educated workers. The decline in the education wage premium is 1.1 and 0.9 per-
centage points for CZs at the 99th and 100th percentile of exposure, respectively, versus 0.02
percentage points for a CZ at the 10th percentile of exposure.
    More novel are the results for changes in wages at the occupation level. To review, wage
changes vary across occupations in response to a foreign-labor-supply shock because work-
ers are heterogeneous in their occupation-level productivity and because occupations vary
in the intensity with which they employ immigrant labor (where we infer these intensities
from historical occupation employment patterns). At fixed occupation prices, a reduction
in the supply of immigrants from Latin America in a CZ would reallocate native workers
towards less immigrant-intensive occupations, as discussed in Section 3, consistent with the
Rybczynski effect. However, occupation prices respond by increasing in immigrant-intensive
occupations, which reallocates native workers towards more immigrant-intensive occupa-
tions. Due to the fact that occupation prices respond by less in tradable occupations (i.e.,
output-price elasticities are relatively high), native workers should reallocate towards more
immigrant-intensive occupations relatively more within nontradable than within tradable
occupations. Changes in occupation wages induce these changes in employment across oc-
cupations: occupation wages of native workers in immigrant-intensive occupations increase
by relatively more within nontradable than within tradable jobs.
    Figure 3 describes differences across occupations in adjustment to the immigration shock
in nontradable and tradable tasks for a single CZ, which we choose to be Los Angeles be-
cause of its high level of exposure to immigration from Latin America. The horizontal
axis reports occupation-level exposure to immigration, as measured by the absolute value
of xro in (22). The vertical axis reports the change in the wage by occupation for stayers
(native-born workers who do not switch between occupations nor migrate between commut-
ing zones in response to the shock) deflated by the change in the absorption price index
in Los Angeles. Across nontradable occupations, there are large differences in real wage
changes according to occupation-level exposure to immigration. The most-exposed nontrad-
able occupation (private household services) sees wages rise by 7.8 percentage points more
than the least-exposed nontradable occupation (firefighting). This difference in wage changes
across nontradable occupations is large compared to the 0.8 percentage point reduction in
the average real wage for low-educated workers in Figure 2. Consistent with our theoretical
model, the adjustment process across tradable occupations differs markedly from that for
nontradables. The most-exposed tradable occupation (textile-machine operators) sees wages
rise by 0.8 log percentage points more than the least-exposed tradable occupations (social
scientists, urban planners and architects). The most-least difference for occupations in wage
adjustment is thus 6.1 percentage points larger in nontradables than in tradables.
    We also see in Figure 3 the differential consequences of the immigration shock on changes

                                                                                           36
 Figure 3: 50% reduction in Latin American immigrants: change in domestic occupation
          wage (deflated by the price index) by occupation in Los Angeles, CA


in real wage levels for stayers in tradables versus nontradables. In tradables, there is a near
uniform decline in real wages, consistent with the negative impact of the loss in labor supply
on the absorption price index discussed above. In nontradables, by contrast, the least-
exposed occupations see substantial real wage declines—owing to the immigration shock
mostly affecting the absorption price index for workers in these jobs—whereas the most-
exposed occupations see substantial real wage increases—as the wage-increasing effects of
reduced immigrant labor supply more than counteract the increase in the price index. Al-
though the second most exposed occupation in tradables (woodworking machine operators)
and nontradables (agriculture jobs) experience a shock nearly identical in magnitude, the
tradable occupation suffers a real wage loss of 0.7 percentage points while the nontradable
occupation enjoys a real wage gain of 3.1 percentage points. These differences in wage out-
comes between tradables and nontradables are not evident in our empirical analysis, given
that the regressions reported in Table 4 capture differential impacts of immigration within
tradable and nontradable sets. It is only in the quantitative analysis that we are able to
calculate differences between tradables and nontradables in impacts.
    To summarize wage adjustment across occupations in other commuting zones, we plot
in Figure 4 the difference in wage changes for the most and least immigration-exposed oc-
cupations on the vertical axis against overall CZ exposure to the immigration shock on the
horizontal axis. The left panel of Figure 4 reports results across CZs for comparisons among
nontradable occupations, while the right panel reports comparisons for tradable occupations.
The slope coefficients in Figure 4 are 0.95 for nontradables and just 0.08 for tradables. To
put the magnitude of these values in perspective, the slope coefficient for average real wages
in Figure 2 is 0.18. In nontradables, CZs at the 90th percentile of exposure have a difference
in wage changes between the most- and least-exposed occupations of 3 percentage points (for
the 99th and 100th percentiles of exposure, it is 6.5 and 9.4 percentage points, respectively),


                                                                                            37
                                                              Non-tradable occupations                                                            Tradable occupations




          Wage change high - low exposure occupation




                                                                                            Wage change high - low exposure occupation
                                                        0.1                                                                               0.1



                                                       0.08                                                                              0.08



                                                       0.06                                                                              0.06



                                                       0.04                                                                              0.04



                                                       0.02                                                                              0.02



                                                         0                                                                                 0


                                                                0.05       0.1       0.15                                                         0.05       0.1       0.15
                                                              CZ exposure to immigration                                                        CZ exposure to immigration


  Figure 4: 50% reduction in Latin American Immigrants: occupation wage change most
                     exposed - less exposed occupation across CZs


as compared to a most-least exposed occupation difference in wage changes of 0.3 percent-
age points in CZs at the 10th percentile of overall exposure. The largest difference in wage
changes between the most and least exposed nontradable occupations, which is for the Santa
Barbara, CA commuting zone, is 10.7 percentage points. The within-CZ dispersion in wage
changes for tradable occupations, shown in the right panel of Figure 4, is substantially more
compressed. For tradables, the most-least exposed occupation differences in wage changes
are clustered around zero, and the largest difference, which is for Los Angeles, CA, is only 1.7
percentage points. Consistent with the case of Los Angeles, across CZs we see substantially
more variation in wage adjustment within nontradables than within tradables.
    The intuition we have developed for differences in adjustment across occupations within
nontradable versus within tradable occupations rests on labor supply shocks being region
specific (or highly variable across regions) or on factor allocations across occupations varying
across regions. If, on the other hand, all regions within a national or global economy are
subject to similar aggregate labor supply shocks and if labor is allocated similarly across oc-
cupations in all regions, there is no functional difference between nontradable and tradable
activities. Each locality simply replicates the aggregate economy. Because of the geographic
concentration of immigrants from Latin America in specific U.S. commuting zones and be-
cause these immigrants specialize in different occupations across commuting zones, the immi-
gration shock we model in this section represents far from a uniform change in labor supply
across region-occupation pairs. Hence, the logic of adjustment to a local labor supply shock
applies when projecting differences in labor market adjustment mechanisms in nontradable
versus tradable activities. The next experiment we consider, an increase in high-skilled im-
migration, will be closer to a uniform increase in labor supplies across region-occupation
pairs, owing to more diffuse geographic settlement and more similar occupation employment
patterns for immigrants in this skill category. The consequence will be less differentiation in



                                                                                                                                                                              38
 Figure 5: Doubling of high education immigrants: change in real wage of low education
domestic workers and change in education wage premium of domestic workers, across CZs


adjustment across occupations within nontradables versus within tradables.53

6.2     Doubling of High-Education Immigrants
                           I                                                             I
In this scenario, we set N̂re = 2 for e = 3 (immigrants with a college education) and N̂re =1
for e = 1, 2 (immigrants with some college, a high-school degree, or less than a high-school
education). At the 10th percentile of exposure to the immigration shock (i.e., our measure
xIr ), a commuting zone would see its effective labor supply increase by 0.5 percentage points,
which grows to 3.7 percentage points at the 90th percentile, 12.9 percentage points at the
99th percentile and 32.3 percentage points at the 100th percentile of exposure. The CZs with
the greatest aggregate exposure to changes in high-skilled immigration include San Jose CA,
Miami FL, New York NY, Los Angeles CA, San Diego CA, and Houston TX.
     To summarize impacts of the shock, we again show changes in average real wages for less-
educated native-born workers and the native education-wage premium, as seen in Figure 5.
In the CZs at the 99th and 100th percentile of exposure, the real wage rises by 2.2 and 4.2
percentage points, respectively, as compared to an increase of 0.8 percentage points for CZs
at the 10th percentile of exposure. As in the previous exercise, this real wage impact arises
because of agglomeration effects and because native and immigrant workers are imperfect
substitutes, so that increasing high-education immigrants raises native real wages.
     In the right panel of Figure 5, we see that because the immigration shock expands the
relative supply of more-educated immigrant labor in a CZ and because more-educated im-
migrants are relatively less substitutable with less-educated natives, the education wage
premium falls more in CZs that are exposed to larger increases in skilled foreign labor.
Consistent with the logic operating in the previous shock, this effect arises because more-
educated immigrants and less-educated natives tend to work in dissimilar occupations and
  53
    Even if all regions within the U.S. are identical, as long as there is trade between countries there will be a
functional difference between tradable and nontradable occupations in terms of within-occupation adjustment
to shocks. By abstracting away from trade with the rest of the world in our counterfactual exercises, we may
tend to understate differences between tradables and nontradables; on the other hand, by assuming no trade
costs in tradables these exercises may tend to overstate differences between tradables and nontradables.

                                                                                                               39
  Figure 6: Doubling of high education immigrants: change in domestic occupation wage
             (deflated by the price index) by occupation in Los Angeles, CA


not because they are relatively weakly substitutable within occupations.
    Moving to adjustment in wages at the occupation level, Figure 6 shows changes in real
wages across occupations in Los Angeles for tradable and nontradable activities. Since there
is a positive inflow of immigrants, most occupations experience an increase in real earnings,
owing to the negative impact of the increase in labor supply on the absorption price index.
For the occupations that are most exposed to the labor inflow, real wages decline, as the direct
effect of expanded labor supply on occupation wages more than offsets the fall in the price
index. However, in sharp contrast with Figure 3, the difference in real wage adjustment
between the two sets of occupations is now rather modest: the declines in real earnings
for the most-exposed tradable and nontradable occupations are roughly the same, while the
increase in real wages for the least-exposed occupations differ by roughly 2 percentage points
between the tradable and nontradable occupations. In terms of relative earnings within the
two groups, wages for the most-exposed nontradable occupation (health assessment) fall by
6.6 percentage points more than for the least-exposed nontradable occupation (extractive
mining). In tradables, the difference in wage changes between the most- and least-exposed
occupation (natural sciences and fabricators, respectively) is 4 percentage points. Whereas
in the case of the previous counterfactual exercise the difference in wage changes between
the most and least immigration-exposed occupations was 6.1 percentage points larger in
nontradables than in tradables, the difference in Figure 6 is just 2.7 percentage points.
    Figure 7, which plots the difference in wage changes between the most- and least-
immigration-exposed occupations across CZs, provides further evidence of reduced differ-
ences in occupation wage adjustment between nontradables and tradables in the high-skilled
immigration experiment as compared to the Latin American immigration experiment. In
nontradable jobs, most-least exposed occupation wage differences are clustered between 0
and −6 percentage points, whereas in tradable jobs the points are clustered in the slightly


                                                                                             40
                                                                          Non-tradable occupations                                                                         Tradable occupations




                   Wage change high - low exposure occupation




                                                                                                               Wage change high - low exposure occupation
                                                                0.04                                                                                        0.04


                                                                0.02                                                                                        0.02


                                                                   0                                                                                           0


                                                                -0.02                                                                                       -0.02


                                                                -0.04                                                                                       -0.04


                                                                -0.06                                                                                       -0.06


                                                                -0.08                                                                                       -0.08


                                                                        0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3                                                        0.05    0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3
                                                                          CZ exposure to immigration                                                                  CZ exposure to immigration


Figure 7: Doubling of high education immigrants: occupation wage change most exposed -
                           less exposed occupation across CZs


more compact range of between 1 and −4 percentage points. In some CZs the wage of more-
exposed tradable occupations rises relative to the wage of less-exposed tradable occupations
because of the general equilibrium impact of immigration in other CZs.54


7        Conclusion
Empirical analysis of the labor market impacts of immigration has focused overwhelmingly on
how inflows of foreign-born workers affect average wages at the regional or education-group
level. When working with a single-sector model of the economy, such emphases are natural.
Once one allows for multiple sectors and trade between labor markets, however, comparative
advantage at the worker level immediately comes into play. Because foreign-born workers
tend to concentrate in specific groups of jobs—engineering and computer-related tasks for
the high skilled, agriculture and labor-intensive manufacturing for the low skilled—exposure
to immigration will vary across native-born workers according to their favored occupation.
That worker heterogeneity in occupational productivity creates variation in how workers are
affected by immigration is hardly a surprise. What is more surprising is that adjustment to
immigration varies within the sets of tradable and nontradable jobs. The contribution of our
paper is to show theoretically how this tradable-nontradable distinction arises, to identify
empirically its relevance for local-labor-market adjustment to immigration, and to quantify
its implications for labor-market outcomes in general equilibrium.
    For international economists, the idea that trade allows open economies to adjust to
factor-supply shocks more through changes in output mix than through changes in relative
prices is thoroughly familiar. For decades, graduate students learned the Rybczynski effect
    54
    In Figure 7, we see that there are CZs that experience very large changes in wages between occupations
even though their aggregate exposure to immigration is low. These CZs tend to be those that have a small
number of occupations that are very exposed to high-skilled immigration, whereas their other occupations
have little exposure. For these CZs, aggregate exposure to the immigration shock is not necessarily predictive
of the difference in wage changes between the most- and least-exposed occupations.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            41
as one of the four core theorems in international trade theory. Yet, Rybczynski has traveled
poorly outside of the trade field. To labor economists, the claim that factor prices are insen-
sitive to factor quantities seems ludicrous. Although recent theories of offshoring (Grossman
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008) and economic growth (Acemoglu and Guerrieri, 2008) utilize el-
ements of Rybczynski logic, a distinction between adjustment within tradable and within
nontradable activities is missing from modern labor-market analysis. Our framework—which
softens the knife-edge quality of the standard Rybczynski formulation—provides a road map
for studying occupational and industrial adjustment to external shocks in modern economies.
    While our empirical analysis validates the differential labor-market adjustment patterns
within tradables and within nontradables predicted by our theoretical model, it is only in
the quantitative analysis that we see the consequences of this mechanism for differences
in adjustment between occupational groups. Individuals who favor working in jobs that
attract larger numbers of immigrants may experience very different consequences for their
real incomes, depending on whether they are attracted to tradable or nontradable activities.
Workers drawn to less-tradable jobs are likely to experience larger changes in wages in
response to a given immigration shock, owing to adjustment occurring more through changes
in occupational prices and less through changes in occupational output. In contrast to the
lessons of recent empirical work, a worker’s local labor market and education level may be
insufficient to predict her exposure to changes in inflows of foreign labor. Her occupational
preferences and abilities may be of paramount importance, too.
    We choose to study immigration because it is a shock whose magnitude varies across
occupations, skill groups, regions, and time, thus providing sufficient dimensions of variation
to understand where the distinction between tradable and nontradable jobs is relevant. The
logic at the core of our analytical approach is applicable to a wide range of shocks. Sec-
tor or region-specific changes in technology or labor-market institutions would potentially
have distinct impacts within tradable versus within nontradable activities, as well. What
is necessary for these distinct impacts to materialize is that there is variation in exposure
to shocks within tradable and within nontradable jobs and across local labor markets, such
that individual regional economies do not simply replicate the aggregate economy. Return-
ing to the immigration context, the U.S. Congress has repeatedly considered comprehensive
immigration reform, which would seek to legalize undocumented immigrants, prevent future
undocumented immigration, and expand visas for high-tech workers. Our analysis suggests
that it would be shortsighted to see these changes simply in terms of aggregate labor-supply
shocks, as is the tendency in the policy domain. They must instead be recognized as shocks
whose occupational and regional patterns of variation will determine which mechanisms of
adjustment they induce.


References
Acemoglu, Daron and Veronica Guerrieri, “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 06 2008, 116 (3), 467–498.

Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1085–1140.




                                                                                            42
Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card, “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of
  Less-skilled Natives,” in “Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market” NBER Chapters, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc, 1991, pp. 201–234.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the
 US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1553–97.

  ,  , and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Shock: Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large
  Changes in Trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 205–240.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Testing for Factor Price Equality
  with Unobserved Differences in Factor Quality or Productivity,” American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, May 2013, 5 (2), 135–63.

Bernstein, Jeffrey R and David E Weinstein, “Do endowments predict the location of production?,”
  Journal of International Economics, 2002, 56 (1), 55 – 76.

Blau, Francine and Christopher Mackie, The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration,
  National Academy of Sciences, 2016.

Blinder, Alan S. and Alan B. Krueger, “Alternative Measures of Offshorability: A Survey Approach,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (S1), S97 – S128.

Borjas, George J., “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
  Immigration on the Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1335–1374.

  , Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson, “Comment: On Estimating Elasticities of
  Substitution,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (1), 198–210.

  , Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “How Much Do Immigration and Trade Affect
  Labor Market Outcomes?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997, (1), 1–90.

Bratsberg, Bernt and Oddbjorn Raaum, “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from Construction,” The
  Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (565), 1177–1205.

  , Andreas Moxnes, Oddbjorn Raaum, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, “Opening the
  Floodgates: Immigration and Structural Change,” Technical Report, University of Oslo May 2017.

Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel, “Changes in Between Group Inequality:
  Computers, Occupations, and International Trade,” Working Paper, Columbia University 2016.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, “Trade and Labor Market
  Dynamics,” Working Papers 2015-9, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis May 2015.

Card, David, “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” ILR Review, 1990, 43 (2),
  245–257.

  , “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immigration,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, January 2001, 19 (1), 22–64.

  , “Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?*,” The Economic Journal, 2005, 115 (507), F300–F323.

  , “Immigration and Inequality,” American Economic Review, May 2009, 99 (2), 1–21.

   and Ethan G. Lewis, “The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations and
  Impacts,” in “Mexican Immigration to the United States” NBER Chapters, University of Chicago Press,
  2007, pp. 193–227.


                                                                                                      43
Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Laurent Gobillon, “The Empirics of Agglomeration Economies,” in
  J. Vernon Henderson Gilles Duranton and William C. Strange, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban
  Economics, Vol. 5 of Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Elsevier, 2015, pp. 247–348.

Cortes, Patricia, “The Effect of Low Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI Data,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (3), 381–422.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, “Global Rebalancing with Gravity:
  Measuring the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, July 2008, 55 (3), 511–540.

Desmet, Klaus, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “The Geography of
  Development: Evaluating Migration Restrictions and Coastal Flooding,” Journal of Political Economy,
  Forthcoming.

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei Levchenko, and Francesc Ortega, “A Global View of Cross-Border
   Migration,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (1), 168–202.

Dustmann, Christian and Albrecht Glitz, “How Do Industries and Firms Respond to Changes in
 Local Labor Supply?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (3), 711–750.

  , Tommaso Frattini, and Ian P. Preston, “The Effect of Immigration along the Distribution of
  Wages,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (1), 145–173.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
  September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar,
  “State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation,” NBER Working Papers 21760, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc November 2015.

Federman, Maya N., David E. Harrington, and Kathy J. Krynski, “Vietnamese Manicurists: Are
  Immigrants Displacing Natives or Finding New Nails to Polish?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
  2006, 59 (2), 302–318.

Feenstra, Robert, Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence Second Edition, 2 ed., Vol. 1,
  Princeton University Press, 2015.

Freeman, Richard B., “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1995, 9
  (3), 15–32.

Friedberg, Rachel M., “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1373–1408.

Galle, Simon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Moises Yi, “Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate
 and Distributional Effects of Trade,” Working Paper, 2015.

Gandal, Neil, Gordon H Hanson, and Matthew J Slaughter, “Technology, trade, and adjustment
 to immigration in Israel,” European Economic Review, 2004, 48 (2), 403 – 428.

Gonzalez, Libertad and Francesc Ortega, “How do very open economies adjust to large immigration
 flows? Evidence from Spanish regions,” Labour Economics, 2011, 18 (1), 57 – 70.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, “Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased
 Technological Change and Offshoring,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (8), 2509 – 2526.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”
  American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1978–97.


                                                                                                     44
Hanson, Gordon H and Matthew J Slaughter, “Labor-market adjustment in open economies:
 Evidence from US states,” Journal of International Economics, 2002, 57 (1), 3 – 29.

Harrigan, James, “Factor endowments and the international location of production: Econometric
 evidence for the OECD, 1970 to 1985,” Journal of International Economics, 1995, 39 (1), 123 – 141.

Harrison, Ann, John McLaren, and Margaret McMillan, “Recent Perspectives on Trade and
 Inequality,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 261–289.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Chapter 3 - Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cookbook,”
  in Elhanan Helpman Gita Gopinath and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics,
  Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 131 – 195.

Hong, Gihoon and John McLaren, “Are Immigrants a Shot in the Arm for the Local Economy?,”
 Working Paper 21123, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2015.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “The Allocation of Talent
  and U.S. Economic Growth,” NBER Working Papers 18693, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
  January 2013.

Kennan, John, “Open Borders,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2013, 16 (2), L1–L13.

Kerr, William R. and William F. Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and
  U.S. Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics, 07 2010, 28 (3), 473–508.

Klein, Paul and Gustavo Ventura, “Productivity differences and the dynamic effects of labor
  movements,” Journal of Monetary Economics, November 2009, 56 (8), 1059–1073.

Lagakos, David and Michael E. Waugh, “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences,” American Economic Review, April 2013, 103 (2), 948–80.

Lewis, Ethan, “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 1029–1069.

Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth, “The Impact of Immigration on the
 Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain,” Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 2012, 10 (1), 120–151.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “What Explains the 2007 to 2009 Drop in Employment?,” Econometrica,
 2014, 82 (6), 2197–2223.

Monras, Joan, “Opening the Floodgates: Immigration and Structural Change,” Technical Report,
 Science Po 2017.

Munshi, Kaivan, “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U. S. Labor Market,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 549–599.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri, “Rethinking The Effect Of Immigration On Wages,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 02 2012, 10 (1), 152–197.

  ,   , and Greg C. Wright, “Immigration, Offshoring, and American Jobs,” American Economic
  Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1925–59.

Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber, “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2009, 1 (3), 135–69.

   and   , “Assessing inherent model bias: An application to native displacement in response to
  immigration,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2011, 69 (1), 82 – 91.

                                                                                                      45
   and    , “Highly Educated Immigrants and Native Occupational Choice,” Industrial Relations: A
  Journal of Economy and Society, 2011, 50 (3), 385–411.

Peters, Michael, “Refugees and Local Agglomeration: Evidence from Germany’s Post-War Population
  Expulsions,” Working Paper, Yale University 2017.

Piyapromdee, Suphanit, “The Impact of Immigration on Wages, Internal Migration and Welfare,”
  Working Paper, University College London 2017.

Redding, Stephen J., “Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare,” Journal of International Economics,
  2016, 101 (C), 148–167.

   and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Quantitative Spatial Economics,” 2016.

Rodrik, Dani, Has Globalization Gone too Far?, Institute for International Economics, 1997.

Roy, A. D., “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 1951, 3 (2),
  135–146.

Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek,
 “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database],” Minneapolis:
 University of Minnesota, 2015.

Rybczynski, T. M., “Factor Endowment and Relative Commodity Prices,” Economica, 1955, 22 (88),
  336–341.

Saiz, Albert, “Immigration and housing rents in American cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2007, 61
  (2), 345 – 371.

Schott, Peter K., “One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production,” American
  Economic Review, June 2003, 93 (3), 686–708.

Slaughter, Matthew J., “International Trade and Labor Demand Elasticities,” Journal of International
  Economics, 2001, 54 (1), 27 – 56. Trade and Wages.

Tolbert, Charles M and Molly Sizer, “US commuting zones and labor market areas: A 1990 update,”
  1996.

Wood, Adrian, “A more general Heckscher-Ohlin model,” QEH Working Papers qehwps185, Queen
 Elizabeth House, University of Oxford 2012.




                                                                                                    46
Contents (Appendix)

I     Theoretical Appendix                                                                                                  1
A Derivation of analytic results                                                                                             2
  A.1 System in changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    2
  A.2 Proofs and comparative statics for Section 3.1: closed economy . . . . . . . .                                         3
  A.3 Proofs for Section 3.2: small open economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       8

B Alternative occupation production function                                                                                10

C Connecting to the Rybczynski Theorem                                                                                      11
  C.1 Small open economy: Rybczynski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        12
  C.2 Closed economy: extended Rybczynski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                         13

D Fixed immigrant wages                                                                                                     14


II    Empirical Appendix                                                                                                    18
E Occupation details                                                                                                        18

F Robustness                                                                                                                22
  F.1 Labor allocation regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    23
  F.2 Labor payments regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      29

G Industry analysis                                                                                                         35


III    Quantitative Model Appendix                                                                                          43
H Additional details of the extended model                                                                                  43
  H.1 System of equilibrium equations in changes . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   43
  H.2 Relation between extended and baseline models         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   45
  H.3 Basic analytic results in extended model . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   46
  H.4 Bilateral trade and absorption shares . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47

I    Average wage changes for native workers                                                                                48

J Immigrant occupation reallocation                                                                                         50




                                                                                            Online Appendix 1
Part I
Theoretical Appendix
A     Derivation of analytic results
A.1     System in changes
Here we derive a system of four equations that we will use in our analytic exercises to study
the impact of infinitesimal changes in NrD and NrI on changes in factor allocations and
occupation wages. We use lower case characters, x, to denote the log change of any variable
X relative to its initial equilibrium level: x = d ln X.
   Log-differentiating equation (7) we obtain
                                                 X
                                                       k   k
                                     pro = −ar +      Sro wro ,                           (34)
                                                    k

where ar is the log change in aggregate productivity (which is common across occupations
                                                 k k
and worker types within region r) and Sro k
                                             ≡W ro Lro
                                               Pro Qro
                                                       is the cost share of factor k in occupation
o output in region r. Log differentiating equation (8), we obtain
                                  D     I            D      I
                                                              
                                 lro − lro  = −ρ wro   − wro    .                             (35)

Combining equations (9) and (10) and log differentiating yields
                                                        !
                                           X
                            k      k             k   k
                           lro = θwro −θ        πrj wrj   + nkr .                                      (36)
                                                 j∈O

Combining equations (35) and (36) yields
                                                                           !
                   D     I       θ      X
                                               D D
                                                          X
                                                                  I   I            nIr − nD
                                                                                          r
                  wro − wro   =               πrj wrj −          πrj wrj       +            ,
                                θ+ρ     j∈O               j∈O
                                                                                     θ+ρ

so that the log change in domestic relative to immigrant occupation wages is common across
occupations, and denoted by
                                          D      I
                                  w̃r ≡ wro  − wro for all o.
Log differentiating equation (6), we obtain
                                      X
                                           x
                                                (α − η) pyjo + ηpj + yj ,
                                                                      
                       qro = −αpro +     Srjo                                                          (37)
                                       j∈R

        x     P τ   Y
where Srjo ≡ roProrjo
                   Qro
                      rjo
                          is the share of the value of region r’s output in occupation o that is
destined for region j. Log differentiating equation (5), we obtain
                                                         X
                                 pyro = (1 − Sro
                                              m
                                                 ) pro +    m
                                                           Sjro pjo,
                                                          j6=r


                                                                                          Online Appendix 2
        m      P τ   Y
where Sjro  ≡ joPro
                  jro jro
                  y
                    Yro
                          is the share of the
                                           P valuemof region r’s absorption within occupation
                                       m
o that originates in region j and Sro    ≡ j6=r Sjro  is regions r’s import share of absorption
within occupation o. Combining the previous two expressions yields
                                   "                                         !          #
                          X                                  X
                               x                   m
        qro = −αpro +         Srjo  (α − η) (1 − Sro ) pro +    Sjm′ro pj ′ o + ηpj + yj .
                          j∈R                                 j ′ 6=r


Log differentiating equation (1) and using equation (8) we obtain
                                               X
                                                   k k
                                    qro = ar +    Sro lro .
                                                    k

Combining the two previous expressions, we obtain
                                 "                                        !          #
      X                   X                                X
         k k                 x                   m
 ar +   Sro lro = −αpro +   Srjo  (α − η) (1 − Sro ) pro +   Sjm′ ro pj ′o + ηpj + yj . (38)
       k                    j∈R                                     j ′ 6=r


    We can use equations (34), (35), (36), and (40) to solve for changes in employment
             k                         k
allocations lro , occupation wages wro   , and occupation prices pro for all r, o and k. In order to
compare changes in employment across occupations, it is useful to log differentiate equation
(9),                                                          X
                           nkro − nkr = (θ + 1) wro
                                                  k
                                                    − (θ + 1)      k
                                                                 πrj   k
                                                                     wrj ,
                                                             j∈O

which, together with equation (36), yields

                                                 θ+1 k
                                  nkro − nkr =       lro − nkr .
                                                              
                                                                                               (39)
                                                  θ

A.2        Proofs and comparative statics for Section 3.1: closed economy
Deriving equations (12)-(16). If region r is autarkic—τrjo = ∞ if j 6= r for all o—then the
share of r’s output that is exported to and absorption that is imported from other regions
           x       m                     x       m
is zero—Srjo  = Srjo  = 1 if r = j and Srjo   = Srjo = 0 otherwise—and, therefore, r’s import
                                                      m
share of absorption is zero within each occupation, Sro  = 0. In an autarkic economy, equation
(38) simplifies to                 X
                                        k k
                              ar +    Sro lro = −η (pro − pr ) + yr .                     (40)
                                     k

The system of equations is given by equations (34), (35), (36), and (40). Equation (40) can
be expressed as
                                 1     1      1 I D         I
                                                                1 D
                     pro = pr + yr − ar + Sro        lro − lro  − lro .
                                 η     η      η                  η
The previous expression and equation (35) yield
                                   1    1    ρ I   D     I
                                                             1 D
                         pro = pr + yr − ar − Sro wro − wro  − lro ,
                                   η    η    η                η

                                                                               Online Appendix 3
which, together with equation (34) yields

                       D      η−ρ I   D     I
                                                      1      η−1     1 D
                      wro =      Sro wro − wro   + pr + y r +     ar − lro .                                              (41)
                               η                       η       η      η
   As shown in Section A.1, equations (35) and (36) yield
                                                                                        !
                                                   X                    X
                            D     I                        I   I               D D
                                                                                            = nIr − nD
                                         
                   (θ + ρ) wro − wro +θ                   πrj wrj −           πrj wrj                r ,                  (42)
                                                    j∈O                 j∈O

               D     I
so that w̃r ≡ wro − wro is common across o. Hence, equations (41) and (42) can be expressed
as
                          D    η−ρ       I          1     η−1       1 D
                        wro =       w̃r Sro + pr + y r +       ar − lro                (43)
                                 η                  η       η       η
and                                                           !
                                     X              X
                                            I  I        D D
                    (θ + ρ) w̃r + θ       πrj wrj −    πrj wrj = nIr − nD
                                                                        r .            (44)
                                             j∈O               j∈O

   Combining equation (43) and equation (36), we obtain
                                                                                                      !
            θ+η D    η−ρ      I        1      η−1      θ                           X
                                                                                             D D           1
               wro =     w̃r Sro + pr + y r +     ar +                                      πrj wrj       − nD ,          (45)
             η        η                η       η       η                            j∈O
                                                                                                           η r

which is equivalent to
                                                                                                                  !
  θ+η X D D        η−ρ X D I                1     η−1      θ                                      X
                                                                                                         D D           1
         πro wro =    w̃r     πro Sro + pr + yr +     ar +                                              πrj wrj       − nD .
   η j∈O            η     j∈O
                                            η      η       η                                      j∈O
                                                                                                                       η r

Hence, we have
                   X
                          D D        η−ρ X D I                1     η−1     1
                         πrj wrj =      w̃r     πro Sro + pr + yr +     ar − nD .                                         (46)
                   j∈O
                                      η     j∈O
                                                              η      η      η r

   Equivalent to equation (43), we obtain

                          I      ρ−η          I
                                                        1      η−1     1 I
                         wro =       w̃r 1 − Sro   + pr + y r +     ar − lro .
                                  η                      η       η      η
Together with equation (36), we obtain
                                                                                                          !
      θ+η        I      ρ−η          I          1      η−1      θ                           X
                                                                                                   I   I         1
                                                                                                                − nIr ,
                                        
                wro   =     w̃r 1 − Sro   + pr + y r +     ar +                                   πrj wrj                 (47)
       η                 η                      η       η       η                           j∈O
                                                                                                                 η

which is equivalent to
                                                                   !
             X
                    I   I      ρ−η                 X
                                                          I   I              1      η−1     1
                   πro wro   =     w̃r       1−          πro Sro       + pr + y r +     ar − nIr .                        (48)
             o∈O
                                η                  o∈O
                                                                             η       η      η

                                                                                                        Online Appendix 4
Equations (44), (46), and (48) yield

                                       w̃r = nIr − nD
                                                      
                                                    r Ψ,                                (49)

where
                                                θ+η
                             Ψr ≡
                                    (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )
and                                        X
                                                  I     D
                                                            I
                                    zr ≡         πrj − πrj  Srj .                       (50)
                                           j∈O

The previous two equations yield the definition of Ψr in Section 3.1; we show that Ψr ≥ 0
below. Combining equations (45) and (46) yields
                                               !
             D    η − ρ      I    θ X
                                         D I            1      η−1        1
           wro =        w̃r Sro +       πro Sro + pr + yr +          ar − nD  ,       (51)
                  θ+η             η j∈O                 η        η        η r

and, similarly, combining equations (47) and (48) yields
                      "                            !#
       I    ρ −  η          I    θ     X
                                            I   I           1      η−1     1
     wro =         w̃r 1 − Sro +   1−      πro Sro    + pr + y r +     ar − nIr .       (52)
            θ+η                  η     o∈O
                                                            η       η      η

                                                                               x
    Equations (34) and (51) yield equation (13). Equations (37) (setting Srjo     = 0 for all
j 6= r in the closed economy) and (13) yield equation (12). Equations (36), (39), (46) and
(48), and (51) and (52) yield equation (15). Equations     (36) and (15) yield equation (16).
Finally, equation (15) and the constraint that o nkro = nkr yield the value of
                                                P

                                                                 !
                              θ + 1                   X
                       nkro =                    I
                                    (η − ρ) w̃r Sro −      k I
                                                          πrj Srj + nkr .
                              θ+η                     j∈O



Signing Ψr . Here, we prove that
                                             θ+η
                          Ψr =                                   ≥ 0.
                                 (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )

Recall that                                X
                                                  I     D
                                                            I
                                    zr ≡         πrj − πrj  Srj .
                                           j∈O

The numerator of Ψr is weakly positive. We consider two cases: (i) ρ ≥ η and (ii) ρ < η. In
the first case, we clearly have Ψr ≥ 0, since zr ≤ 1.
   Suppose that ρ < η. Then zr ≥ 0 is a sufficient condition for Ψr ≥ 0 since in this case
                ηρ   1
Ψr ≥ 0 ⇐⇒ ρ−η        η
                       + θ1 ≤ zr . Order occupations such that

                                       o ≤ o′ ⇒ Sro
                                                 I     I
                                                    ≤ Sro′.




                                                                         Online Appendix 5
       I
Since Sro is increasing in o, a sufficient condition under which zr ≥ 0 is that
                                   j               j
                                   X               X
                                          I               D
                                         πro   ≤         πro for all j ∈ O.                         (53)
                                   o=1             o=1

                I     I I
                                   I I       D D
                                                    
By definition, Sro = Wro Lro       Wro Lro + Wro Lro . Equations (9) and (10) imply
                                                                              1
                                                                           ! θ+1
                                                                   k θ+1
                                                           X
                               k k
                                  Lro = γNrk πro
                                              k
                                                                    
                              Wro                               Wrj                .
                                                            j


Hence, we have
                                                           D     D
                                                          πro   πro
                                          o ≤ o′ ⇒
                                                                   ′

                                                           I
                                                              ≥  I
                                                                     .                              (54)
                                                          πro   πro′
    We now prove that inequality (53) is satisfied for all j ∈ O. We first prove by contradic-
                                                                       I      D
tion that inequality (53) is satisfied for j = 1. Suppose that πr1       > πr1   , violating condition
(53).  If O = 1, where O is the number of occupations, then we have         P a contradiction       since
         k                                                                             k
P
   o∈O πro = 1 for all k. Hence, we must have O > 1. Then, since                o∈O πro = 1 for all k,
                                        I       D                   D    I             D    I
there must exist an o > 1 for which πro    < πro  . This implies πr1   /πr1 < 1 < πro    /πro , violating
                                                                     I        D
equation (54). Hence, we have shown that we must have πr1 ≤ πr1 . We next prove by
contradiction that if inequality (53) is satisfied for any occupation
                                                                   Pj       j < O,  Pjthen Dit must be
                                                                            I
satisfied for occupation j + 1. Let j < O and suppose that o=1 πro ≤ o=1 πro and that
Pj+1 I        Pj+1 D                    I          D
                                                                                Pj+1 I          Pj+1 D
   o=1 πro >    o=1 πro . This implies πrj+1 > πrj+1 . If j + 1 = O, then           o=1 πro >     o=1 πro
             PO      I
                                                               PO      I
contradicts o=1 πro = 1 for all k. If j + 1 < O, then o=1 πro = 1 for all k implies that
there must exist a j ′ > j + 1 such that πrjI        D                   D        I              D     I
                                              ′ < πrj ′ . This implies πrj+1 /πrj+1 < 1 < πrj ′ /πrj ′ ,
                                                              Pj       I
                                                                            P   j     D
violating equation (54). Hence, we have shown that if o=1 πro            ≤ o=1 πro       then we must
      Pj+1 I       Pj+1 D
have o=1 πro ≤ o=1 πro . Combining these two steps, we have proven that condition (53)
holds by mathematical induction. As shown above, this implies that zr ≥ 0. And, again as
shown above, zr ≥ 0 implies Ψr ≥ 0.
Comparative statics. First, we show that qro − qro′ converges to zero when η limits to zero
and that the absolute value of qro − qro′ is increasing in η. Equation (12) and the definition
of w̃r imply

                                        η (θ + ρ)
                                                              nIr − nD
                                                                        I     I
                                                                                  
               qro − qro′ =                                          r  Sro − Sro′ ,
                              (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )

where we have used equation (50) to substitute in zr . Clearly, the previous expression implies

                                           lim (qro − qro′ ) = 0.
                                          η→0

It also implies
                           d (|qro − qro′ |)   θρ
                                             =    (1 − zr ) (|qro − qro′ |) ≥ 0
                                  dη           η
where we use the result proven above that 1 − zr ≥ 0 to sign this derivative.

                                                                                       Online Appendix 6
   Second, we show that the absolute value of pro − pro′ is decreasing in η. Equation (13)
and the definition of w̃r imply

                                      − (θ + ρ)
                                                            nIr − nD
                                                                      I     I
                                                                                
             pro − pro′ =                                          r  Sro − Sro′ ,
                            (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )
where we have used equation (50) to substitute in zr . The previous expression implies

             d (|pro − pro′ |)               θzr + ρ
                               =−                                 |(pro − pro′ )| ≤ 0,
                    dη            (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )

where we use the result proven above that 1 − zr ∈ [0, 1] to sign the derivative.
                                              k      k
   Third, we show that the absolute value of wro − wro ′ is declining in θ. Equation (16) and

the definition of w̃r imply

          k     k                      1
                                                        nIr − nD          I     I
                                                                                  
         wro − wro′ =                                          r (η − ρ) Sro − Sro′ ,
                        (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )

where we have used equation (50) to substitute in zr . The previous expression implies
                    k     k
                              
               d wro   − wro′
                                                             k     k
                                = − (η + (ρ − η) (1 − zr )) wro − wro′ ≤ 0,
                      dθ
where we use the result proven above that 1 − zr ≥ 0 to sign this derivative.
   Fourth, we show that the elasticity of domestic relative to immigrant occupation wages
with respect to changes in factor endowments, Ψr , is decreasing in η . From the definitions
of Ψr and zr , we have

          dΨr   (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr ) − (θ + η) [(θ + ρ) − θ (1 − zr )]
              =                                                                   ≤ 0.
           dη                  [(θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )]2
Note that if η = ρ then Ψr = 1/ρ, and the elasticity of domestic relative to immigrant
occupation wages with respect to changes in relative factor endowments is exactly the same
as in a model in which there is only one occupation. Moreover, the elasticity of domestic
relative to immigrant occupation wages with respect to changes in relative factor endowments
is higher than in the one-occupation model if and only if η < ρ.
    Fifth, we show that if zr > 0 then the elasticity of factor intensities  with respect to
                                                       D     I       D     I
changes in relative factor endowments, measured by nro − nro / nr − nr , is less than one
if and only if η > ρ (and equal to one if η = ρ). Equation (15) and equation (50) imply

                        nD      I
                         ro − nro               (θ + 1) (η − ρ) zr
                          D      I
                                    =1−                                   .
                        nr − nr           (θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )
                                
Clearly, nD       I      D
            ro − nro / nr − nr
                               I
                                    = 1 if η = ρ (and, when zr > 0, if and only if η = ρ).
Differentiating with respect to η, we obtain

                     d nD         I
                                   
                          ro − nro            − (θ + 1) (ρ + θ) ρzr
                                      =                                     ≤0
                    dη nD  r − nr
                                  I
                                        [(θ + ρ) η + θ (ρ − η) (1 − zr )]2


                                                                               Online Appendix 7
with strict inequality if zr > 0 for any finite values of θ, η, and ρ. This result generalizes the
Rybczynski theorem, in which factor intensities are fully inelastic (i.e. nD          I
                                                                               ro − nro = 0); we
obtain this result in the limit as η, θ → ∞,
                                                      D
                                                       nro − nIro
                                                                  
                            lim lim w̃r = lim lim                   = 0.
                           η→∞ θ→∞         η→∞ θ→∞     nDr − nr
                                                                I


    Finally, in the limit as η, θ → ∞, changes in relative labor allocations between occupa-
tions (equation (15)) and changes in relative labor payments between occupations (equation
(14)) are given by
                                                           1 I
          lim lim nkro − nkro′ = lim lim (lpro − lpro′ ) =    nr − nD
                                                                      I     I
                                                                                 
                                                                    r  Sro − Sro′ .
         η→∞ θ→∞                 η→∞ θ→∞                   zr
                                   k       k
Recall that for any value of η, wro  − wro   ′ → 0 as θ → ∞. Hence, there is crowding in,

consistent with our result in Section 3.1.

A.3     Proofs for Section 3.2: small open economy
In Section 3.2, we extend the results of Section 3.1 by allowing region r to trade.
Two restrictions: We assume that region r is a small open economy in the sense that it
constitutes a negligible share of exports and absorption in each occupation for each region
                                             m               x
j 6= r. Specifically, we assume that Srjo        → 0 and Sjro      → 0 for all o and j 6= r. We
additionally assume that occupations are grouped into two sets, O (z) for z = {T, N}, where
  x      x        m      m              ′
Sro = Sro  ′ and Sro = Sro′ for all o, o ∈ O (z).

    The small-open-economy assumption implies that, in response to a shock in region r only,
prices and output elsewhere are unaffected in all occupations: pyjo = pjo = pj = yj = 0 for
j 6= r. Therefore, given a shock to region r alone, equation (38) simplifies to
                              X
                                    k k                      x
                        ar +      Sro lro = −ǫro pro + (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) ,              (55)
                                k

where
                                       x          m               x          m
                      ǫro ≡ (1 − (1 − Sro ) (1 − Sro )) α + (1 − Sro ) (1 − Sro )η
is a weighted average of the elasticity of substitution across occupations, η, and the elasticity
across origins, α > η, where the weight on the latter is increasing in the extent to which
                                                                  x      m
the services of an occupation are traded, as measured by Sro        and Sro . When region r is
                            x       m
autarkic—in which case Sro = Sro = 0 so that ǫro = η for all o—equation (55) limits to
equation (40), and we are back to the system of equations in Section 3.1.
                             x       x         m       m             ′
    The assumption that Sro     = Sro  ′ and Sro = Sro′ for all o, o ∈ O (z) implies that the

elasticity of local output to the local producer price, ǫro , is common across all occupations
in O (z).
Deriving equations (17)-(19): Equation (55) is equivalent to
                       1        x                   1        1 I I         D
                                                                                  1 D
              pro =       (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) −     ar −     Sro lro − lro   −    l .
                      ǫro                          ǫro      ǫro                   ǫro ro

                                                                                 Online Appendix 8
                                                   D     I
The previous expression, equation (35), and w̃r = wro − wro for all o, yield
                            1        x                   1        ρ I           1 D
                   pro =       (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) −     ar −     Sro w̃r −    l ,
                           ǫro                          ǫro      ǫro           ǫro ro
which, together with equation (34) yields
                                                                        
           D     1          x                   ǫro − 1            ǫro − ρ    I         1 D
         wro =      (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) +              ar +               Sro w̃r −     l .
                ǫro                                ǫro               ǫro               ǫro ro
The previous expression and equation (36) yield
                                    "                                                             #
  D      ǫro − ρ        I        1            x
                                                                                   X
                                                                                        D D
 wro =             w̃r Sro +           (1 − Sro  ) (ηpr + yr ) + (ǫro − 1) ar + θ      πrj wrj − nD
                                                                                                  r   .
           ǫro                ǫro + θ                                              j∈O
                                                                                                   (56)
Equations (56) and (36) yield
                                   "                                                                          !#
 D       ǫro − ρ        I       1             x
                                                                                                X
lro =θ             w̃r Sro +          θ (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) + θ (ǫro − 1) ar + ǫro   nD
                                                                                         r −θ
                                                                                                       D D
                                                                                                      πrj wrj        .
           ǫro               ǫro + θ                                                            j∈O
                                                                                                  (57)
We similarly obtain
                                         "                                                           #
 I      ρ − ǫ ro            I         1           x
                                                                                      X
                                                                                           I   I
                                                                                                  − nIr .
                               
wro =              w̃r 1 − Sro   +          (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) − (ǫro + 1) ar + θ     πrj wrj
          ǫro                      ǫro + θ                                            j∈O
                                                                                                   (58)
Equations (58) and (36) yield
                      
    I          ǫro − ρ        I      ǫro − ρ          θ           x
   lro = θ               w̃r Sro −θ          w̃r +         [(1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr ) − (ǫro + 1) ar ](59)
                  ǫro                   ǫro        θ + ǫro
                                            !
                ǫro             X
           +           nIr − θ        I
                                    πrj   I
                                        wrj   .
             θ + ǫro            j∈O

Equations (39), (57), and (59) yield equation (18), where ǫrg = ǫro for all o ∈ O (g). Equa-
tions (56) and (58) each yield equation (19).
    In order to solve for w̃r , we use the following system of linear equations: (34), (35), (36),
(55), the final good price equation in a small open economy
                                           X
                                                 A       m
                                     pr =      Sro (1 − Sro ) pro
                                               o

and balanced trade              X          X
                                      P         k   k     k
                                                             
                                     Sro       Sro wro + lro   = pr + y r
                                 o         k
        A          P
where  Sro  and   Sro   denote the share of occupation r in total absorption and production,
respectively,
                                                         y
                                                A      Pro Yro
                                               Sro =
                                                        Pr Y r
                                                P      ProQro
                                               Sro   =
                                                        Pr Y r

                                                                                  Online Appendix 9
B     Alternative occupation production function
Here we provide an alternative set of assumptions on the occupation production that yield
the same equilibrium equations as the CES occupation production function in equation (1)
(under the restriction, which we do not impose in our baseline model, that ρ > 1). For
simplicity, here we suppress region indicators.
Setup. Suppose that there are two factors of production, domestic labor and immigrant
labor, indexed by k = D, I, with wages per efficiency unit of labor within occupation o given
by WoD and WoI . Each occupation production function is itself a Cobb-Douglas combination
of the output of a continuum of tasks indexed by z ∈ [0, 1]. Workers within each k may
differ in their relative productivity across occupations, but not in their relative productivity
across tasks within an occupation.
    The production function of task z within occupation o is given by
                                                         1                                      1
                                                ToD                                    ToI
                                                      ρ−1                                  ρ−1
                      Yo (z) =   LD
                                  o   (z)                       +   LIo   (z)                        ,
                                                 z                                    1−z

where Lko (z) is employment of efficiency units of factor k in task z in occupation o and
where ρ > 1. Therefore, domestic and immigrant efficiency units of labor are perfectly
substitutable in the production of each task, up to a task-specific productivity differential.
A lower value of ρ implies that this productivity differential is more variable across tasks.
The cost function implied by this production function is Co (z) = min{CoD (z), CoI (z)}, where
the unit cost of completing task z using domestic labor is
                                                                         1
                                                                        ρ−1
                                                                  z
                                  CoD (z)        =    WoD                         ,
                                                                 ToD
whereas using immigrant labor it is
                                                                            1
                                                                           ρ−1
                                                                1−z
                                  CoI (z)       =   WoI                           .
                                                                 ToI
The unit cost of producing each occupation equals its price and is given by
                                          Z 1
                                 Po = exp     ln Co (z)dz.
                                                        0

Characterization. There exists a cutoff task, denoted by
                                                             1
                                                Zo =             ,                                                     (60)
                                                          1 + Ho
for which firms are indifferent between hiring domestic and immigrant workers, where Ho ≡
ωoρ−1 τo−1 , ωo ≡ WoD /WoI , and τo ≡ ToD /ToI . The set of tasks in occupation o in which firms
employ domestic workers is given by [0, Zo ) and the set of tasks in occupation o in which
firms employ immigrant workers is given by (Zo, 1]. Moreover, the share of expenditure on
domestic labor in occupation o is simply Zo .

                                                                                                         Online Appendix 10
    Given the cutoffs, we have
                                   Z       Zo                      Z    1                  
                        Po = exp                 ln CoD (z)dz   +            ln CoI (z)dz
                                        0                               Zo

which can be expressed as
                                      
                                  1                       1                                        1
                                           WoI (ToI ) 1−ρ HoZo ZoZo (1 − Zo )1−Zo
                                                                                                 ρ−1
                  Po = exp                                                                              .
                                 1−ρ

The previous expression and equation (60) yield
                                                                                    1
                                                                                     ρ−1
                                        1                         1          Ho
                        Po = exp                      WoI (ToI ) 1−ρ                        .
                                       1−ρ                                 1 + Ho

Together with the definition of Ho , we obtain
                                     
                                  1                                    1
                    Po = exp             ToD (WoD )1−ρ + ToI (WoI )1−ρ 1−ρ                                       (61)
                                1−ρ

exactly as in Dekle et al. (2008).
    In Appendix A.1, we use equation (1) to derive only two equations: (34) and (35). Log
differentiating equation (61) and using equation (60), we obtain

                                        po = SoD woD + SoI woI ,

where SoD = Zo and SoI = 1 − Zo , exactly as in equation (34). Moreover, the fact that Zo is
the share of expenditure on domestic labor, equation (60), and the definition of Ho together
imply
                                                    −ρ
                                   LD     ToD WoD
                                              
                                    o
                                       = I              .
                                   LIo    To    WoI
Log differentiating the previous expression, we obtain equation (35).


C     Connecting to the Rybczynski Theorem
In this section we consider a version of our baseline model in which we derive the basic
Rybczynski Theorem as well as an extended version of the Rybczynski theorem in a closed
economy (similar to Section 3.1). As in the Rybczynski Theorem, we assume that there
is no heterogeneity within factors (θ → ∞), that there are two occupations (O = 2), that
productivity is fixed (ar = 0), and (in the open economy version) that the region treats
occupation prices parametrically (our small open economy assumptions in addition to α → ∞
and τrjo = 1 for all jo). Unlike our baseline model, we do not impose CES production
functions at any level of aggregation. Instead, we impose only that production functions
are continuously differentiable and constant returns to scale: the occupation o production
function in region r is
                              Qro = Qro LIro , LD
                                                  
                                                ro for o = 1, 2


                                                                                                   Online Appendix 11
and, in the open economy, the production of the final good combining the services of the
two occupations is
                                  Yr = Yr (Yr1 , Yr2) .
   Homogeneous factors within k = D, I implies that employment of type k in r equals the
number efficiency units of type k in r, Nrk = Lkr , and similarly for employment in occupation
                     k
o within region r, Nro = Lkro . Moreover, it also implies wro k
                                                                 = wrok               ′
                                                                        ′ for all o, o . Hence, we

write wrk rather than wro
                       k
                          .

C.1     Small open economy: Rybczynski
Here, we consider a small open economy that takes occupation prices as given. Equation
(34) becomes                          X
                                         k
                                pro =   Sro wrk for all o,                        (62)
                                              k

where pro = 0. Equation (35) becomes

                               D     I
                                        = −ρro wrD − wrI for all o,
                                                        
                              lro − lro                                                      (63)
where ρro is the local elasticity of substitution between native and immigrant labor within
occupation o in region r. Finally, in place of equation (36), our resource constraint implies
only
                                 X Nk
                                       ro k
                                        k
                                          nro = nkr for k = D, I.                       (64)
                                  o
                                     Nr

    Equation (62) requires wrI = wrD = 0 if Sr1  I     I
                                                   6= Sr2 ; this is analogous to the factor-price
                                                          I      I
insensitivity theorem. Suppose in what follows that Sr1      6= Sr2 ; this assumption corresponds
locally to the global assumption of no factor-intensity reversals in the Rybczynski theorem.
Hence, equation (63) implies nD        I
                                 ro = nro for both occupations. Equation (64) then becomes

                           k                 k
                                              
                          Nr1              Nr1
                               I
                              n + 1 − k nIr2 = nkr for k = D, I
                          Nrk r1           Nr
                                          k
where we have also used the fact that Nr2   = Nrk − Nr1
                                                     k
                                                        . The previous expression, for I and
D, allows us to solve for nkr1 and nkr2 :
                                              I                D
                                                             
                          k     1     D     Nr1      I       Nr1
                        nr1 =       nr 1 − I − nr 1 − D
                                ∆           Nr               Nr

and
                                                   D        I
                                                                   
                                          1       Nr1      Nr1
                                 nkr2   =             nI
                                                       r −     nD
                                          ∆        D
                                                  Nr       Nr r
                                                             I

where
                                                    D    I
                                                  Nr1   Nr1
                                         ∆≡           −     .
                                                  NrD   NrI



                                                                            Online Appendix 12
Moreover, we have
                                                                          
               ∂Qro LIro , LD
                            ro         LI
                                        ro         dL I
                                                      ro   ∂Qro  LI
                                                                  ro , LD
                                                                        ro        LDro     dLDro
       qro   =                                           +
                      ∂LIro      Qro (LIro , LD
                                              ro ) L I
                                                     ro         ∂L D
                                                                   ro        Qro (LI , LD ) LD
                                                                                   ro   ro   ro
                I I             I
                                   D
             = Sro lro + 1 − Sro   lro
                                       I
The previous expression together with lro = nIro = nD     D
                                                    ro = lro yields

                                           qro = nIro = nD
                                                         ro .

Result 1 (Factor allocation). Suppose that immigrants increase relative to natives in
region r, nIr > nD
                 r . Then occupation 1 is immigrant intensive within r, ∆ < 0, if and only if
nkr1 > nIr > nD
              r >  nkr2 for k = D, I.

The previous result and qro = nkro for k = I, D implies the following corollary, which is the
standard Rybczynski theorem.

Result 2 (Occupation output). Suppose that immigrants increase relative to natives in
region r, nIr > nD
                 r . Then occupation 1 is immigrant intensive within r, ∆ < 0, if and only if
       I      D
qr1 > nr > nr > qr2 .

C.2    Closed economy: extended Rybczynski
The system of equations is exactly as in the open economy—given by equations (62), (63),
and (64)—except we do not impose that pro = 0 and we include one additional equation,
which we derive as follows. The assumption that Yr is homothetic implies

                                     yr1 − yr2 = −ηr (pr1 − pr2 )

where ηr is the local elasticity of substitution between occupations. Log differentiating
equation (1) and setting yro = qro in the closed economy,
                                         X             X
                                              k k         k k
                             yr1 − yr2 =     Sr1 nr1 −   Sr1 nr1 .
                                               k                k

The two previous expressions, equation (62), and the definition w̃r ≡ wrD − wrI yield
                               I     I
                                        X k k            k k
                                                                
                     −ηr w̃r Sr1 − Sr2  +      Sr1 nr1 − Sr2 nr2 = 0.                              (65)
                                                   k

From equation (63) we have

                                   nD     I
                                    ro = nro − ρro w̃r for o = 1, 2.

Combining the previous two equations, we obtain
                    I    I            I              I
                                                         ρr2 w̃r = nIr2 − nIr1 .
                                                      
             −ηr Sr1  − Sr2   − 1 − Sr1   ρr1 + 1 − Sr2

                                                                                 Online Appendix 13
Suppose that ρr ≡ ρro for o = 1, 2. Then the previous equation is simply
                                        I     I
                                                   w̃r + nIr2 = nIr2 .
                                                 
                            (ηr − ρr ) Sr1 − Sr2

Combining the previous expression with equation (64) for k = I, we obtain
                                                     I
                                                    Nr1
                                  nIr2       nIr                   I     I
                                                                            
                                         =         − I (ηr − ρr ) Sr1 − Sr2   w̃r .
                                                    Nr

Similarly, equation (64) for k = D, yields
                                   D                            
                        I      D    Nr1             I     I
                                                            
                      nr2 = nr +        (ρr − ηr ) Sr1 − Sr2 + ρr w̃r .
                                    NrD
The two previous expressions yield a solution for w̃r in terms of primitives,

                                                             nIr − nD
                                                                    r
                                w̃r =                                         I          D
                                                                                              
                                                           I     I            Nr1       Nr1
                                         ρr + (ηr − ρr ) (Sr1 − Sr2 )         NrI
                                                                                    −   NrD


Hence, we obtain the result that
                                                  I      I
                                                           
                                     (ηr − ρr ) Sr1 − Sr2
        nkr1       nkr2                                                        nIr − nD
                                                                                                  
               −          =                              I               D            r              for k = I, D.
                                              I     I     N             Nr1
                            ρr + (ηr − ρr ) (Sr1 − Sr2 ) Nr1I −         NrD
                                                                  r


Finally, qr1 − qr2 = −ηr (pr1 − pr2 ) and equation (62) yield
                                                                 I     I
                                                                               
                                             qr1 − qr2 = ηr w̃r Sr1 − Sr2

Result 1 (Factor allocation). Suppose that immigrants increase relative to natives in
region r, nIr > nD                                                          I       I
                   r , that occupation 1 is immigrant intensive within r, Sr1 > Sr2 , and that
                                              k     k                    k     k
ρr = ρro for o = 1, 2. Then ηr = ρr implies nr1 = nr2 , ηr < ρr implies nr1 < nr2 , and ηr > ρr
implies nkr1 > nkr2 for k = I, D.

Result 2 (Occupation output). Suppose that immigrants increase relative to natives in
region r, nIr > nD                                                        I      I
                 r , that occupation 1 is immigrant intensive within r, Sr1 > Sr2 , and that
ρr = ρro for o = 1, 2. Then yr1 − yr2 = −ηr (pr1 − pr2 ), qro = yro, and equation (62) imply
qr1 > qr2 .


D     Fixed immigrant wages
Here we consider a modification of our model in which we take immigrant occupation wages
as given, rather than solving them to satisfy a local labor market clearing condition. This
assumption is justified if the supply of immigrants to each occupation within each region
is infinitely elastic (which is similar to assuming that each worker’s productivity dispersion
across occupations is zero, so that relative wages across occupations are fixed) and immigrant
remuneration is determined in a global market. We use this model to relate our results

                                                                                                       Online Appendix 14
to those in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) (henceforth GRH), since this model of
immigration can be applied to examining the implications of offshoring (in both cases, foreign
wages are exogenously given).
    We derive analytic results under the small open economy assumptions of Section 3.2, as-
               I
suming that wro   = 0 and ignoring the immigrant-labor-market-clearing condition. Since the
supply of immigrants is infinitely elastic, we consider as the driving force of our comparative
statics a change in the productivity of immigrant workers in region r that is common across
occupations, aIro ≡ aIr (which in our baseline model is equivalent in terms of factor allocation
and occupation wages to an increase in the supply of immigrants in region r).
    Under the assumptions in this section, and setting nD r = ar = 0, the log-linearized system
of equations that mirrors (34)-(36) and (55) is
                             X
                                  k    k
                                         − akr = −Sro I I           I
                                                                      D
                       pro =     Sro wro               ar + 1 − Sro    wro                  (66)
                                 k

                 D     I        D      I
                                           + (ρ − 1) aD      I     D            I
                                                              
                lro − lro = −ρ wro − wro              r − ar = −ρwro + (1 − ρ) ar                        (67)
                                                                 !
                                                    X
                                    D       D            D D
                                   lro = θwro  −θ       πrj wrj                                          (68)
                                                         j∈O


   X
            k   k
                   + akr = 1 − Sro
                                I
                                    D     I   I
                                                  + aIr = −ǫro pro + 1 − Srg
                                                                          x
                                                                           
           Sro lro                  lro + Sro lro                              (ηpr + yr ) ,             (69)
       k

                       x       x
where ǫro = ǫrg and Sro  = Srg   for all o ∈ O (g). Combining equations (66), (67) and (69)
yields
           D               I I                I   D         D         x
                                                                         
          lro = (ǫrg − ρ) Sro ar + (ǫrg − ρ) Sro wro − ǫrg wro + 1 − Srg   (ηpr + yr ) .
                      D
Substituting out for lro using equation (68) we obtain
                      !
           X
   D            D D                   I I              I   D         D         x
                                                                                  
 θwro −θ       πrj wrj = (ǫrg − ρ) Sro ar + (ǫrg − ρ) Sro wro − ǫrg wro + 1 − Srg   (ηpr + yr ) .
               j∈O
                                                                                           (70)
                                                 I
Given that the only shockP in region r is to a r , we can express  the  r ×  g specific term
      x
                               D D            I
 1 − Srg (ηpr + yr ) + θ   j∈O πrj wrj as κrg ar , where κrg is a function of parameters that
we do not explicitly solve.55 Equation (70) yields
                                                           I
                                      D         (ǫrg − ρ) Sro + κrg
                                     wro =                             aI
                                                                    I ) r
                                                                                                         (71)
                                             (θ + ǫrg − (ǫrg − ρ) Sro
                                    D
for o ∈ O (g). Given wage changes, lro can be calculated using (68).
  55
     It is natural to guess that a decrease in the cost of hiring immigrant labor in region r—i.e. an increase
in aIr —will increase region r’s output and the average wage of native workers within region r. This implies
that dκrg /daIr > 0.




                                                                                     Online Appendix 15
    To examine how occupation wage changes vary within the set O (g) with the immigrant
                           I                                                      I
intensity of occupations, Sro , we differentiate expression (71) with respect to Sro to obtain
                               D
                             dwro                  (θ + ǫrg + κrg )         I
                               I
                                  = (ǫrg − ρ)                            2 ar .
                             dSro                                   I
                                              (θ + ǫrg − (ǫrg − ρ) Sro )
                                                               D                                D
Therefore, if κrg > − (θ + ǫrg ), then the sign of dw ro
                                                      I
                                                   dSro
                                                                                 dlro
                                                         (as well as the sign of dS I ) is given by
                                                                                    ro
the sign of (ǫrg − ρ) ar . In response to a productivity increase of immigrant labor, aIr > 0,
                        I

native workers reallocate towards immigrant-intensive occupations within O (g) (crowding
in) and the wages of these occupations rise, if and only if ǫrg > ρ. Moreover, the extent
of this reallocation and wage increase is increasing in ǫrg . These comparative static results
mirror those in our baseline model in which the supply of immigrants into region r is inelastic
and immigrant wages satisfy factor market clearing.56
    To provide a better understanding of the mechanism that gives rise to crowding in within
this variation of our model, and to link it to the productivity effect in GRH, suppose that
ǫrg → ∞, so that occupation prices are unchanged, pro = 0, for all o ∈ O (g) (whereas
Rybczynski and GRH consider 2 goods or occupations, our occupation choice model allows
for interior solutions in an open economy under any number of occupations). In this special
case, equation (66) becomes
                                      I I          I
                                                      D
                              0 = −Sro ar + 1 − Sro     wro for all o,

which implies
                                                          I
                                               D         Sro
                                              wro =          I
                                                               aIr .
                                                       1 − Sro
             I                   D
Hence, if Sro  ∈ (0, 1) then dwro   /daIr > 0 so that an increase in the productivity of immi-
grants within region r increases native occupation wages in all occupations. Intuitively, the
zero-profit condition requires that cost savings induced by an increase in the productivity
of immigrants must be exactly offset by an increase in the cost of employing natives. More-
          I
over, if Sro  ∈ (0, 1) then d2 wro
                                D
                                   / daIr dSro
                                            I
                                               > 0, so that an increase in the productivity of
immigrants within region r increases native occupation wages relatively more in immigrant-
intensive occupations. Intuitively, the cost savings induced by an increase in the productivity
of immigrants are proportional to the share of costs paid to immigrants, which is higher in
immigrant-intensive occupations. That is, the zero-profit condition requires that the offset-
ting increase in the occupation wage of native workers must be greater in immigrant-intensive
occupations. We derive these results for occupation wages using only the zero profit condi-
tion. However, these results for occupation wages translate directly into results for factor
reallocation using the factor-market clearing condition (68): the increase in the relative na-
tive occupation wage of immigrant-intensive occupations induces native workers to reallocate
towards those occupations (crowding in).57
  56                                      D     I         D     I               I
     In contrast to our baseline model, dwro /dSro and dlro /dSro  depend on Sro  ; hence the estimating equation
                                                             I
(20) does not hold exactly. However, if θ + ǫrg − (ǫrg − ρ) Sro is not very close to zero, then the fit of equation
(20) remains good.
  57
     It is straightforward to show that immigrant workers are also crowded in.



                                                                                         Online Appendix 16
    Changes in offshoring productivity in GRH and either changes in immigrant productivity
or supply in the present paper generate changes in wages for natives. Whereas GRH consider
offshoring of low-skill tasks in a model featuring three factors—foreign labor, native low-skill
labor, and native high-skill labor—our model instead features two factors—immigrant and
native labor—but introduces factor heterogeneity across workers within each factor. At fixed
output prices, in our model native workers employed in the immigrant-intensive occupation
benefit relatively more from an improvement in immigrant productivity or supply, while in
GRH low-skill natives benefit relative to high-skill natives from a reduction in the cost of
offshoring low-skill tasks (through what they refer to as the “productivity effect”). Hence, at
fixed output prices, our framework provides within-group wage results that are very similar
to the between-group wage results in GRH. The mechanisms generating these results are
also very similar, as is clear from our description of wage changes in the previous paragraph.
Recall that in section C we showed that the mechanism generating crowding in (as well the
increase in the relative wage of immigrant-intensive occupations) at fixed occupation prices is
tightly linked to the mechanism in the Rybczynski theorem. Therefore, at fixed occupation
prices there is a tight link between the mechanism generating relative wage changes and
factor reallocation across Rybczynski, GRH, and our model.
    Relative to Rybczynski and GRH, we additionally show that when output prices are
endogenous a simple comparison of elasticities determines whether relative wages rise and
factors crowd into more immigrant-intensive occupations or relative wages fall and factors
crowd out of more immigrant-intensive occupations; we allow for many occupations and
variation across occupations in these elasticities; and we show that there is relatively less
crowding out within more tradable compared to within less tradable occupations.




                                                                          Online Appendix 17
Part II
Empirical Appendix
E     Occupation details

                  List of the 50 occupations used in   our baseline analysis
 Executive, Administrative, and Managerial             Supervisors, Protective Services
 Managerial Related                                    Firefighting
 Social Scientists, Urban Planners and Architects      Police
 Engineers                                             Guards
 Math and Computer Science                             Food Preparation and Service
 Natural Science                                       Health Service
 Health Assessment                                     Cleaning and Building Service
 Health Diagnosing and Technologists                   Personal Service
 Therapists                                            Agriculture
 Teachers, Postsecondary                               Vehicle Mechanic
 Teachers, Non-postsecondary                           Electronic Repairer
 Librarians and Curators                               Misc. Repairer
 Lawyers and Judges                                    Construction Trade
 Social, Recreation and Religious Workers              Extractive
 Arts and Athletes                                     Precision Production, Food and Textile
 Engineering Technicians                               Precision Production, Other
 Science Technicians                                   Metal and Plastic Machine Operator
 Technicians, Other                                    Metal and Plastic Processing Operator
 Sales, All                                            Woodworking Machine Operator
 Secretaries and Office Clerks                         Printing Machine Operator
 Records Processing                                    Textile Machine Operator
 Office Machine Operator                               Machine Operator, Other
 Computer and Communication Equipment Operator         Fabricators
 Misc. Administrative Support                          Production, Other
 Private Household Occupations                         Transportation and Material Moving

                         Table 7: Occupations for Baseline Analysis

Notes: We start with the 69 occupations based on the sub-headings of the 1990 Census
Occupational Classification System and aggregate up to 50 to concord to David Dorn’s occupation
categorization (http://www.ddorn.net/) and to combine occupations that are similar in education
profile and tradability but whose small size creates measurement problems (given the larger
number of CZs in our data).




                                                                          Online Appendix 18
                                 Most and least tradable occupations
 Rank*    Twenty-five most tradable occupations            Twenty-five least tradable occupations
   1      Fabricators +                                    Social, Recreation and Religious Workers+
   2      Printing Machine Operators  +                    Cleaning and Building Service+
   3      Metal and Plastic Processing Operator+           Electronic Repairer+
   4      Woodworking Machine Operators     +              Lawyers and Judges+
   5      Textile Machine Operator                         Vehicle Mechanic+
   6      Math and Computer Science                        Police+
   7      Precision Production, Food and Textile           Private Household Occupations+
   8      Records Processing                               Teachers, Postsecondary+
   9      Machine Operator, Other                          Health Assessment+
  10      Computer, Communication Equip Operator           Food Preparation and Service+
  11      Office Machine Operator                          Personal Service+
  12      Precision Production, Other                      Firefighting+
  13      Metal and Plastic Machine Operator               Related Agriculture+
  14      Technicians, Other                               Extractive+
  15      Science Technicians                              Production, Other+
  16      Engineering Technicians                          Guards+
  17      Natural Science                                  Construction Trade+
  18      Arts and Athletes                                Therapists+
  19      Misc. Administrative Support                     Supervisors, Protective Services+
  20      Engineers                                        Teachers, Non-postsecondary
  21      Social Scientists, Urban Planners and Architects Transportation and Material Moving
  22      Managerial Related                               Librarians and Curators
  23      Secretaries and Office Clerks                    Health Service
  24      Sales, All                                       Misc. Repairer
  25      Health Technologists and Diagnosing              Executive, Administrative and Managerial

                 Table 8: The most and least tradable occupations, in order

Notes: *: for most (least) traded occupations, rank is in decreasing (increasing) order of
tradability score; + : occupations that achieve either the maximum or minimum tradability score.




                                                                           Online Appendix 19
                        Characteristics of occupations in 1980
                                                 Non-tradable occs Tradable occs Total
 Share of female                                        0.31              0.48         0.40
 Share with college degree or above                     0.21              0.17         0.19
 Share of non-white                                     0.13              0.11         0.12
                               16-32                    0.43              0.46         0.44
 Age distribution              33-49                    0.35              0.33         0.34
                               50-65                    0.22              0.21         0.21
 Share working in routine-intensive occs                0.12              0.55         0.34
 Share working in abstract-intensive occs               0.29              0.39         0.34
 Share working in communication-intensive occs          0.35              0.33         0.34
 Total                                                  0.49              0.51         1.00

                        Characteristics of occupations in 2012
                                                 Non-tradable occs Tradable occs Total
 Share of female                                        0.42              0.50         0.46
 Share with college degree or above                     0.34              0.35         0.34
 Share of non-white                                     0.24              0.24         0.24
                               16-32                    0.29              0.30         0.30
 Age distribution              33-49                    0.41              0.40         0.41
                               50-65                    0.30              0.30         0.30
 Share working in routine-intensive occs                0.12              0.50         0.29
 Share working in abstract-intensive occs               0.35              0.47         0.34
 Share working in communication-intensive occs          0.39              0.35         0.37
 Total                                                  0.55              0.45         1.00

     Table 9: Characteristics of workers, 1980 in top panel and 2012 in bottom panel

Notes: Source for data is 1980 Census for the top panel and 2011-2013 ACS in the bottom
panel. Values are weighted by annual hours worked times the sampling weight.




                                                                     Online Appendix 20
Most and least immigrant-intensive occupations (low-education immigrants)
15 most immigrant-intensive occupations   15 least immigrant-intensive occupations
Agriculture                               Police
Food Preparation and Service              Firefighting
Textile Machine Operator                  Woodworking Machine Operators
Private Household Occupations             Social Scientists, Urban Planners and Architects
Arts and Athletes                         Engineers
Personal Service                          Extractive
Precision Production, Other               Electronic Repairer
Metal and Plastic Machine Operator        Guards
Precision Production, Food and Textile    Misc. Repairer
Metal and Plastic Processing Operator     Science Technicians
Office Machine Operator                   Teachers, Non-postsecondary
Printing Machine Operators                Technicians, Other
Health Technologists and Diagnosing       Managerial Related
Fabricators                               Librarians and Curators
Cleaning and Building Service             Therapists

  Table 10: The 15 most and least immigrant-intensive occupations, defined in terms of
immigrant earning shares at the national level, for low-education immigrants (less than a
                                high-school education)


Most and least immigrant-intensive occupations (medium-education immigrants)
15 most immigrant-intensive occupations            15 least immigrant-intensive occupations
Private Household Occupations                      Firefighting
Arts and Athletes                                  Extractive
Food Preparation and Service                       Police
Teachers, Postsecondary                            Lawyers and Judges
Textile Machine Operator                           Woodworking Machine Operators
Personal Service                                   Transportation and Material Moving
Social Scientists, Urban Planners and Architects   Electronic Repairer
Precision Production, Other                        Construction Trade
Health Assessment                                  Misc. Repairer
Health Service                                     Science Technicians
Office Machine Operator                            Supervisors, Protective Services
Librarians and Curators                            Machine Operator, Other
Engineers                                          Guards
Natural Science                                    Vehicle Mechanic
Therapists                                         Fabricators

 Table 11: The 15 most and least immigrant-intensive occupations, defined in terms of
immigrant earning shares at the national level, for medium-education immigrants (high
                    school graduates and some college education)



                                                                        Online Appendix 21
 Most and least immigrant-intensive occupations (high-education immigrants)
 15 most immigrant-intensive occupations   15 least immigrant-intensive occupations
 Textile Machine Operator                  Teachers, Non-postsecondary
 Metal and Plastic Processing Operator     Lawyers and Judges
 Health Diagnosing and Technologists       Firefighting
 Private Household Occupations             Extractive
 Precision Production, Other               Supervisors, Protective Services
 Metal and Plastic Machine Operator        Police
 Health Service                            Woodworking Machine Operators
 Office Machine Operator                   Agriculture
 Science Technicians                       Therapists
 Food Preparation and Service              Social, Recreation and Religious Workers
 Engineers                                 Sales, All
 Vehicle Mechanic                          Construction Trade
 Natural Science                           Transportation and Material Moving
 Teachers, Postsecondary                   Executive, Administrative, and Managerial
 Health Assessment                         Librarians and Curators

  Table 12: The 15 most and least immigrant-intensive occupations, defined in terms of
 immigrant earning shares at the national level, for high-education immigrants (a college
                                    degree or more)


F     Robustness
In this section we report robustness exercises on our baseline allocation and labor payment
regressions. First, we vary the set of tradable and nontradable occupations. Second, we study
                                                                                           I
pretrends and alternative periods of analysis. Third, we construct immigrant intensity, Sreo ,
using alternative approaches. Finally, we drop certain regions or workers. We first present
robustness tables for labor allocation regressions and then for labor payments regressions.




                                                                         Online Appendix 22
F.1     Labor allocation regressions

         Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                                region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)           (1)          (2)             (3)
                                                 Low Ed                                    High Ed
                                     OLS          2SLS            RF           OLS          2SLS             RF
      xro                         .1824***    .0745     .0599                .1063**      .043      .05
                                    (.0594)  (.0888)   (.0663)                (.0521)   (.0897)   (.0901)
      Io (N) xro                  -.3914*** -.401*** -.3439***              -.3921*** -.4523*** -.4008***
                                    (.0846)  (.0917)   (.0828)                (.1092)   (.1384)   (.1256)
      Obs                            30835        30835         30835         24038          24038         24038
      R-sq                            .831         .831          .831          .697           .696          .697
      Wald Test: P-values             0.01         0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
      F-stat (first stage)                        112.65                                     71.65
       Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
       Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                                D
                                                  = 0.

                        Table 13: Alternative tradability cutoff (23T and 23N)
             Include the top 23 most tradable (and least tradable) occupations, dropping 4 middle occupations.




         Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                                region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)            (1)          (2)            (3)
                                                 Low Ed                                     High Ed
                                     OLS          2SLS            RF            OLS          2SLS            RF
      xro                         .2383***    .1571*    .1177*                 .0866*     .0332     .0436
                                    (.0585)   (.0849)   (.0673)                (.0511)   (.0869)   (.0868)
      Io (N) xro                  -.4393*** -.4809*** -.3941***              -.3964*** -.4863*** -.4239***
                                    (.0958)   (.0948)   (.0874)                (.1096)   (.1317)   (.1171)
      Obs                           28035         28035          28035         21262         21262          21262
      R-sq                           .827          .827           .827          .692          .691           .692
      Wald Test: P-values            0.02          0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00
      F-stat (first stage)                        105.66                                      63.63
       Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
       Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                                D
                                                  = 0.

                        Table 14: Alternative tradability cutoff (21T and 21N)
             Include the top 21 most tradable (and least tradable) occupations, dropping 8 middle occupations.




                                                                                                Online Appendix 23
   Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                          region-occupation, 1980-2012
                              (1)          (2)             (3)           (1)         (2)         (3)
                                         Low Ed                                    High Ed
                             OLS          2SLS            RF            OLS         2SLS         RF
xro                          .0353     -.0846    -.0407                 -.0114   -.0683    -.0617
                            (.0508)   (.0846)   (.0571)                (.0308)  (.0551)   (.0488)
Io (N) xro                -.2262*** -.2515*** -.2448***              -.3026*** -.382*** -.3042***
                            (.0727)   (.0813)   (.0752)                (.0928)  (.1155)   (.0934)
Obs                         33723          33723         33723         26644         26644      26644
R-sq                         .832           .832          .832           .7            .7         .7
Wald Test: P-values          0.02           0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00       0.00
F-stat (first stage)                       99.52                                     53.11
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                          D
                                            = 0.

                Table 15: Alternative tradability cutoff (30T and 20N)
                 Separate 50 occupations into 30 tradable and 20 nontradable occupations.




   Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                          region-occupation, 1980-2012
                             (1)           (2)            (3)           (1)          (2)          (3)
                                         Low Ed                                    High Ed
                             OLS          2SLS            RF           OLS          2SLS          RF
xro                        .232***    .1484*    .1156*                 .0867     .0267     .0454
                            (.0585)   (.0844)    (.067)               (.0574)   (.0943)   (.0919)
Io (N) xro                -.3931*** -.2963*** -.2335***             -.3181*** -.3521*** -.3248***
                             (.084)    (.083)   (.0735)               (.0936)   (.1186)   (.1151)
Obs                         33723         33723         33723         26644          26644      26644
R-sq                         .84           .84           .839          .698           .698       .699
Wald Test: P-values          0.01          0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00       0.00
F-stat (first stage)                      117.27                                     58.42
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                          D
                                            = 0.

                Table 16: Alternative tradability cutoff (20T and 30N)
                 Separate 50 occupations into 20 tradable and 30 nontradable occupations.




                                                                                       Online Appendix 24
       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1950-1980
                                (1)         (2)              (3)            (1)            (2)         (3)
                                          Low Ed                                         High Ed
                               OLS         2SLS              RF            OLS            2SLS         RF
 xro                        -.2898** -.3927 -.4645**                       -.3765* -.7862*** -.5875***
                             (.1406)  (.324) (.2169)                       (.2038)   (.2689)   (.1906)
 Io (N) xro                  .3137**  .2204  .2497*                       .9853*** 1.534*** 1.171***
                             (.1235) (.2168) (.1396)                        (.237)   (.2714)   (.1987)
 Obs                           21669         21669       21669             6420           6420        6420
 R-sq                           .717          .716        .718             .654           .653        .655
 Wald Test: P-values           0.78           0.31           0.16          0.00           0.00         0.00
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                         D
                                           = 0.

       Table 17: Testing for pre-trends in regional-occupational employment growth



       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1990-2012
                                       (1)        (2)               (3)           (1)       (2)           (3)
                                                Low Ed                                     High Ed
                                      OLS        2SLS               RF        OLS          2SLS           RF
        xro                        .1875**  .1396 .1908**                     -.0481   -.2219*    -.146
                                   (.0895) (.1035) (.0768)                   (.0892)   (.1316)   (.1187)
        Io (N) xro                -.2702** .0145    -.0068                   -.216** -.3388*** -.3051***
                                   (.1148) (.3739) (.2308)                   (.1053)   (.1311)   (.1118)
        Obs                           33957          33957         33957      28089         28089       28089
        R-sq                           .776           .776          .776       .601           .6         .602
        Wald Test: P-values            0.25          0.60           0.36          0.00      0.00         0.00
        F-stat (first stage)                         55.35                                  47.28
    To construct the Card instrument, we use the 1980 immigrant distribution by source region and
    education. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%.
    For the Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                                     D
                                                       = 0.

                               Table 18: Alternative period: 1990-2012




                                                                                                    Online Appendix 25
   Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                          region-occupation, 1980-2007
                               (1)         (2)          (3)          (1)         (2)            (3)
                                        Low Ed                                 High Ed
                              OLS         2SLS          RF          OLS         2SLS            RF
 xro                           .081    -.0404  -.0495               -.0341    -.0967    -.1033
                             (.0797)  (.1525) (.1059)              (.0436)   (.0665)   (.0764)
 Io (N) xro                -.4851*** -.4517** -.3543*            -.3301*** -.3677*** -.3093***
                             (.0858)  (.1895) (.1915)              (.0988)   (.1152)    (.086)
 Obs                          31596        31596      31596        23215         23215        23215
 R-sq                          .789         .789       .788         .649          .648         .649
 Wald Test: P-values           0.00         0.00       0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00
 F-stat (first stage)                     134.76                                 73.53
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                          D
                                            = 0.

                          Table 19: Alternative period: 1980-2007



   Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                          region-occupation, 1980-2012
                             (1)          (2)            (3)           (1)         (2)            (3)
                                        Low Ed                                   High Ed
                            OLS          2SLS            RF           OLS         2SLS            RF
xro                         .089*    1.154*    .6561*                 .0223    .2168     .0711
                           (.0492)  (.6034)   (.3382)                 (.036)  (.3651)   (.2351)
Io (N) xro               -.3034*** -1.817*** -1.163***             -.3088*** -2.565*** -2.064***
                           (.0615)  (.5879)   (.4443)                (.0973)  (.4197)   (.5177)
Obs                         33723        33723         33723         26644         26644        26644
R-sq                         .836         .822          .836          .699          .623         .701
Wald Test: P-values          0.00         0.01          0.04          0.00          0.00         0.00
F-stat (first stage)                      8.88                                     16.27
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                          D
                                            = 0.

                   Table 20: Using S−reo to calculate the instrument




                                                                                     Online Appendix 26
       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (1)          (2)           (3)
                                              Low Ed                                  High Ed
                                  OLS          2SLS           RF           OLS          2SLS           RF
     xro                          .089*     -.0009    -.0049               .0223     -.0728   -.0375
                                 (.0492)   (.0931)    (.058)               (.036)   (.0718)  (.0473)
     Io (N) xro                -.3034*** -.3007*** -.2272***            -.3088*** -.5027*** -.2387**
                                 (.0615)   (.1153)   (.0856)              (.0973)   (.1767)  (.1038)
     Obs                         33723         33723         33723         26644        26644        26644
     R-sq                         .836          .836          .836          .699         .697         .699
     Wald Test: P-values          0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00
     F-stat (first stage)                      102.93                                    83.89
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

Table 21: Using the average values in 1970 and 1980 to construct immigrant share of labor
                                                 I
                                      payments Sreo



       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                 Low Ed                               High Ed
                                     OLS          2SLS           RF          OLS        2SLS         RF
       xro                           .0881     .0406     .0274               .0084   -.0544 -.0508
                                    (.0534)   (.0895)   (.0739)             (.0431) (.0722) (.0597)
       Io (N) xro                 -.2722*** -.3577*** -.3422***            -.1791** -.2222* -.1961
                                    (.0854)   (.0779)   (.0934)             (.0874) (.1295) (.1182)
       Obs                          33473         33473        33473         26405      26405      26405
       R-sq                          .827          .827         .827          .687       .687       .687
       Wald Test: P-values           0.04          0.00         0.00          0.03       0.00       0.01
       F-stat (first stage)                       26.98                                  35.39
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

               Table 22: Dropping top 5 immigrant-receiving commuting zones
    Drop 5 largest immigrant-receiving CZs: LA/Riverside/Santa Ana, New York, Miami, Washington DC, Houston.




                                                                                          Online Appendix 27
        Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                               region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                       (1)          (2)             (3)            (1)       (2)           (3)
                                                  Low Ed                                   High Ed
                                      OLS          2SLS            RF             OLS       2SLS           RF
       xro                           .0826*   .1375**      .11                    -.0517   -.0746   -.0517
                                     (.0442)   (.0655)   (.0672)                  (.036)  (.0614)   (.057)
       Io (N) xro                  -.3045*** -.4347*** -.3592***                -.2212** -.3263** -.2901**
                                     (.0972)   (.0831)   (.0643)                 (.0921)  (.1284)  (.1146)
       Obs                           32997         32997          32997          24693       24693        24693
       R-sq                           .822          .822           .822           .706        .706         .707
       Wald Test: P-values            0.01          0.00           0.00           0.00        0.00         0.00
       F-stat (first stage)                         80.33                                    73.75
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

                Table 23: Dropping workers employed in routine-intensive sector
Drop workers in routine-intensive occupations, defined as occupations that has a routine intensity (Autor and Dorn, 2012)
                                             higher than 75% of all workers.




        Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                               region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                     (1)          (2)            (3)             (1)         (2)            (3)
                                                Low Ed                                     High Ed
                                    OLS          2SLS            RF              OLS        2SLS            RF
     xro                         .0888*** .1151**     .0808*                      -.001     -.0622    -.0528
                                  (.0325)   (.0554)   (.0436)                    (.0298)   (.0478)   (.0401)
     Io (N) xro                  -.249*** -.3847*** -.2964***                  -.2523*** -.3121*** -.2522***
                                  (.0448)   (.0662)   (.0567)                    (.0792)   (.0938)   (.0788)
     Obs                           32022         32022         32022            24581       24581          24581
     R-sq                           .785          .784          .785             .687        .686           .687
     Wald Test: P-values            0.01          0.00          0.00             0.00        0.00           0.00
     F-stat (first stage)                       103.77                                      149.30
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

                  Table 24: Dropping workers employed in manufacturing sector




                                                                                               Online Appendix 28
       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                              region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                      (1)          (2)             (3)          (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                 Low Ed                                   High Ed
                                     OLS          2SLS             RF          OLS          2SLS           RF
      xro                         .1987*** .2313*** .2297***                   .0584     -.0005   .0104
                                    (.0556)   (.087)  (.0837)                 (.0496)   (.0879)  (.0786)
      Io (N) xro                  -.2596*** -.3394** -.2459**               -.3216*** -.4101*** -.3419**
                                    (.0771)  (.1336)  (.0971)                 (.1233)   (.1583)  (.1405)
      Obs                            33748        33748         33748         26692         26692         26692
      R-sq                            .834         .834          .834          .702          .702          .702
      Wald Test: P-values             0.46         0.48           0.90         0.01          0.00          0.00
      F-stat (first stage)                         62.86                                    58.09
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

Table 25: Excluding foreign-born workers who moved to the US before the age of 18 from
                                      immigrants


F.2    Labor payments regressions

  Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)
                                          OLS        2SLS         RF
                        xro                             .5961*** .6624*** .4943***
                                                         (.1253)   (.1468)   (.1068)
                        Io (N) xro                     -.5629*** -.7093*** -.5223***
                                                         (.1321)   (.1357)   (.0855)
                        Obs                                32004          32004          32004
                        R-sq                                .897           .896           .896
                        Wald Test: P-values                0.45            0.61            0.70
                        F-stat (first stage)                             134.40
  Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
  Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                       Table 26: Alternative tradability cutoff (23T and 23N)
            Include the top 23 most tradable (and least tradable) occupations, dropping 4 middle occupations.




                                                                                               Online Appendix 29
Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)
                                        OLS        2SLS         RF
                   xro                             .5898*** .6554*** .5115***
                                                    (.1276)   (.1563)   (.1109)
                   Io (N) xro                     -.5533*** -.6957*** -.5321***
                                                    (.1332)   (.1316)   (.0843)
                   Obs                               29122           29122          29122
                   R-sq                               .893            .893           .892
                   Wald Test: P-values                0.41            0.65            0.77
                   F-stat (first stage)                             150.63
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                  Table 27: Alternative tradability cutoff (21T and 21N)
       Include the top 21 most tradable (and least tradable) occupations, dropping 8 middle occupations.




Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)
                                        OLS        2SLS         RF
                   xro                             .349***    .2964*   .2742**
                                                    (.1037)   (.1515)   (.1265)
                   Io (N) xro                     -.3232*** -.3465*** -.3023***
                                                    (.0926)   (.0822)   (.0676)
                   Obs                               34892           34892          34892
                   R-sq                               .895            .895           .895
                   Wald Test: P-values                0.52            0.59            0.70
                   F-stat (first stage)                             153.04
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                  Table 28: Alternative tradability cutoff (30T and 20N)
                   Separate 50 occupations into 30 tradable and 20 nontradable occupations.




                                                                                          Online Appendix 30
Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)
                                        OLS        2SLS         RF
                   xro                            .6055*** .6847*** .5256***
                                                   (.1317)   (.162)    (.1139)
                   Io (N) xro                    -.5629*** -.6817*** -.5043***
                                                   (.1244)   (.122)    (.0863)
                   Obs                             34892           34892           34892
                   R-sq                             .902            .901            .901
                   Wald Test: P-values              0.31            0.97            0.75
                   F-stat (first stage)                            98.59
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                 Table 29: Alternative tradability cutoff (20T and 30N)
                  Separate 50 occupations into 20 tradable and 30 nontradable occupations.




Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                           (1)      (2)      (3)
                                          OLS      2SLS      RF
                         xro                           -.0103  .0133   -.1757
                                                      (.1557) (.3604) (.3065)
                         Io (N) xro                     .2236  .0332   .0846
                                                       (.177) (.3407) (.2669)
                         Obs                          23321        23321       23321
                         R-sq                          .808         .808        .808
                         Wald Test: P-values            0.01        0.79         0.50
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

    Table 30: Testing for pre-trends in regional-occupational employment growth




                                                                                        Online Appendix 31
Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1990-2012
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)
                                         OLS       2SLS        RF
                   xro                        .5592*** .5133*** .7175***
                                                (.0818) (.1302)   (.1192)
                   Io (N) xro                 -.4636*** -.2602* -.5572***
                                                 (.091) (.1497)   (.0945)
                   Obs                          35127        35127        35127
                   R-sq                          .869         .869         .87
                   Wald Test: P-values           0.08         0.17         0.02
                   F-stat (first stage)                      67.81
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                          Table 31: Alternative period: 1990-2012



Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2007
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)
                                        OLS        2SLS         RF
                   xro                        .4057*** .4454***   .328***
                                               (.0993)   (.1246)   (.0926)
                   Io (N) xro                -.5488*** -.6431*** -.4809***
                                               (.2034)   (.1286)   (.0933)
                   Obs                         33200         33200         33200
                   R-sq                         .853          .853          .852
                   Wald Test: P-values          0.27          0.04          0.10
                   F-stat (first stage)                      160.91
Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                          Table 32: Alternative period: 1980-2007




                                                                               Online Appendix 32
   Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                            (1)        (2)         (3)
                                           OLS        2SLS         RF
                     xro                        .3918*** 2.299***   1.081**
                                                 (.1147)  (.4259)   (.4653)
                     Io (N) xro                -.3512*** -2.296*** -1.275***
                                                 (.1157)   (.441)   (.4854)
                     Obs                         34892         34892         34892
                     R-sq                         .897          .863          .896
                     Wald Test: P-values          0.38          0.99          0.34
                     F-stat (first stage)                       9.34
  Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
  Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                      Table 33: Using S−reo to calculate the instrument



   Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                            (1)        (2)         (3)
                                           OLS        2SLS         RF
                     xro                        .3918***   .592**   .3582**
                                                 (.1147)   (.2319)   (.1541)
                     Io (N) xro                -.3512*** -.6301*** -.3794***
                                                 (.1157)   (.2223)   (.1392)
                     Obs                         34892         34892         34892
                     R-sq                         .897          .897          .897
                     Wald Test: P-values          0.38          0.62          0.70
                     F-stat (first stage)                      141.15
  Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
  Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

Table 34: Using the average values in 1970 and 1980 to construct immigrant share of labor
                                                 I
                                      payments Sreo




                                                                                 Online Appendix 33
  Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                            (1)       (2)        (3)
                                           OLS       2SLS        RF
                          xro                            .2844***   .1696    .1388
                                                          (.0736)  (.1053)  (.1016)
                          Io (N) xro                     -.2067** -.1979** -.1829**
                                                          (.0881)  (.0969)  (.0931)
                          Obs                              34642          34642         34642
                          R-sq                              .895           .895          .895
                          Wald Test: P-values               0.14           0.58           0.35
                          F-stat (first stage)                            36.98
  Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
  Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                Table 35: Dropping top 5 immigrant-receiving commuting zones
    Drop 5 largest immigrant-receiving CZs: LA/Riverside/Santa Ana, New York, Miami, Washington DC, Houston.




  Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                           (1)       (2)         (3)
                                           OLS      2SLS        RF
                          xro                            .3282**   .3854*   .3458**
                                                          (.1341)  (.2166)   (.1755)
                          Io (N) xro                     -.2904** -.4286** -.3768***
                                                          (.1382)  (.1756)   (.1256)
                          Obs                             33817          33817          33817
                          R-sq                             .89            .89            .891
                          Wald Test: P-values               0.46          0.69           0.70
                          F-stat (first stage)                           97.61
  Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
  Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                Table 36: Dropping workers employed in routine-intensive sector
Drop workers in routine-intensive occupations, defined as occupations that has a routine intensity (Autor and Dorn, 2012)
                                             higher than 75% of all workers.




                                                                                                Online Appendix 34
    Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                               (1)      (2)       (3)
                                              OLS      2SLS       RF
                             xro                      .0962** .0036    .0108
                                                      (.0441) (.062) (.0523)
                             Io (N) xro                -.0411  -.0311 -.0353
                                                      (.0492) (.0685) (.0508)
                             Obs                       33367     33367      33367
                             R-sq                       .858      .858       .858
                             Wald Test: P-values        0.12      0.59       0.47
                             F-stat (first stage)                122.67
    Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
    Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

                 Table 37: Dropping workers employed in manufacturing sector



    Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)
                                            OLS        2SLS         RF
                       xro                           .4068***   .4237*   .3876**
                                                      (.1276)   (.2187)   (.1711)
                       Io (N) xro                   -.3455*** -.4908*** -.4234***
                                                      (.1289)   (.1794)   (.1191)
                       Obs                           34892       34892         34892
                       R-sq                           .897        .897          .897
                       Wald Test: P-values            0.30        0.60          0.69
                       F-stat (first stage)                      95.77
    Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
    Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

Table 38: Excluding foreign-born workers who moved to the US before the age of 18 from
                                      immigrants


G      Industry analysis
In this section we report results of the baseline labor allocation and labor payments regres-
sions applied to industries rather than occupations. In Table 39, we list the 34 industries
considered in this analysis, defining these industries based on the sub-headings of the 1990
Census Industry Classification System.

                                                                                    Online Appendix 35
                       List of the 34 industries used in our analysis
 Agriculture, forestry and fisheries                    Mining
 Construction                                           Food and kindred products
 Tobacco manufactures                                   Textile mill products
 Apparel and other finished textile products            Paper and allied products
 Printing, publishing and allied industries             Chemicals and allied products
 Petroleum and coal products                            Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
 Leather and leather products                           Lumber and woods products, except furniture
 Furniture and fixtures                                 Stone, clay, glass and concrete products
 Metal industries                                       Machinery and computing equipment
 Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies          Transportation equipment
 Professional and photographic equipment, and watches   Toys, amusement, and sporting goods
 Manufacturing industries, others                       Transportation
 Communications                                         Utilities and sanitary services
 Wholesale trade, durables                              Wholesale trade, nondurables
 Retail trade                                           Finance, insurance, and real estate
 Business and repair services                           Personal services
 Entertainment and recreation services                  Professional and related services

                                   Table 39: List of industries

    We consider three alternative ways to determine the tradability of these 34 industries.
First we construct a geographical Herfindahl index for each industry, following Mian and Sufi
(2014), using labor income by industry and CZ in the 1980 Census. Industries reliant on
national demand will tend to be geographically concentrated compared to industries relying
on local demand. Hence, industries that have a higher HHI will be more tradable according
to this measure. Second, we use Mian and Sufi (2014)’s industry tradability measure directly.
Third, we categorize all goods industries—agriculture, mining, and manufacturing—as trad-
able and all service industries as non-tradable. The categorization of industries into the
tradable and nontradable sets according to each of these three approaches is provided in
Tables 40, 41, and 42, respectively.




                                                                              Online Appendix 36
                            Most and least tradable industries (HHI)+
 Rank*    Seventeen most tradable industries               Seventeen least tradable industries
   1      Tobacco manufactures                                  Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
   2      Transportation equipment                              Utilities and sanitary services
   3      Entertainment and recreation services                 Construction
   4      Professional and photographic equipment and watches   Food and kindred products
   5      Petroleum and coal products                           Lumber, woods products (except furniture)
   6      Toys, amusement, and sporting goods                   Paper and allied products
   7      Printing, publishing and allied industries            Stone, clay, glass and concrete products
   8      Apparel and other finished textile products           Mining
   9      Manufacturing industries, others                      Retail trade
   10     Finance, insurance, and real estate                   Personal services
   11     Business and repair services                          Machinery and computing equipment
   12     Textile mill products                                 Professional and related services
   13     Chemicals and allied products                         Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
   14     Leather and leather products                          Transportation
   15     Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies         Wholesale trade, durables
   16     Furniture and fixtures                                Metal industries
   17     Communications                                        Wholesale trade, nondurables

                 Table 40: The most and least tradable industries, in order

Notes: + : Industries are ranked according to their geographical Herfindahl index, measured using
the distribution of labor income across CZs in the 1980 Census; more tradable industries have
higher HHIs. *: for most (least) traded industries, rank is in decreasing (increasing) order of
tradability score.




                                                                            Online Appendix 37
                 Most and least tradable industries using Mian and Sufi (2014)+
 Rank*    Seventeen most tradable industries       Seventeen least tradable industries
   1      Tobacco manufactures                            Lumber, woods products (except furniture)
   2      Apparel and other finished textile products     Retail trade
   3      Entertainment and recreation services           Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
   4      Leather and leather products                    Construction
   5      Mining                                          Manufacturing industries, others
   6      Transportation equipment                        Toys, amusement, and sporting goods
   7      Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies   Paper and allied products
   8      Finance, insurance, and real estate             Wholesale trade, durables
   9      Textile mill products                           Stone, clay, glass and concrete products
   10     Chemicals and allied products                   Professional and related services
   11     Transportation                                  Printing, publishing and allied industries
   12     Communications                                  Food and kindred products
   13     Petroleum and coal products                     Furniture and fixtures
   14     Metal industries                                Personal services
   15     Agriculture, forestry and fisheries             Utilities and sanitary services
   16     Business and repair services                    Wholesale trade, nondurables
   17     Machinery and computing equipment               Professional and photographic equipment and watches

                  Table 41: The most and least tradable industries, in order

Notes: + : We use Mian and Sufi (2014)’s tradability measure directly for this classification. We
concord the ind1990 code with the 4-digit NAICS code to aggregate Mian and Sufi (2014)’s
tradability measures to the 34 industries in our analysis. *: for most (least) traded industries,
rank is in decreasing (increasing) order of tradability score.




                                                                             Online Appendix 38
               Tradable and non-tradable industries (goods vs. services)+
    Tradable industries                             Non-tradable industries
    Agriculture, forestry and fisheries                     Retail trade
    Mining                                                  Personal services
    Transportation equipment                                Professional and related services
    Professional and photographic equipment and watches     Transportation
    Petroleum and coal products                             Wholesale trade, durables
    Toys, amusement, and sporting goods                     Wholesale trade, nondurables
    Printing, publishing and allied industries              Communications
    Apparel and other finished textile products             Business and repair services
    Manufacturing industries, others                        Finance, insurance, and real estate
    Machinery and computing equipment                       Entertainment and recreation services
    Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products              Utilities and sanitary services
    Textile mill products
    Chemicals and allied products
    Leather and leather products
    Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies
    Furniture and fixtures
    Tobacco manufactures
    Food and kindred products
    Lumber, woods products (except furniture)
    Paper and allied products
    Stone, clay, glass and concrete products

                        Table 42: Tradable and non-tradable industries

Notes: + : We group all goods industries, i.e. agriculture, mining and manufacturing, as tradable
industries; and all service industries as non-tradable industries. We drop construction industry for
this analysis.

    We revisit our baseline analyses using industries and these three measures of tradability.
Tables 43, 44, and 45 show that our allocation regressions are largely robust to using indus-
tries and these three measures of industry tradability. Similarly, Tables 46, 47, and 48 show
that our labor payments regressions are robust to using industries and these three measures
of industry tradability. Results are robust to varying the cutoff between tradable and non-
tradable industries in the two cases in which we have a continuous measure of tradability.
Results are robust to including construction within non-tradable industries in the case in
which we separate industries into tradable and non-tradable using goods vs. services.




                                                                              Online Appendix 39
       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                               region-industry, 1980-2012
                                     (1)            (2)         (3)          (1)          (2)               (3)
                                                  Low Ed                                High Ed
                                    OLS            2SLS         RF          OLS          2SLS               RF
      xro                         .2907*     .4908  .5968*                .3276**    .3569*   .5005**
                                  (.1742)   (.3402) (.3523)                (.1669)   (.2143)   (.2207)
      Io (N) xro                 -.3994** -.6781*** -.72***              -.5129*** -.8084*** -.8323***
                                   (.163)   (.2371) (.2285)                (.1826)   (.2245)   (.1603)
      Obs                          22789           22789      22789        17924          17924        17924
      R-sq                          .821            .821       .822         .709           .709         .71
      Wald Test: P-values           0.09           0.18        0.39         0.08           0.01            0.04
      F-stat (first stage)                         74.79                                 303.29
     Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
     Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                              D
                                                = 0.

Table 43: Domestic allocation of workers across industries measuring tradability using the
                             industry-level Herfindahl index
                         Separate 34 industries into 17 tradable and 17 nontradable industries




       Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                               region-industry, 1980-2012
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)         (1)         (2)          (3)
                                                   Low Ed                             High Ed
                                        OLS         2SLS        RF         OLS         2SLS          RF
            xro                         .0533    .202   .3287             .1379    .2336   .2982**
                                        (.134) (.3541) (.3511)           (.0994) (.1582)   (.1415)
            Io (N) xro                  .0367   -.1272 -.2625             -.2079 -.4766** -.4024**
                                       (.1288) (.2653) (.2543)           (.1287) (.1982)   (.1676)
            Obs                         22789       22789      22789      17924        17924        17924
            R-sq                         .818        .817       .818       .707         .707         .708
            Wald Test: P-values            0.32      0.56       0.58       0.64         0.35         0.67
            F-stat (first stage)                    104.58                            315.96
     Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
     Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                              D
                                                = 0.

 Table 44: Domestic allocation of workers across industries measuring tradability using
                                 Mian and Sufi (2014)
                         Separate 34 industries into 17 tradable and 17 nontradable industries




                                                                                                 Online Appendix 40
        Dependent variable: log change in the employment of domestic workers in a
                                region-industry, 1980-2012
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (1)          (2)           (3)
                                               Low Ed                                 High Ed
                                     OLS        2SLS          RF          OLS          2SLS           RF
         xro                       .2441**   .5744   .6119             .4303***    .5429   .5789**
                                    (.1168) (.4335) (.4063)              (.1313)  (.3904)   (.2888)
         Io (N) xro                -.3473** -.4971 -.4842              -.7248*** -.9742** -.8986***
                                    (.1372) (.4113) (.3481)              (.1803)  (.4814)    (.318)
         Obs                        22067        22067      22067        17202         17202         17202
         R-sq                        .827         .826       .828         .723          .723          .723
         Wald Test: P-values         0.35         0.46       0.27         0.01          0.00         0.01
         F-stat (first stage)                    51.65                                 81.62
      Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
      Wald test, the null hypothesis is β D + βN
                                               D
                                                 = 0.

Table 45: Domestic allocation of workers across industries using goods-producing industries
                    as tradable and service industries as non-tradable



    Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-industry, 1980-2012
                                             (1)      (2)       (3)
                                             OLS    2SLS        RF
                          xro                            .5301* .8334* .8106**
                                                         (.2829) (.4563)   (.359)
                          Io (N) xro                      -.4665 -.7836* -.8098**
                                                         (.2994) (.457)   (.3499)
                          Obs                             22736        22736         22736
                          R-sq                             .831         .831          .833
                          Wald Test: P-values              0.47         0.68          0.99
                          F-stat (first stage)                         90.13
   Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
   Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

Table 46: Labor payments across industries measuring tradability using the industry-level
                                   Herfindahl index
                        Separate 34 industries into 17 tradable and 17 nontradable industries




                                                                                                Online Appendix 41
   Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-industry, 1980-2012
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)
                                           OLS     2SLS         RF
                     xro                            .3683** .8298**   .6888**
                                                    (.1744) (.3579)    (.2757)
                     Io (N) xro                      -.1855 -.7337** -.6164***
                                                    (.1605) (.2935)    (.2237)
                     Obs                             22736         22736           22736
                     R-sq                             .827          .825            .828
                     Wald Test: P-values               0.06          0.54           0.46
                     F-stat (first stage)                          131.86
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

 Table 47: Labor payments across industries measuring tradability using Mian and Sufi
                                       (2014)
                     Separate 34 industries into 17 tradable and 17 nontradable industries




   Dependent variable: log change in labor payments in a region-industry, 1980-2012
                                            (1)       (2)        (3)
                                            OLS      2SLS        RF
                      xro                            .4437*** .9535** .7295**
                                                       (.1661) (.4569) (.3101)
                      Io (N) xro                     -.4743*** -.8382* -.5719*
                                                       (.1803) (.5033) (.3148)
                      Obs                              22014          22014         22014
                      R-sq                              .838           .836          .839
                      Wald Test: P-values               0.80           0.35          0.16
                      F-stat (first stage)                            61.31
 Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
 Wald test, the null hypothesis is γ + γN = 0.

Table 48: Labor payments across industries using goods-producing industries as tradable
                       and service industries as non-tradable




                                                                                             Online Appendix 42
Part III
Quantitative Model Appendix
H     Additional details of the extended model
In this section we present additional details of the extended model.

H.1     System of equilibrium equations in changes
We describe a system of equations to solve for changes in prices and quantities in the extended
model. We use the “exact hat algebra” approach that is widely used in international trade
(Dekle et al., 2008). We denote with a “hat” the ratio of any variable between two time
periods. The two driving forces are changes in the regional supply of foreign workers (denoted
     I
by N̂re ) and in the aggregate supply of domestic workers (denoted by N̂eD ).
    We proceed in two steps. First, for a given guess of changes in occupation wages for
                                                         D             I
domestic and immigrant workers in each region, {Ŵro        }n ando {Ŵro }, and changes in the
                                                                D
supply of domestic workers of each group in each region, N̂re , we calculate in each region
r the change in aggregate expenditures (and income)
                                                    ˆ k N̂ k ,
                                         X
                                              k
                                  Êr =      Sre W agere re
                                              k,e

changes in average group wages
                                                                            1
                                                                         ! θ+1
                                                                 θ+1
                              ˆ k = N̂ λ
                                                X
                                                         k     k
                           W agere    r                 πreo Ŵro                ,
                                                    o

changes in occupation output prices
                                                                   1
                                      1−ρ                  1−ρ  1−ρ
                             I      I             I       D
                                                     
                    P̂ro = Sro   Ŵro      + 1 − Sro    Ŵro            ,

changes in allocations of workers across occupations
                                                     θ+1
                                               λ   k
                                             N̂r Ŵro
                                     k
                                   π̂reo =           θ+1 ,
                                                 ˆ
                                            W agerek


and changes in occupation output
                                        1 X          k     k      ˆ k N̂ k .
                              Q̂ro =                Sreo π̂reo W agere re
                                       P̂ro   k,e

         k
Here,  Sre is defined as the total income share in region r of workers of group k, e (such that
       k           k
P
  k,e Sre = 1), Sreo is defined as the cost (or income) share in region r of workers of group


                                                                                     Online Appendix 43
                                       k               I
                                P
k, e in occupation o (such that k,e Sreo  = 1), and Sro  denotes the cost (or income) share
                                                 I          I
                                                      P
of immigrants in occupation o in region r (i.e. Sro  = e Sreo  ). Change in the population in
                             P Nre k
                                      k
region r are given by N̂r = k,e Nr N̂re .
    Second, we update our guess of changes in occupation wages and changes in the supply
of domestic workers until the following equations are satisfied
                                −α X           α−η  η−1
                                             x      y
                        Q̂ro = P̂ro        Srjo  P̂jo      P̂j     Êj
                                              j∈R
                                                                                          !1−ρ
                                                    ˆ I I
                                I
                                  P
                          1 − Sro       I    I                                       I
                                    e Sreo π̂reo W agere N̂re                      Ŵro
                                                              =
                             I
                            Sro
                                   P D D
                                      S   π̂    W   ˆ D N̂ D
                                                   age                               D
                                                                                   Ŵro
                                    e reo reo         re re
                                                ˆ k ν
                                                      W agere
                                   D                    P̂r
                                 N̂re   =                                 ν N̂eD ,
                                                        D          ˆ
                                            P         Nje       W agejre
                                              j∈R     NeD         P̂j

where changes in absorption prices are given by
                                                                               1
                                                                            ! 1−α
                                             X                    1−α
                                   y                 m
                                 P̂ro =             Sjro P̂jo
                                             j∈R

                                                                              1
                                                                           ! 1−η
                                              X                  1−η
                                                     A    y
                                   P̂r =            Sro P̂ro
                                              o∈O
                                                                                                              y
Here,  A
      Sro  is defined as the total absorption share in region r of occupation o, Sro   A
                                                                                         ≡ ProEYr ro ,
 x
Srjo is the share of the value of region r’s output in occupation o that is destined for region j,
 x       P τ Yrjo         m
Srjo ≡ roProrjo
             Qro
                  , and Sjro is the share of the value of region r’s absorption within occupation
                                 m          P τ   Y
o that originates in region j, Sjro ≡ joPro
                                          jro jro
                                          y
                                            Yro
                                                  .
    In this second step, we solve for |O|×|R| unknown occupation wage changes for domestic
workers and the same for foreignnworkers.
                                        o     We also solve for E D × |R| unknown changes in
                                          D
population of domestic workers          N̂re . We use the same number of equations.
                                                                                                   D
    The inputs required to solve this system are: (i) values of initial equilibrium shares πreo      ,
 I      D     I     A     m      x                          k
πreo , Sre , Sre , Sro , Sjro , Srjo and population levels Nre ; (ii) values of parameters θ, η, α, ν
                                                                                              I
and λ; and (iii) values of changes in immigrant supply by education and region, N̂re            , and
                                                  D                        k        I
aggregate domestic supply by education, N̂e . We have omitted Sreo and Sro from the list of
                                                                              k       k
required inputs because they can be immediately calculated given πreo            and Sre as
                                                             k    k
                                          k              πreo   Sre
                                         Sreo =P                k′ k′
                                                       k ′ ,e′ Sre′ πre′ o

      I
          P I
and Sro = e Sreo  .
   In the next subsection we show that equilibrium price and quantity changes in the ex-
tended model coincide with those in the baseline version of our model if education groups
                                                                  k      k
within each k are allocated identically across occupations (i.e. πreo = πro for all e ∈ E k ).

                                                                                                 Online Appendix 44
H.2     Relation between extended and baseline models
Consider a version of this extended model that takes as given changes in the population of
domestic workers by education in each region and assumes no agglomeration externalities
(λ = 0). Here we show that equilibrium price and quantity changes coincide with those in
the baseline version of our model if education groups within each k are allocated identically
                          k      k
across occupations (i.e. πreo = πro for all e ∈ E k ).
   For simplicity, we consider the mapping of the model with many immigrant groups and
the model with a single immigrant group (but the same logic applies when there are many
                                                               I
domestic groups). Under the assumptions of this subsection, Sreo  can be written as
                                                                       I    I
                                            I                       πro  Sre
                                           Sreo =P                D D           I   I
                                                              e′ Sre′ πre′ o + πro Sr

where SrI = e′ Sre
           P I
                   ′ . In the system of equations above, the equations that involve immigrants

and education e can be written as
                                                                 ! 1
                                                            θ+1 θ+1
                            ˆ I = W ageˆ I=
                                                X
                         W age        re            π I Ŵ I
                                                          r           ,         ro      rj
                                                                   j∈O

                                                                                             X SI
                                                  ˆ D N̂ D + S I W age
                                                                   ˆ I
                                      X
                                            D                                                       re     I
                              Êr =        Sre W agere re     r       r                                  N̂re ,
                                      e                                                        e
                                                                                                   SrI
                                                                                    θ+1
                                                                             I
                                                                           Ŵro
                                              I             I
                                            π̂reo   =     π̂ro   =                   θ+1 ,
                                                                         ˆ I
                                                                       W ager
                                                                                                                            !
                1     X
                               D D          ˆ D N̂ D + P          SrI πro
                                                                        I I
                                                                           π̂ro             I
                                                                                              X SI
                                                                                                 re   I
      Q̂ro =                  Sreo π̂reo W age  re re             D D             I SI
                                                                                       W ager     I
                                                                                                    N̂re
               P̂ro       e                                 e ′ S     π
                                                                  re re o
                                                                    ′    ′   +  πro r         e
                                                                                                S r

                                       I     ˆ I    P   I
                                                       Sreo   I
                                                                                !  1−ρ
                                     π̂ro W age   r      I N̂re
                                                     e Sro
                                                                              I
                                                                           Ŵro
                                                                    =
                                   P Sreo  D
                                             I π̂
                                                       ˆ D N̂ D
                                                  D W age                  Ŵ D
                                      e 1−Sro       reo           re       re                ro

        D        I
where N̂re and N̂re are exogenously given. This system of equations is equivalent to the one
                                                                     P I I
in which there is only one immigrant education group and N̂rI = e SSreI N̂re   . In this case,
                                                                          r
the exposure variable xro in the empirics can be written as if there was a single immigration
education group. Specifically,
                      X ∆N I                               SrI πro
                                                                 I          X S I ∆N I              I
                                re I                                           re     re     I ∆Nr
           xro ≡                  S        =P                                            = S
                      e
                              Nre reo
                               I                        D D           I   I     I
                                                    e′ Sre′ πre′ o + πro Sr e Sr Nre
                                                                                    I        ro
                                                                                                NrI

where we define
                                                 I
                                                                           I
                                                                      SrI πro
                                                Sro =P                     k′ k′
                                                                 k ′ ,e′ Sre′ πre′ o

                                               ∆NrI   X S I ∆N I
                                                         re   re
                                                    =
                                                NrI   e
                                                        S I NI
                                                          r  re


                                                                                                                  Online Appendix 45
H.3     Basic analytic results in extended model
In order to characterize changes in occupation employment and wages in the model with
multiple education groups, we use a log-linearized system of equations under the small open
economy assumptions of Section 3.2. We assume that there are no agglomeration externalities
(λ = 0).
    Combining equations (34), (35), and (55) (which hold with one or more education levels
e) and setting ar = 0 yields
               k     −k             k     −k           k          x
                                             
              lro + Sro (ρ − ǫro ) wro − wro   = −ǫro wro + (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr )      (72)
                                                                            x
for k = D, I (where −k = D if k = I and −k = I if k = D) and where ǫro and Sro  are
common for all o ∈ O (g).
    Log-linearizing equations (30)-(32) yields
                                 k         k
                                             − wagekre + nkre
                                                      
                                lreo = θ wro                                   (73)

and                                                                     !
                                                       X
                                         wagekre =            k
                                                             πrej  k
                                                                  wrj
                                                       j∈O

which imply
                                      k      k         k     k
                                                                
                                     lreo − lreo′ = θ wro − wro′ .                             (74)
Log-linearizing Lkro =       Lkreo and then substituting (73) yields
                         P
                         e

                                     X Lk
                              k            reo k
                             lro =             l
                                     e
                                          Lkro reo
                                             X Lk
                                    k                 reo
                                                            −θwagekre + nkre .
                                                                            
                                = θwro +                                                       (75)
                                              e
                                                     Lkro

In contrast to the model with a single education, in this case equations (35) and (75) do not
              D     I
imply that wro  − wro is common across occupations.
    To make analytic progress, we assume that ρ = ǫro for all o ∈ O (g). Recall that if there
is only one education group, then in response to changes in labor supply there is neither
crowding in nor crowding out for both worker types k. Consider the case with multiple
education groups. Equation (72)simplifies to
                                k          k          x
                               lro = −ǫro wro + (1 − Sro ) (ηpr + yr )                         (76)

for all o ∈ O (g), for k = D, I. Combining (75) and (76) yields

                      1 X Lkreo Lkreo′
                                           
       k     k                                        k     k
                                                                 for all o, o′ ∈ O (g) .
                                                               
     wro − wro′ =                 k
                                     −  k
                                              −θwage  re + nre                                 (77)
                   θ + ǫro e     Lro   Lro′

We use equation (77) to provide conditions under which there is no crowding in or out for
worker type k when ρ = ǫro . Suppose that at least one of the two following conditions is

                                                                                 Online Appendix 46
satisfied: (i) the share of workers by education e in occupation o, Lkreo /Lkro , is common across
all occupations o ∈ O (g), or (ii) −θwagekre + nkre is common across education levels e. Under
                                                                     k     k                   ′
either condition (i) or (ii), equation (77) implies that wro           − wro ′ = 0 for all o, o ∈ O (g). By
                                     k        k             ′
equation (74), this implies lreo = lreo′ for all o, o ∈ O (g); that is, there is neither crowding
in nor out across occupations in O (g). Condition (i) is satisfied if productivities satisfy
  k     k         k       k                 ′
Treo  /Tre ′ o = Treo′ /Tre′ o′ for all e, e . A special case in which condition (ii) is satisfied is when

nkre = nkre′ for all e, e′ and labor k is only employed in the set of occupations g, since in this
case wagekre = wrg    k
                         for all e.
     We can use this result to understand why, in the calibrated model of Section 5, setting
ǫrT ≈ ρ results in neither crowding in nor crowding out for natives workers within the set of
tradable occupations, as in the model with a single education group. This is because immi-
gration induces only small differential changes across education groups in native population
across space and in average wages within a region: nD                    D             D          D
                                                                  re ≈ nre′ and wagere ≈ wagere′ for all
    ′
e, e . Hence, condition (ii) is approximately satisfied for native workers.
     In Section J of the Appendix we show that, because conditions (i) and (ii) are not
satisfied for immigrant workers, setting ǫrT ≈ ρ implies that immigrant workers reallocate
systematically across tradable occupations in response to an inflow of immigrants. This is
also the case in the data when we consider the allocation regressions for immigrant workers.

H.4          Bilateral trade and absorption shares
Given the difficulty of obtaining bilateral regional trade data by occupation that is required
                                                 m         x
to construct initial equilibrium trade shares Sjro  and Srjo , we instead assume that tradable
occupations can be traded at no trade costs (that is, τrjo = 1 for all r and j) while nontradable
occupations are prohibitively costly to trade across regions (that is, τrjo = ∞ for all j 6= r),
and that trade is balanced by region (that is, the exports equal imports summed over all
                                                                                      x     m
tradable occupations). Under these assumptions, for nontradable occupations Srro         = Srro =
        x      m
1 and Srjo = Sjro = 0 for all j 6= r. For tradable occupations, in the absence of trade costs all
regions face the same absorption prices, which implies that the ratio of exports of occupation
o from region r to j relative to absorption of occupation o in region j is equal for all j, so

                                                     m         Pro Qro
                                                    Srjo =P                      .
                                                               r ′ Pr ′ o Qr ′ o

Using a similar logic, the ratio of exports of occupation o from region j to r relative to output
of occupation o in region j is58
                                              P
                                  x              o′ ∈O(T ) Pro′ Qro′
                                Sjro = P          P                            .
                                          r ′ ∈R     o′ ∈O(T ) Pr ′ o′ Qr ′ o′

Therefore, constructing bilateral trade shares under these assumptions only requires infor-
mation on the value of production, Pro Qro , by region for tradable occupations. Finally, under
  58
       We use the fact that exports of occupation o from j to r can be written as Exportsjro = AbsorptionrT ×
Absorptionro            m
                                                     P                                         Absorptionro
Absorption       × Sjro     ,
                         where AbsorptionrT =          o′ ∈O(T ) Pro Qro by balanced trade, AbsorptionrT
                                                                    ′   ′                                   =
      P rT
            P    Q                                              m
P       r′ P r′ o r′ o
                                 for tradable occupations, and Sjro for tradable occupations is given by the expres-
  o′ ∈O(T )   r′ Pr′ o′ Qr′ o′
sion above.

                                                                                            Online Appendix 47
                                                 Price index                                  Price index and low education real wage
                            0.030                                                        0.030

                                                      Brownsville TX                                         Brownsville TX
                                                     Laredo TX AZ Miami FL
                                                         Yuma                                         Miami FL
                                                                                                         Yuma   AZ TX
                                                                                                             Laredo
                            0.025                                                        0.025

                                                     El Paso TX                                                 El Paso TX
                                                  Del Rio TX                                                    Del Rio TX
                            0.020                                                        0.020
                                                     Eagle
                                               West Palm    PassFL
                                                         Beach   TX                                           Eagle Pass
                                                                                                                     WestTX
                                                                                                                          Palm Beach FL

                  ∆ log P




                                                                               ∆ log P
                                                Los Angeles CA                                                       Los Angeles CA
                            0.015                                                        0.015



                            0.010                                                        0.010



                            0.005                                                        0.005



                            0.000                                                        0.000
                                    0   0.05      0.1      0.15       0.2                    -0.04   -0.03   -0.02   -0.01    0       0.01
                                        CZ exposure to immigration                                   ∆ log (Low education wage / P)


  Figure 8: 50% reduction in Latin American Immigrants: the change in CZ price indices
 against CZ exposure to immigration and against the real wage of low education domestic
                     workers who start and remain in the same CZ

                                                    A
these assumptions, absorption shares by occupation Sro are given by

                                                                   A          ProQro
                                                                  Sro =P
                                                                             j∈O Pro Qro

for nontradable occupations and by59
                        P                       !                                                                              !
                                     P   ′ Qro′
                                                                                               P
                  A        o ∈O(T )
                            ′          ro                                                                 P
                                                                                                 r ′ ∈R r o r o
                                                                                                             ′ Q    ′
                 Sro =    P                       ×                                      P       P
                              o′ ∈O Pro′ Qro′                                             r ′ ∈R      o′ ∈(T ) Pr ′ o′ Qr ′ o′

for tradable occupations.


I        Average wage changes for native workers
In this section we report results for wage regressions using data generated by our model as
well as for wage regression 29 using actual data.
    We first consider our wage regressions (26) and (28) using model-generated data. Panel
A of Figure 9 reports the estimates of χD and χD N from our occupation wage regression (26)
based on our parameterization in which we vary η from 1 to 7. At our baseline calibration
of η = 1.93, coefficient estimates are consistent with neither crowding in nor crowding out
within tradable jobs, χD ≈ 0, and crowding out within nontradable jobs, χD   N = −0.15. If
                                                                  D     D
instead we impose η = α = 5 (so that ǫrT = ǫrN ), we obtain χ ≈ χN ≈ 0, implying no
crowding out (in) in nontradable or tradable occupations. More generally—and consistent
with equations (18) and (19) in Section 3.2—for any value of η the slope of the occupation
wage regression, shown in Panel A of Figure 9, roughly equals a multiple of 1/ (θ + 1) times
the slope of the allocation regression, shown in Figure 1.
    59
    We use balanced trade and the fact that all regions choose the same ratio of absorption in tradable
occupation o relative to the sum of absorption across all tradable occupations.

                                                                                                                                      Online Appendix 48
                Figure 9: Estimates from wage regressions in model generated data
The left and right panels report estimates of the occupation wage regression (26) and the average wage regression (28) varying
  η from 1 to 7 and holding all other parameters at their baseline levels. The vertical lines represents the baseline value of
                                             η = 1.93 and the value of η = α = 5.



    Panel B of Figure 9 reports estimates of χD and χDN from our average wage equation (28)
using model-generated data from our baseline parameterization.60 Comparing Panels A and
B, we see a tight link in the extended model between the reduced-form coefficients in (28)
(Panel B), which are based on changes in average wages for each commuting zone education-
group pair, and those in (26) (Panel A), which are based on changes in occupation wages for
each commuting zone. At our baseline calibration, we estimate χD = 0 and χDN = −0.15 using
variation in occupation wage changes, whereas we estimate χ = 0.002 and χD
                                                              D
                                                                               N = −0.173
using variation in commuting zone wages. Thus, under the conditions imposed by our model
we can infer the coefficients from the occupation-wage equation—which reveal crowding out
(in)—by estimating the average wage regression.
    We now estimate regression 29 using actual and model-generated data. Table 49 reports
empirical estimates using actual data for regression (29),

                           wageD        D              I     I
                                                                
                               re − wagere′ = β0 + β1 xre − xre′ + β2 zr + υr

using college educated workers for e and less-than-college educated workers for e′ .
  60
    Although equation (28) is not structural, it fits the model-generated data quite well: across all values of
η, the R2 of our regression is at least 0.98.




                                                                                                    Online Appendix 49
Dependent variable: Difference in the change in the average log earnings between e and e′
                              domestic workers, 1980-2012
                                                               (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                               OLS       2SLS         RF
                            Exposure to Immigration           -.0233 -.0103 -.0105
                                                             (.0247) (.0367) (.0378)
                            Obs                                722        722        722
                            R-sq                               .49        .48        .49
        Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. All
        regressions include a constant term, the initial share of employment in manufacturing, initial share of
        employment in routine occupations, initial log ratio of college-educated to non-college education adults,
        and initial share of women in employment.

       Table 49: Difference in the change in the average log earnings between high- and
                                low-education domestic workers

   When we run this regression using model-generated data (without including controls zr )
we obtain β1 = −0.066 and R2 = 0.53.


J      Immigrant occupation reallocation
In Section 4 we analyze empirically how native workers reallocate across occupations in
response to immigration. In this section, we analyze the reallocation of immigrant workers,
both in the extended model and in the data.
    We first use model-generated data from our calibrated model to estimate equation the
allocation regression separately for all three immigrant education groups:

                              nIro = αrg
                                      I
                                         + αoI + β I xro + βN
                                                            I               I
                                                              Io (N) xro + νro .

Table 50 reports the results. Consistent with our results for natives, we find more crowding
                                                                I
out within nontradable than within tradable occupations: βN       < 0, for all education groups.
     However, unlike our results for natives, we find crowding out within tradable jobs for
all immigrant education groups, β I < 0. This divergence between native and immigrant
reallocations within tradable jobs (β I < 0 and β D ≈ 0) is inconsistent with the analytic
results for our model in Section 3, which has a single education group in which case β k ≡
 θ+1
ǫrg +θ
       (ǫrg − ρ) ψr . In subsection H.3 we show that if changes in immigrant labor supply vary
by education level and immigrants with different education levels vary in their comparative
advantage across occupations, then immigrants may be crowded in or out within the set of
tradables even if ǫrT = ρ.61
  61
    In Section H.3 we argue that because immigration induces small differential changes across education
groups in native regional populations and in average wages within a region, immigration neither crowds out
nor crowds in natives within tradables when ǫrT = ρ. Hence, our quantitative results for natives are largely
consistent with our analytic results in Section 3.




                                                                                             Online Appendix 50
                                    Low Education                Med Education              High Education
                          βI            -0.10                        -0.12                       -0.09
                           I
                          βN            -0.26                        -0.33                       -0.38
                          R-sq          1.00                         0.98                        0.91

 Table 50: Allocation for immigrant workers across occupations in model-generated data

    This implies that our immigrant-allocation regression suffers from omitted variable bias
(whereas our employment-allocation regression for native-born workers does not). Specifi-
cally, when ǫrT = ρ, our regression specification for immigrant reallocation omits the term

                                                   1 X LIreo         I     I
                                                                             
                                        yro ≡                  −θwagere + nre .
                                                θ + ǫro e LIro

Because the correlation (conditional on fixed effects) between yro and xro in the extended
model is negative, when we estimate the immigrant-allocation regression on model-generated
data we find β I < 0. Table 51 reports estimates of βN I
                                                          and β I using real data rather than
                                                                  I
model-generated data. As in the model-generated data, we find βN    < 0 for all three education
groups (i.e., an inflow of immigrants reduces the share of immigrants in immigrant-intensive
occupations within nontradables more so than within tradables). For high-education (college-
graduate) immigrants, we find a significant and negative estimate of β I (i.e., an inflow
of immigrants reduces the share of immigrants in immigrant-intensives occupations within
tradables). Estimates of β I are insignificant for immigrants with intermediate (high-school
graduates and those with some college) and low (less than high school) levels of education.

           Dependent variable: log change in the employment of immigrant workers in a
                                  region-occupation, 1980-2012
                                 (1a)       (2a)          (3a)          (1b)        (2b)           (3b)          (1c)            (2c)    (3c)
                                           Low Ed                                  Med Ed                                      High Ed
                                 OLS        2SLS          RF           OLS          2SLS            RF           OLS            2SLS     RF
  xro                            .3345     .6316    .1753              -.2132   -.3846      -.26              -.8253*** -1.391*** -.9635***
                                (.2889)   (.6106)  (.3309)            (.1937)  (.3099)    (.1934)               (.1717)   (.265)    (.1971)
  Io (N) xro                   -1.425*** -2.036** -1.379***         -.8943*** -1.203*** -.8488***             -.4716*** -.6842** -.3991**
                                (.3988)   (.8431)   (.379)            (.2317)  (.3529)     (.134)               (.1736)  (.2895)    (.1814)
  Obs                            5042       5042         5042          13043        13043         13043         6551            6551     6551
  R-sq                           .798       .797         .799           .729         .728          .73          .658            .649     .662
  Wald Test: P-values            0.00        0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00     0.00
  F-stat (first stage)                     863.39                                   185.66                                     128.32
                        Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. For the
                        Wald test, the null hypothesis is β I + βN
                                                                 I
                                                                   = 0.


                      Table 51: Allocation for immigrant workers across occupations
        The table reports estimates of nIro = αIrg + αIo + β I xro + βN
                                                                      I I (N ) x
                                                                         o
                                                                                       I
                                                                                 ro + υro separately for each education group.




                                                                                                              Online Appendix 51
