                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PRECAUTION VERSUS MERCANTILISM:
RESERVE ACCUMULATION, CAPITAL CONTROLS, AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE

                                         Woo Jin Choi
                                         Alan M. Taylor

                                       Working Paper 23341
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23341


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




For their helpful comments we thank Joshua Aizenman, Olivier Jeanne, Kyu-Chul Jung, Sebnem
Kalemli-Ozcan, Anton Korinek, Philip Lane, Jae Won Lee, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Ju Hyun
Pyun, and Eric Young, and seminar participants at the University of Virginia, the INFINITI 2016
Asia-Pacific Conference, International University of Japan, KDI, KIEP, and KIET. All errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23341.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Woo Jin Choi and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Precaution Versus Mercantilism: Reserve Accumulation, Capital Controls, and the Real Exchange
Rate
Woo Jin Choi and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23341
April 2017
JEL No. F31,F38,F41,F43,O24

                                            ABSTRACT

We document a new international stylized fact describing the relationship between real exchange
rates and external asset holdings. Economists have long argued that the real exchange rate is
associated with the net international investment position, appreciating as external wealth increases.
This mechanism has been seen as central for international payments equilibrium and relative price
adjustments. However, we argue that the effect of external assets held by the public sector—
reserve accumulation—on real exchange rates may be quite different from that of privately held
external assets, and that capital controls are a critical factor behind this difference. For 1975–2007,
controlling for GDP per capita and the terms of trade, we find that a one percentage point increase
in external assets relative to GDP (net of reserves) is related to an 0.24 percent real exchange rate
appreciation. On the contrary, a one percentage point increase in reserve accumulation relative to
GDP has virtually no effect on the real exchange rate in financially open countries (low capital
controls), and is related to a 1.65 percent real exchange rate depreciation in financially closed
countries (high capital controls). Results are stronger in developing countries and in more recent
periods. Gross rather than net positions matter and we present a new theoretical model to account
for the stylized fact. The framework encompasses so-called precautionary and mercantilist
motives for reserve accumulation, and also explains how the optimal capital account policy—the
mix of reserve accumulation and capital controls—is determined. Further empirical support arises
from evidence that reserve accumulation is associated with a trade surplus, along with higher GDP
and TFP growth in countries with high capital controls, findings that are consistent with the
mechanisms of our model.


Woo Jin Choi
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville VA 22903
wc5hz@virginia.edu

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics and
Graduate School of Management
University of California
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and CEPR
and also NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
1.     Introduction

Economists have long struggled to understand the mechanics of the real exchange rate.
In an old tradition stretching back centuries, via John Maynard Keynes (1929), and at
least as far as David Hume (1741), the debate over the relative price levels of different
countries and the international payments equilibrium stands out as one of oldest subjects
in the field’s history. In the standard view, there is a clear steady-state relationship in the
long run or between the level of the real exchange rate (RER) and the stock of net foreign
assets (NFA): the real exchange rate should be more appreciated if net foreign assets rise
to a higher level, all else equal.1
      This standard prediction is fairly intuitive: suppose, say, that the home country has a
shock that generates higher net external wealth, assume that it obeys the long run budget
constraint, smooths consumption, and that there is imperfect substitutabilty of home and
foreign goods (to rule out the implausible corner case of “immaculate transfer”); then
home will desire to consume more going forwards relative to output; home must run
trade deficits to achieve this, which will entail a change in price equilibrium such that
home goods increase in price relative to foreign. Empirically, the seminal work of Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2004) made a careful assessment of this relationship and confirmed a
positive conditional correlation between real exchange rates and net foreign assets.
      In this paper, we re-evaluate the relationship, in theory and in the data, with a new
focus on external assets held by the public sector, i.e., international reserve accumulation.
Until the 1990s the magnitude of reserves had not been significant compared overall
external asset position for most countries. However, reserve accumulations in recent
years, especially in emerging economies, has been very rapid and now comprises a large
chunk of their external balance sheet.2
      Why should we care? The central claim of our paper is that reserve accumulation
matters for the debate at hand: it has profound but distinct role to play as a force driving
the real exchange rates, but this force can be quite different than that of other international
assets on the balance sheet. As a first step, we argue that the real exchange rate may
     1 At
        high frequency, the association between changes, or levels, of real exchange rates (or nominal
exchange rates) and net foreign assets could be determined by various underlying shocks and propagation
mechanisms. In general, some of these can have a positive or negative relationship in different models
and at different time frequencies. However, with annual frequency and with long-horizon data, the
aforementioned relationship is what empirically stands out.
   2 Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010) note that the average reserve to GDP ratio has risen to more

than 20 percent of GDP in emerging markets, while in advanced countries it has stayed steady at about
4 percent. Bussière, Cheng, Chinn, and Lisack (2015) find that accumulation decelerated after the 2008
financial crisis.



                                                   1
depreciate especially strongly in response to reserve accumulation when capital controls
are in place. In a benchmark theoretical framework, we show how the real exchange rate
depends on reserve accumulation and capital controls. Then, in empirical work, we add
the aforementioned features to build on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004) for 75 countries
over 1975–2007.3
    We confirm that the marginal effect of private asset accumulation on the real exchange
rate is mostly positive, consistent with the older findings. However, we then show
that the effect of reserve accumulation on the real exchange rate is, in general, exactly
the opposite: there is a negative association between net external assets held by the
public sector (reserves) and the real exchange rate. And, further, this effect varies with
financial openness, where we construct a binary indicator of capital control based on
the financial openness index of Chinn and Ito (2008). The effect of reserve accumulation
on the real exchange rate is close to zero in financially open countries, but strongly
negative in financially closed countries. In cross-sectional analysis for the period of
1975–2007, we find that when net external assets to GDP (net of reserves) increases by
one percentage point, the real exchange rate appreciates by 0.24 percent. However when
reserve accumulation to GDP increases by one percentage point, the real exchange rate
depreciates by 1.65 percent in financially closed countries and is virtually unchanged
(rising 0.12 percent) in financially open countries.
    In addition, we also argue that the negative effect of reserve accumulation on the real
exchange rate is varying over time, and heterogeneous between advanced countries and
developing countries.4 If we focus on developing countries and the more recent period
of 1986–2007, our results become even more pronounced. That is, the effects of reserves
on real exchange rates are most prominent for the high-reserve-accumulating countries
and periods. For example, in cross section for 1975–1996 for developing countries, when
reserve accumulation to GDP increases by one percentage point, the real exchange rate
appreciates by 0.12 percent. But the effects are not statistically significant regardless of
financial openness. For the period 1986–2007, the effect is -1.06 percent overall, but -1.39
in financially closed countries and -0.08 in financially open countries. This differential
pattern disappears in the subset advanced countries.
    We find that including oil exporting countries strengthens the magnitude and the
   3 In our empirical work, we can include or exclude the Global Financial Crisis period (2008–2011) as a
robustness check. We believe that real exchange rate fluctuations during a financial crisis period is really an
independent topic. See, e.g., Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) for a discussion of real exchange rate
determination during crisis.
   4 In this paper, we will refer to both emerging countries and other less-developed countries collectively

as “developing countries.”



                                                      2
statistical significance of the negative association, but the results are mostly robust without
oil exporters. Also, using other other capital control measures or other standard real
exchange rate indices from IMF or BIS does not alter the results. We also confirm all
our results in extensive panel data analysis, complemented by subperiod analyses and
exhaustive robustness tests.
   What could explain these results? In the theory part of this paper we develop a
rationale for our empirical results as follows. We use a small open economy model and
distinguish tradable and nontradable goods. The law of one price holds at the tradable
goods level. What we call the capital account policy—which means reserve accumulation
and capital control choices—then shapes the equilibrium current account balance and,
therefore, the trade balance. In this setup, the relative price level of one country, the
real exchange rate, is proportional to the relative price of nontradable goods to tradable
goods. Thus, in the convention used in this paper, the real exchange rate appreciates
when it increases. Therefore, as we will assume a fixed endowment of nontradable goods,
the real exchange rate will depend on the supply of tradable goods which may vary
intertemporally. If an economy has a positive external wealth shock, its consumption of
tradable goods and its external assets will increase to smooth out the consumption of
tradable goods. This will cause real exchange rate appreciation, and this is the prediction
of the standard model: the usual wealth effect of external assets on the real exchange
rate and their positive association. We then add several new ingredients to the standard
model that can generate scenarios where this prediction is overturned.
   First, we show that public external saving—i.e., reserve accumulation—can be an
important additional channel which affects the allocation of tradable goods consumption
between current and future periods, and hence the real exchange rate. Given the endow-
ment of tradable goods, if tradable consumption decreases as the public sector increases
its external savings, the relative price of nontradable goods goes down as the relative
marginal utility of tradable to nontradable goods consumption goes up. If the current
reserve accumulation is high enough, current consumption of the tradable goods may
decrease and the relative price of nontradable goods may also then decrease. The real
exchange rate may then depreciate, and the price level of the home country decreases,
reversing the predictions of the standard model.
   Second, we consider how capital controls can be an important factor modulating
this new mechanism in our framework. That is to say, the marginal effect of reserve
accumulation on the real exchange rate varies with the degree of financial openness. In
our model it turns out that the effectiveness of deliberate policy efforts to change the
capital account (i.e., reserve accumulation) will depend on the extent to which public

                                              3
savings are offset by private capital flows. With this rationale spelled out in the model, we
argue that capital account policy needs to view reserve accumulation and capital control
together as jointly determining the equilibrium macroeconomic outcome.
   Third, and finally, we provide a framework for understanding the choices of capital
account policies of reserve accumulation and capital control. Here the model encompasses
both the so-called mercantilist and precautionary motives for reserve accumulations and
connects capital account policies with real exchange rate determination. We embed the
mercantilist motive (cf. Rodrik (2008)) which explains reserve accumulation as a means to
promote export sectors and hence future economic growth. If exports generate a positive
technology spillover, then this learning-by-doing externality on growth implies that
reserve accumulation can be beneficial by expanding the export sector. However private
agents cannot internalize the externality, so the government will intervene with capital
account policies. We embed the precautionary motive (cf. Jeanne and Rancière (2011))
which holds that a country accumulates reserves to avert output or consumption losses in
a “sudden stop” crises. Under this view, the government accumulates foreign reserves as
insurance against loss of credit access. Rather than asserting that one motive outperforms
the other, we incorporate both motives into an integrated framework. For tractability, we
presume that there are two parameters which represent the degree of learning-by-doing
externality and the degree of crisis loss, respectively. The optimal capital account policy
then naturally takes these two parameters into account and we show how this determines
the level of reserve accumulation and capital control simultaneously.
   Our new model thus makes key predictions on many dimensions: on reserve accumu-
lation and capital control policies; on gross versus net external positions; and on public
versus private asset positions. It is therefore much richer than the standard model, and
offers a range of testable predictions. The intuition for its main predictions is as follows:
   • If an economy is more vulnerable to a crisis, the government will want to accumulate
     more precautionary savings in the form of reserves. At the same time the private
     sector will want to expand its balance sheet as a reaction to the government financing
     of the additional reserves; they will increase their holdings of the domestic bonds
     that government sells (this is effectively the same as present and future tax payments,
     under Ricardian Equivalence); and at the same time they will increase their issuance
     of external debt to fund these outgoings and maintain consumption smoothing.
     If more such private external borrowing is needed, the government then wants
     to liberalize capital controls (i.e., impose lower capital flow taxes) trading that off
     against the mercantilist incentive to impose such taxes to promote export-led growth
     accompanied by a weaker real exchange rate.

                                             4
   • On the other hand, if an economy has more learning-by-doing externalities related
     to a trade surplus, the government will seek to improve its trade balance. To achieve
     this the government will want to accumulate reserves. At the same time, they will
     also want to mute private capital flows, so less private external borrowing is needed,
     and the government then wants to tighten capital controls (i.e., impose higher capital
     flow taxes) which now aligns with the mercantilist incentive to impose such taxes
     to promote export-led growth accompanied by a weaker real exchange rate.
To provide more specific details on the mechanisms, the model predicts the following
key linkages from deep parameters to the public/private components of the international
investment position. First, there is a simple, positive standard wealth effect which links
increases in private sector wealth shocks to increases in the optimal stock of private
external assets. Second, there is an offsetting balance-sheet mechanism (equally so in the
baseline model) which links increases in the vulnerability to a crisis to increases in both
the optimal stock of public external assets and private external liabilities. Lastly, the model
displays a positive linkage between a learning-by-doing externality and the optimal stock
of public external assets, which arises from a “mercantilistic” real depreciation channel.
   Consequently, after tracing out these balance sheet impacts, our model shows that
the endogenous real exchange rate will tend to be higher (more appreciated) with more
wealth, will have a flat response to higher vulnerability to a crisis, and will tend to be
lower (more depreciated) with a larger learning-by-doing externality.
   Our goal is to use the new model as a laboratory to examine the relationship between
the real exchange rate, reserve accumulation, and capital controls, and then compare the
model with the data. Of course our model may not capture the full range of factors driving
reserve accumulation. Nonetheless, the framework is insightful in capturing some key
mechanisms, and it could have important implications for debates not just in international
macro-finance, but in growth and development. We close with some corroborating
evidence showing the association between reserve accumulation and outcomes such
as the trade surplus, GDP growth, and TFP growth; reserve accumulation is strongly
associated with the trade surplus, GDP and TFP growth in financially closed economies.
However, the association disappears in financially open economies. We believe the
patterns supports our theoretical mechanism.
   In the next section, we present a simple new theory of real exchange rate determi-
nation. Then, in Section 3, we lay out our empirical analysis: we provide our empirical
specification of real exchange rate determination, show our results, and check robustness.
Section 4 documents a rationale for capital account policies and Section 5 concludes. To
close out this introduction we briefly relate our arguments to the existing literature.

                                              5
Literature Review Our paper is related to several lines of prior work. Most notably,
the relationship between RER and NFA is empirically documented in Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2004), who confirm a positive association. Controlling for relative GDP and
the terms of trade, they find statistically significant results in line with the standard
wealth effect.5 However, they do not distinguish external assets held by the official
sector—reserve accumulation—nor do they take capital controls into account. As the
recent reserve accumulations in emerging markets have been so dramatic, the marginal
effect of net external assets estimated using pre-2004 data may no longer hold and in
this paper we expand the observations from 1975 up to 2007, covering more of the recent
high-accumulation period.
    Reserve accumulations in emerging markets have been large for the last couple of
decades. Reserve accumulation used to be understood as a central bank instrument
for maintaining nominal exchange rate stability, or as a fund to cope with short-term
payments difficulties. However as argued in Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010),
Jeanne and Rancière (2011) and others, the current level of reserve accumulation appears
to be too high to be rationalized by the old conventional wisdom. Furthermore Gourinchas
and Jeanne (2013) and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2014) argue that it is also
related to the Allocation Puzzle: capital flows upstream, instead of downstream.
    One strand of literature advocates the so-called mercantilist motive as a rationale for
reserve accumulation. Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2004) and Korinek and
Serven (2016) argue that emerging economies have been devaluing their currencies in
order to facilitate their export sectors and growth, and that reserve accumulation is the
policy instrument used to undervalue the currency. On the other hand, a different strand
of literature focused on crises and financial stability has emphasized the precautionary
motive for reserve accumulation. Jeanne and Rancière (2011) provide a framework
where reserve accumulation is in essence an insurance contract, approximated by a
state-contingent contract with international investors. Likewise, Hur and Kondo (2013)
cite increased roll-over risk after the nineties as an important determinant.6
    Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010) propose a precautionary rationale based on
   5 See also Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002). In Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti, and Lee (2008), instead of the terms of
trade and relative GDP, they control for commodity terms of trade and productivity differentials and obtain
similar results. Galstyan and Velic (2017) analyze nonlinearities in short-run RER dynamics. They measure
RER misalignments of using public debts as fundamentals, and estimate the dynamics of RER mean
reversion incorporating a debt threshold. Interestingly, they find negative long-run movement between
RER strength and public debt.
   6 Michaud and Rothert (2014) specifically focus on China and claim that capital controls facilitate growth.

Rabe (2014) evaluates the welfare gains for China of reserve accumulation using a quantitative model, and
concludes that the “mercantilist” motive by itself cannot account for the high level of Chinese reserves.



                                                       6
the a “double drain” model. They incorporate monetary base (M2) which proxies for
the financial development of the economy, and the liquid wealth which could potentially
escape via capital flight during a crisis; they predict the level of reserve accumulation
with more accuracy than previous empirical models. Almost a decade ago, Aizenman
and Lee (2007) sought to empirically compare the mercantilist and the precautionary
motives. They used econometric specifications where international reserves are regressed
on proxy variables which are thought to be related to the mercantilist view such as lagged
export growth, and variables which are related to precautionary motive such as a crisis
dummy. They compared the effects and concluded that the precautionary motive view
was more supported by the evidence at that time. But rationales may shift, and Ghosh,
Ostry, and Tsangarides (2016) have argued that the motives of emerging economies to
increase reserves have varied over time.
    Several empirical studies document that more international reserves actually decreases
the likelihood of financial crises, consistent with precautionary view. Frankel and Saravelos
(2012) claim that reserve accumulation and past movements in the real exchange rate
were the two leading indicators of the varying incidence of the Global Financial Crisis.
More broadly, Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) use panel analysis of many countries and
years to conclude that higher foreign reserves are associated with a reduced probability
of a crisis in emerging markets, all else equal. Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2009)
document that higher reserves compared to predicted levels were associated with smaller
subsequent nominal exchange rate depreciations after 2008.
    Even if these types of studies are successful in revealing the true motives behind
the reserve accumulation, they do not address the effect of the accumulation on real
exchange rates.7 Our work provides new empirical facts concerning external adjustment
and real exchange rates. We argue that to account for how external assets affect the real
exchange rate it is important to figure out whether the asset is held by the public or
private sector, and also to consider whether the real exchange rate could be misaligned
due to externalities. With our new perspective and empirical findings, we fill some of the
gaps left by the previous literature.
    We stress the role of gross external asset positions throughout our analysis. Several
very recent papers also claim that this is important in understanding reserve accumu-
lations. In these papers, increases in reserves can be understood as capital outflows
by the government, the effects of which depend on the behavior of offsetting private
capital inflows. These can depend on capital controls, or other financial or institutional
   7 For
       a discussion of a more narrowly-defined effect of reserve accumulation (sterilized intervention) on
nominal exchange rate, see Blanchard, Adler and de Carvalho Filho (2015).


                                                    7
frictions. Bayoumi, Gagnon, and Saborowski (2015) empirically estimate the determinants
of medium-term current accounts and find reserve accumulation to be a critical factor: a
one dollar increase in reserve accumulation cause a 42 cent increase in current account
balances. Especially they stress the importance of capital control; an additional one dollar
increase in reserve accumulation increases current account balances more in financially
closed countries. Jeanne (2013) argues that nominal devaluation is not plausible especially
in the long run. He instead claims that reserve accumulation combined with capital
control is an instrument to depreciate the real exchange rate in the Chinese economy. By
having capital account policies, he argues that the Chinese government tries to control
the gross external position to affect the real exchange rate. In a similar vein, Benigno
and Fornaro (2012) construct a quantitative model of real devaluation where reserve
accumulation with imperfect capital mobility depreciates the real exchange rate and
thus reallocates production inputs to the tradable sector, boosting growth. Bacchetta,
Benhima, and Kalantzis (2013) claim that the policy combination of capital controls and
international reserve is the optimal policy, similar to ours. However, they take a different
perspective, focusing on the best policy to overcome international borrowing constraints,
and abstracting from real exchange rate undervaluation and the mercantilist view.
   An alternative viewpoint does not see reserve accumulation as a policy instrument to
curb private capital inflows. Works by Alfaro and Kanzcuk (2009) and Bianchi, Hatchondo
and Martinez (2013) lean toward a sovereign-focused model of reserve accumulation
which incorporates crises and a role for the gross external position; these papers ask
why a government holds external asset and liability positions simultaneously as it copes
with crises. The former address the question and conclude that hoarding reserves is
sub-optimal; the latter argue that by having a duration mismatch between external assets
and liabilities, reserve accumulation may be helpful in managing a sudden stop.
   There is little, or weak, empirical evidence that capital controls reduce the probability
of crisis, and theory can cut both ways with no clear consensus. After the recent Global
Financial Crisis, a vast literature has debated this issue. Because of a pecuniary externality
in the model, Bianchi (2011) and Jeanne and Korinek (2010) call for capital controls;
meanwhile Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2016) call for exchange rate policy
during the crisis, instead of ex-ante capital controls. Turning to the data, Glick and
Hutchison (2011) claim that capital controls have not effectively insulated economies
from currency crises in recent years. However, Bussière et al. (2015) argue that countries
with high reserves suffered less during the Global Financial Crisis, and that the effect
of reserves is slightly stronger when combined with capital controls. The interaction
results are not robust without outliers, however. So we interpret the current state of

                                              8
empirical evidence as saying that the effect of capital controls on crisis risk is minimal
and unproven.
     Finally, our work is related to the literature on capital account policies and economic
growth. Rodrik (2008) argues that undervaluation of the currency stimulates economic
growth. Our paper is consistent with that argument, and embeds it in a formal model.
The joint capital account policy choice, over reserve accumulation and capital controls,
which is associated with a real exchange rate outcome, also maps into trade surplus and
economic growth outcomes. We therefore also contribute to the discussion of whether
financial account openness is related to economic growth, and by what channels. Kose,
Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009) argue that financial globalization leads to economic growth
in developing countries, but with many nuances. In that same vein, we will conclude with
the argument that—in our model and in reality—countries which have exploited a growth
externality from the export sector, and which accumulated high reserves combined with
less financial openness, did indeed attain higher GDP and TFP.


2.    The Basic Model with Exogenous Capital Account Policies

In this section we introduce a theoretical benchmark model to guide our empirical analysis.
The model builds on Jeanne (2013) and it incorporates both reserve accumulation and
capital controls as two policy instruments. This sets us up for a later section, where we
will explore how the combination of two policy instruments will enable the government
to target two economic outcome variables.
     Specifically, the government can control both the level of reserve accumulation (for
precautionary reasons) and the level of exports (for mercantilist reasons). Through these
choices, the resulting endogenous level of consumption ties down the real exchange rate
outcome as well, yielding novel predictions about the RER-NFA relationship in a variety
of parameter scenarios. In particular, our model implies a new and notable deviation
from the standard positive wealth effect of NFA on RER. Instead, we show how reserve
accumulation and RER can have a negative relationship, and we find that the degree of
negativity is magnified when the degree of capital control is high.
     We assume a small open economy with two goods (tradable and nontradable), two
periods (t = 1, 2), and two financial markets (domestic and international). The economy
contains a representative private agent who consumes a composite good, issues an
international bond, holds a domestic bond issued by the government, pays a “capital
control” tax on issued international bonds and receives (or pays) lump-sum government
transfers (tax). The government is the counterpart in the lump-sum tax or transfer,

                                              9
issues domestic bonds, takes revenue from the “capital control” tax on international
bonds, and accumulates an external asset (i.e., international reserves). We assume that
foreign investors cannot participate in the domestic financial market. For the moment,
we presume that government decisions are exogenous, but we will endogenize them in
the next section.
   We assume that the utility maximization problem of the representative agent is
                                                                                      
                                                                          1
                       max{cT       N      ∗                 u ( c1 ) +        u ( c2 ) ,
                             1,2 , c1,2 , d , a }                       1 + r∗

where the agent’s utility is derived from a composite good composed of tradable and
nontradable goods with constant elasticity, such that

                                        1          σ −1                  σ −1
                                                                                    σ−σ 1
                                                                      1
                                     θT         ctT          + (θ N ) ctN
                                            σ
                         ct =                           σ             σ       σ
                                                                                             ,   (1)


the maximization is subject to the budget constraints

             c1T + p1 c1N + a + τ (d∗ , κ ) ≤ (1 + ω )y T + p1 y N + d∗ + T1 ,                   (2)
               c2T + p2 c2N + (1 + r ∗ )d∗ ≤ (1 + ḡ)y T + p2 y N + (1 + r ) a + T2 ,            (3)

and where u(·) is a standard CRRA utility function with risk-aversion parameter γ; ctT and
ctN denote tradable and nontradable goods consumption levels in period t, respectively;
ω is a fraction of tradable output, representing the shock to initial external wealth, or
equivalently the initial endowment shock; the tradable goods is a numeraire and pt is the
price of the nontradable goods in period t; y T and y N are the tradable and nontradable
endowment levels in period t, respectively; d∗ is the international bond issued (i.e., the
external private debt); a is the domestic bond issued by the government; r and r ∗ are the
domestic and international interest rates, respectively (and, for simplicity, r ∗ is the agent’s
discount rate); ḡ is the growth rate of the domestic tradable goods sector; τ (d∗ , κ ) is the
“capital control” tax schedule on external debt, which may be nonlinear in the debt issues,
and also depends on the degree of capital control measured by a shift parameter κ; and
Tt is the government lump-sum transfer to the agent (or tax, if negative).
   The government budget constraint is

                                     rsrv∗ + T1 ≤ a + τ (d∗ , κ ),                               (4)
                                T2 + (1 + r ) a ≤ (1 + r ∗ )rsrv∗ ,                              (5)



                                                               10
where rsrv∗ is the official external asset, that is reserve accumulation.
   A key concept for us is the real exchange rate (RER), defined as

                                            rert ≡ pt .

Nontradable consumption will be equal to nontradable endowment each period, and
thus the market for nontradable goods clears trivially. But tradable consumption can be
intertemporally adjusted by way of external asset holdings.
   Combining budget constraints (2), (3), (4), (5), the feasible consumption sets are

                            c1T = (1 + ω )y T − (rsrv∗ − d∗ );                                  (6)
                            c2T = (1 + ḡ)y T + (1 + r ∗ )(rsrv∗ − d∗ );                        (7)
                     c1N = c2N = y N .                                                          (8)

It should be noted that rsrv∗ − d∗ is the economy’s net foreign asset holding (NFA),
another key concept for us.
   We will also assume that the “capital control” tax schedule is weakly increasing and
non-concave with each argument,

                         0 ≤ τi (d∗ , κ ) < 1               for i = 1, 2,
                         0 ≤ τij     (d∗ , κ )              for i, j = 1, 2.

where τi (·), τij (·) denote the partial derivative with respect to ith and jth arguments.
   Note that, since the government levies the tax on the level of the private capital outflow
d∗ , the second derivative condition implies that the marginal tax rate is increasing with
the level of private borrowing.
   Now, to solve the model, we denote the Lagrangian multipliers for the agent’s budget
                                     1
constraints (2) and (3) as λ1 and   1+r ∗ λ 2 ,   respectively. The equilibrium conditions are then

                                    θ N ctT
                                                  = pσt ,   for t = 1, 2;                       (9)
                                    θ T ctN
                                              λ2
                           1 − τ1 (d∗ , κ ) =    ;                                             (10)
                                              λ1
                                              1 + r∗
                           1 − τ1 (d∗ , κ ) =        .                                         (11)
                                              1+r

The first condition (9) links relative consumption to the price of the nontradable goods,
and hence the real exchange rate. In our model, the endowment of the nontradable


                                                     11
goods is fixed and cannot be transferred intertemporally, so any variation in the current
real exchange rate is directly tied to variations in the current consumption level of the
tradable good; RER will go up (down), that is appreciate (depreciate), if and only if
the tradable consumption increases (decreases). Thus, if initial wealth increases, raising
current consumption, the current real exchange rate will appreciate, the standard result.
   We can now establish three propositions regarding real exchange rate.

Proposition 1. Given the level of reserve accumulation (rsrv∗ ) and the degree of capital control
parameter (κ), and increase in the current endowment of tradable goods (ω) will cause an
appreciation of the current real exchange rate,

                                           ∂rer1
                                                 ≥ 0.
                                            ∂ω

Proof. See Appendix.

   This first result is intuitive. It implies that the country experiences a stronger currency
as its current endowment (or, equivalently, its external wealth) increases, the standard
positive wealth effect. This first proposition could be seen to be empirically supported by
the well-established positive correlation in the current literature between external asset
holdings and the real exchange rate. This mechanism will also operate in our model, all
else equal, and will continue to be supported by the evidence we show later.

Proposition 2. Given current endowment (ω) and the degree of capital control index (κ), increas-
ing reserve accumulation (rsrv∗ ) will depreciate the current real exchange rate. That is,

                                           ∂rer1
                                                 ≤ 0.
                                          ∂rsrv∗

Proof. See Appendix.

Proposition 3. Given current endowment (ω) and reserve accumulation (rsrv∗ ), increasing the
degree of capital control index (κ) will depreciate the current real exchange rate, That is,

                                           ∂rer1
                                                 ≤ 0.
                                            ∂κ

Proof. See Appendix.

   These two results builds on equilibrium condition (10), where reserves and marginal
“capital control” tax rate together affects (compared to the economy without any tax on the
international debt) the intertemporal decision between period 1 and 2. For example, if the

                                                  12
growth rate ḡ − ω exceeds the international interest rate r ∗ , the agent will try to increase
her current consumption to a level that exceeds her endowment in the period 1, by
issuing an external bond in the international financial market. However if the government
imposes a tax on the bond so issued, it will be more costly for her to transfer goods
from the future to the present. So she would then reduce her intertemporal consumption
re-allocation according to the magnitude of the marginal tax rate. If the marginal tax rate
is higher, the agent will borrow less and consume less in period 1, and we know from the
first condition that this will lead to a current real exchange rate depreciation.
     Finally, we note one final and important simplifying feature of our model. The
third equilibrium condition (11) implies that domestic interest rate has to be equated
to international interest rate adjusted for the marginal tax wedge. Indeed, this result
is independent of whether reserve accumulation is financed by a lump-sum tax or by
issuing domestic bonds. For example, suppose that the government levies a lump-sum
tax to finance the reserve accumulation. The same economy can be replicated with
domestic bond issuance equivalent to the lump-sum tax, as long as the government offers
a domestic interest rate that satisfies the equilibrium condition (11). This simplifies our
model enormously. Although it is an important issue, we will focus mainly on reserve
accumulation through lump-sum taxation, and abstract from domestic bond issuance.


3.     Empirical Analysis

3.1.        Data
In this section, we describe the data and variables used in our empirical work. The
sample includes 22 advanced and 53 developing and emerging economies, as listed in
Table A.6.8 For these countries, we constructed a balanced annual panel of net foreign
assets excluding reserves, international reserves, relative outputs, the terms of trade, and
capital control indices. We mainly focus on the 1975–2007 period, but will also check the
robustness of our results with an extension to include the Global Financial Crisis period
2008–2011.
     8 We
        include as many countries as the data permits. For the dataset of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007),
we linearly interpolate missing data for the early periods (70’s and early 80’s) of Brazil and China. We
exclude countries with more than seven missing observations in the data set of financial openness index
KAOPEN from Chinn and Ito (2008), except for countries such as China, Netherlands, Switzerland, etc.
We further exclude financial centers, countries with very high net foreign assets (more than 500% of GDP),
extremely volatile real exchange rate movement (more than 150% depreciation between periods), some very
small or poor countries, and dollarized economies. The following countries are filtered out by these criteria:
Hong Kong, Singapore, Mauritius, Kuwait, Ghana, Grenada, Malta, Ethiopia, El Salvador, and Panama.
The inclusion or exclusion of these filtered countries does not change our overall results.


                                                     13
      For net foreign assets and international reserves, we take data from the standard
source, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). Net foreign assets is defined as

               NFA = Foreign Assets − Foreign Liabilities
                     = (FDIA + EQA + DEBTA + RES) − (FDIL + EQL + DEBTL) ,

where RES is international reserve assets; FDIA, EQA, and DEBTA denote foreign direct
investment assets, equity investment assets, and debt investment assets, respectively; and
FDIL, EQL, and DEBTL denote foreign direct investment liabilities, equity investment
liabilities, and debt investment liabilities, respectively.
      However, we are interested in implication of net external assets held by the private
sector and the public sector. Therefore we decompose NFA into private and official
components, rewriting the terms as

              NFA = Foreign Assets net of Reserves − Foreign Liabilities + Reserves
                    = (NFA − RES) + RES,

where we will then define the following new variables normalized by GDP,

                  NFAxR ≡ (NFA − RES) / GDP,                    RSRV ≡ RES / GDP.

      For key control variables, following Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004) we construct
relative output and real (effective) exchange rates using trade weights. Let

                                           Mi             Xi
                                 ψij =            mij +          xij ,
                                         Mi + X i       Mi + X i

be the the trade weight of country i with country j, where Mi and Xi are country i’s
imports and exports, mij is the share of country i’s imports originating from country j, and
 j
xi is the share of country i’s exports going to country j. We calculate the trade patterns for
the period 1994–96 and take averages over those years.9 The real effective exchange rate
(denoted REER) is constructed as the ratio between the home CPI and the trade-weighted
partner’s CPI.10 Both indices are calculated in a common currency (U.S. dollar) using
period-average nominal exchange rate. Relative output (denoted YD) will be constructed
     9 Weuse the Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) from IMF to obtain bilateral trade data.
     10 The
         IFS effective exchange rates are based on trade weights over the period of 1999–2001 and incorporate
service trade if available. Weights are barely different from ours. In a robustness check, we use the IMF real
effective exchange rate indices and results are similar. Bayoumi, Jayanthi, and Lee (2006) provide details of
the IMF index.


                                                     14
similarly as the ratio of home country real GDP per capita to the trade-weighted partner
countries’ real GDP per capita. Thus, we define
                                            "        #ψij                             "        #ψij
                                                Pi                                        yi
                       REERi =     ∏            Pj
                                                            ,        YDi =   ∏            yj
                                                                                                      ,
                                   j 6 =i                                    j 6 =i


where Pi is the CPI of country i in common currency, and yi is the real GDP per capita of
country i.11 We take CPI and GDP data from from International Financial Statistics (IFS) by
IMF, and from Penn World Table 7.1, FRED, or the central bank of the economy if missing.
For real GDP per capita we take data from national accounts divided by population from
IFS as default and use rgdp from Penn World Table 7.1 if the data are missing in IFS.12
    The terms of trade is defined as the ratio of a country’s export prices to import prices:

                                                           Pex
                                                      TTi = im ,
                                                           P

where data are from IFS. We use ratios of export to import unit values if these are
missing.13
    Finally, we take the financial openness index KAOPEN from Chinn and Ito (2008) and
construct a continuous capital controls measure KAControl by inverting its sign,

                                    KAControl = −KAOPEN,

where KAOPEN is a standardized (mean 0, s.d. 1) measure of de jure financial openness
from IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.14
    For most of our analysis, however, we derive a binary version of this capital control
measure, denoted KAClosed ∈ {0, 1}, as shown in Table A.6. Our reasoning is that we
focus on long-run effects of capital account policies, and also on relative openness rather
  11 We  note that our sample does not cover most of the Eastern European countries and Russia, former
communist countries due to the data availabilities
  12 Note the use of country fixed effects estimation (or diff-in-diff) below will mean that the cross-country

non-comparability of units of non-PWT real GDP per capita variables will not be of any consequence
  13 As argued in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004), we presume the terms of trade are endogenous to an

individual economy if and only if it has significant market power in international markets. With the
inclusion of the the terms of trade in our empirical real exchange rate analysis, our results support the
predictions of the model, which stresses the relative price between nontradable and tradable goods sectors.
  14 Most of cross-country time series of capital controls are de jure measures based on the IMF’s Annual

Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, which captures legal restrictions. Empirically-
based de facto indicators of capital account restrictions are very hard to construct. We claim that a de jure
type of measure is a more appropriate index for our analysis as in our theory it should correspond to κ, the
measure of restrictions or overall “capital control” in the form of a shifter to the tax schedule on external
debt (τ (d∗ , κ )), as defined above.


                                                                15
than the absolute level of openness. We note that the KAOPEN measure is stable during
the period, and focus more on changes in reserve accumulation. Also, the Chinn-Ito
measure is constructed over rolling windows, and is vulnerable to measurement errors.
Thus, for many countries, the level changes little over time and this may obscure long
run-trends and trigger collinearity problems. So, in most of the analysis in this paper,
we take the median of the index KAControl over the subperiod under analysis, and we
construct a binary indicator KAClosed for financially open economies and financially
closed economies, equal to 1 (0) for those with an index above (below) the median. We
note that, as a robustness check, we will incorporate alternative capital control measures
and the overall results do not change.
   We choose 1975, 1986, 1997, and 2008 as breaks when we divide the whole period into
the four subperiods:

                    1975–1985 :        Period1 ,                1986–1996 :        Period2 ,
                    1997–2007 :        Period3 ,                2008–2011 :        Period4 .

   Table 1 shows period averages of the variables designed to measure the two policy
instruments, RSRV and KAControl, with patterns as one might expect. The average
reserve accumulation of advanced countries was stable at around 5% to 7% in all periods.
At the same time, the average capital control index was low and falling in this group.
In contrast, the average reserve accumulation in developing countries sharply increased
from 9% at the start to 17% in period 3, and around 25% in period 4. Meanwhile, though
at much higher levels, capital controls have been slowly relaxed in developing countries.15
If we further divide the sample into financial openness bins using the KAClosed binary
indicator, we can see that average reserve accumulation was higher in financially open
economies up until 1996, but higher in financially closed economies thereafter.


3.2.      Results
Determinants of the Real Exchange Rate: Preliminary Panel Analysis We begin with
a baseline empirical specifications for 1975–2007 to give some preliminary empirical
guidance. We take the average of each variable in periods 1, 2, and 3, and estimate the
model with OLS. We run the following panel specification with country and period fixed
effects:

                 log( REERi,T ) = αi + DT + β NFAxR NFAxRi,T + β RSRV RSRVi,T
  15 We   provide a rationale for this slower pace of capital control liberalization in Section 4.


                                                        16
 Table 1: Summary Statistics: Average Values for Reserve Accumulation and Capital Control Variables

                                        Period1          Period2         Period3         Period4
                                      (1975–1985)      (1986–1996)     (1997–2007)     (2008–2011)
(a) Advanced Countries
RSRV (%of GDP)                            5.15%           6.71%            5.91%           7.69%
KAControl (standardized)                 −0.51           −1.44            −2.26           −2.17

(b) Developing Countries
RSRV (%of GDP)                            8.90%            8.80%          16.44%          25.45%
KAControl (standardized)                  0.58             0.56           −0.11           −0.25

(c) Financially Open Economies
RSRV (%of GDP)                            8.49%           8.67%           11.14%          15.26%
KAControl (standardized)                 −0.47           −0.99            −1.97           −1.96

(d) Financially Closed Economies
RSRV (%of GDP)                            7.09%            7.69%          15.63%          25.35%
KAControl (standardized)                  1.04             0.97            0.53            0.37



                                   + βKAControl KAControli,T
                                   + βYD log (YDi,T ) + β TT log ( TTi,T ) + ei,T ,            (12)

where T is period 1, 2, or 3, DT is a period fixed effect, and αi is a country fixed effect.
We believe this specification gives useful preliminary evidence on our theoretical model
of reserves, capital controls, and the real exchange rate.
   Estimates of equation (12) are shown in Table 2. In column (1) we show the result
using the full sample period 123. Conditional on relative GDP and the terms of trade,
an increase in NFA to GDP (net of reserves) of one percentage point is associated with a
real exchange rate appreciation of 0.18 percent. This is consistent with previous studies
and the standard wealth effect. However, a one percentage point increase in reserve
accumulation as a share of GDP is associated with a real exchange rate depreciation of
0.95 percent. And a one unit increase in the capital control index is associated with a real
exchange rate depreciation of 0.08 percent.
   Note also that we can split the sample, and if we focus on period 12, the negative
association between reserve accumulation and GDP disappears, suggesting that earlier
work on shorter samples was not at fault, but was unlikely to pick up this effect given
the data then at hand. In column (2), an increase in NFA to GDP (net of reserves) of one
percentage point is associated with a real exchange rate appreciation of 0.39 percent in the
earlier period. At the same time, a one percentage point increase in reserve accumulation

                                                  17
   Table 2: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Three-Period Panel with Fixed Effects

                                                                       Full Sample
Dependent variable:                              Period 123             Period 12              Period 23
log(REER)                                       (1975–2007)            (1975–1996)            (1986–2007)
                                                     (1)                    (2)                   (3)
NFAxR                                                0.18*                0.39**                  0.12*
                                                     (1.71)                (2.16)                 (1.70)
RSRV                                               -0.95***                  0.16               -0.98***
                                                    (-2.70)                (0.26)                (-2.92)
KAControl                                          -0.08***              -0.11***                -0.04**
                                                    (-3.73)               (-3.67)                (-2.17)
ln YD                                                 0.10                  -0.13                  0.08
                                                     (1.11)               (-0.80)                 (0.87)
ln TT                                                 0.11               0.46***                   -0.09
                                                     (1.17)                (2.75)                (-0.74)
Observations                                         225                   150                    150
Countries                                             75                    75                     75
R2                                                  0.310                 0.349                  0.268
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We take
the average over 11 years for each variable (in levels) and perform a three (or two)-period panel analysis.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


as a share of GDP is associated with a real exchange rate appreciation 0.16 percent,
but this is statistically insignificant. A one unit increase in the capital control index is
associated with a real exchange rate depreciation of 0.11 percent. When we focus on
the later period 23 in column (3), reserve accumulation is now significantly associated
with real exchange rate depreciation, with a large coefficient of 0.98. Thus, the negative
coefficient stands out during this latter period, and the result for the full sample is mainly
driven by period 23. The positive association between NFA and the real exchange rate is
preserved in period 23, and the effect of capital controls is weaker.
    Overall, and especially in recent times, the coefficients on reserves and capital controls
are both statistically significant, and work in ways that can overturn or offset the standard
wealth effect. The key message is that to fully understand the effect of NFA changes on
the real exchange rate, we need to allow for the complex interactions of capital account
policies in the form of reserve accumulation and capital controls. This, in a nutshell, is
the key message of this paper, supported by a set of new empirical findings which line
up with the predictions of the new theoretical model presented above. The rest of this
paper is, in essence, a thorough robustness and consistency check on these results.




                                                    18
Determinants of the Real Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis Next we focus on
OLS differences-in-differences estimation. This provides for comparability with prior
work, with a specification like that in the seminal work of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004),
using a balanced 3-period cross-section.
   As noted, although we are interested in two policy instruments, our baseline approach
stresses the effect of reserve accumulations on the real exchange rate, given the level of
capital controls. Some reasons, again, are that the capital control measure shows little
variation over time and this measure is very vulnerable to measurement errors. Thus, we
argue that instead of the raw capital control index, our binary indicator KAClosed is a
more appropriate measure in terms of taking the model to empirics. We presume that
each country is either financially open or closed. We then use our binary capital controls
indicator in an interaction term with reserves changes.
   We calculate the average of each variable for each period 1, 2, and 3. Then we take
the difference between periods. More specifically, for country i, and variable x we define
∆xi,T1 T2 = xi,T2 − xi,T1 , where T1 T2 are 12, or 23 (i.e., periods 1 to 2, and 2 to 3).
   We start the analysis with the interaction term omitted, and estimate

       ∆ log( REERi,T1 T2 ) = α + DT + β NFAxR ∆NFAxRi,T1 T2 + β RSRV ∆RSRVi,T1 T2
                              + βYD ∆log YDi,T1 T2 + β TT ∆log TTi,T1 T2 + ei ,
                                                                       
                                                                                            (13)

where T1 T2 is period 12 or period 23. We add a period fixed effect DT to this regression
in cases where we pool period 12 and period 23, which we label period123. Note that
since the real effective exchange rate, relative GDP per capita, and terms of trade are
log indices, it is meaningless to compare levels of these variables, hence our use of
differences-in-differences.
   We obtained estimates for equation (13) and in Table 3 we show the result of the
pooled regression for period 123. Again column (1) shows a departure from previous
studies: we find that the marginal effect of reserve accumulation is clearly different from
that of external assets held by a private sector. Conditional on relative GDP and the terms
of trade, an increase in NFA to GDP (net of reserves) of one percentage point is associated
with a real exchange rate appreciation of 0.19 percent, which is the standard wealth effect
and consistent with the previous literature. However, an increase in reserve accumulation
to GDP of one percentage point is associated with a real exchange rate depreciation of
0.89 percent. An F-test shows the hypothesis that β NFAxR = β RSRV can be rejected at the
1 percent significance level.
   Next we argue that the new result is mainly driven by developing countries. We split


                                                19
          Table 3: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis

                                                         Periods 12 (Average 86–96 minus Average 75–85)
                                                     & 23 (Average 97–07 minus Average 86–96), Pooled Sample

Dependent variable:                                 Full                  Advanced                Developing
∆ log(REER)                                        Sample                 Countries               Countries
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)            (6)
∆ NFAxR                                     0.19∗         0.24∗∗         -0.12       NA         0.20        0.25∗∗
                                           (1.84)          (2.40)       (-1.43)                (1.66)        (2.17)
∆ RSRV                                    -0.89∗∗∗          0.12         -0.01                -0.97∗∗        -0.05
                                           (-2.68)         (0.35)       (-0.02)               (-2.49)       (-0.11)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                        -1.77∗∗∗                                          -1.52∗∗∗
                                                          (-3.77)                                           (-2.81)
∆ ln YD                                     0.11            0.10         0.04                   0.03          0.02
                                           (0.98)          (0.98)       (0.28)                 (0.26)        (0.20)
∆ ln TT                                     0.07            0.11       0.34∗∗∗                  0.04          0.07
                                           (0.64)          (1.02)       (2.87)                 (0.31)        (0.63)
Period23 Dummy                             0.10∗∗         0.11∗∗∗       -0.04                 0.20∗∗∗      0.19∗∗∗
                                           (2.32)          (2.61)      (-0.88)                 (3.43)        (3.40)
Observations                                150             150           44                    106            106
Countries                                    75              75           22                     53             53
R2                                          0.10            0.15         0.19                   0.13           0.17
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                  0.00            0.76         0.82                   0.01           0.52
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                        0.00                                               0.00
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We
take the average over 11 years for each variable (in differences) and perform a pooled cross-sectional
analysis. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms
not reported.


the sample into developing countries and advanced countries. In column (5) of Table 3,
we see the result for developing countries for period 123: here a one percentage point
increase in NFA to GDP (net of reserves) is associated with a 0.20 percent appreciation
of the real exchange rate, while a one percentage point increase in reserves to GDP is
associated with an 0.97 percent depreciation of the real exchange rate. In advanced
countries, the terms of trade is the only statistically significant factor that affects the real
exchange rate, with no statistically meaningful impacts of NFA or reserve accumulation.
    We now claim, as before, that the result is also mainly driven by the later period.
Instead of a pooled regression, we estimate a separate regression for equation (13) by
period. Tables 4 and 5 show these results for period 12 and period 23, respectively. We
find that the negative relationship between the real exchange rate and reserves is very
prominent in period 23. Column (1) in Table 4 shows that in period 12 the coefficient
on NFAxR is positive and statistically significant while reserve accumulation coefficient
is also positively related to the real exchange rate: a one percentage point increase in

                                                       20
          Table 4: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis

                                                       Period 12 (Average 86–96 minus Average 75–85)
Dependent variable:                                   Full               Advanced               Developing
∆ log(REER)                                          Sample              Countries              Countries
                                               (1)            (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
∆ NFAxR                                      0.38∗∗       0.39∗∗      0.19         0.15      0.33∗       0.34∗
                                             (2.19)       (2.22)     (0.73)      (0.56)      (1.73)     (1.75)
∆ RSRV                                        0.32         0.62       0.21         0.10       0.12       0.35
                                             (0.50)       (0.81)     (0.31)      (0.14)      (0.18)     (0.42)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                          -1.53                   1.79                  -1.01
                                                          (-0.86)                 (0.95)                (-0.54)
∆ ln YD                                       -0.10        -0.09      -0.33        -0.25     -0.18       -0.17
                                             (-0.60)      (-0.56)    (-0.81)     (-0.54)    (-1.05)     (-1.03)
∆ ln TT                                      0.43∗∗       0.40∗∗     0.45∗∗      0.49∗∗      0.36∗       0.34∗
                                             (2.47)       (2.30)     (2.52)      (2.55)     (1.74)      (1.69)
Observations                                   75              75      22          22          53          53
Countries                                      75              75      22          22          53          53
R2                                            0.16            0.17    0.17        0.18        0.12        0.13
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                    0.93            0.77    0.98        0.95        0.79        0.99
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                          0.29                0.42                    0.49
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We take
the average over 11 years for each variable (in differences) and perform a cross-sectional analysis. t-statistics
in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.


external assets to GDP (net of reserves) is associated with an 0.38 percent appreciation
of the real exchange rate while a one percentage point increase in reserves to GDP is
associated with a statistically insignificant 0.32 percent appreciation. On the contrary,
the effect is clearly different in the period 23. Column (1) in Table 5 shows that a one
percentage point increase in NFAxR is associated with a 0.15 percent appreciation of
the real exchange rate. However a one percentage point increase in reserves to GDP is
associated with an 0.96 percent depreciation of the real exchange rate. The latter is not
only statistically significant but the magnitude is also very large. The all-country results
are again driven by developing economies. The column (1) results in Tables 4 and 5 are
broadly similar to the column (5) results in the same table.
    We claim that the negative relationship between reserves and RER is therefore clearly
emerging as a strong feature of developing countries and in the more recent period of
high reserve accumulation. As for the advanced countries, the results show a positive
wealth effect on real exchange rates in period 12. However the result is far from robust:
the coefficient is statistically insignificant and changes sign in the subsequent period. In
column (3) of Table 5, we could not find any statistically significant factor explaining the


                                                         21
          Table 5: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis

                                                       Period 23 (Average 97–07 minus Average 86–96)
Dependent variable:                                   Full                Advanced             Developing
∆ log(REER)                                          Sample               Countries            Countries
                                               (1)              (2)       (3)     (4)        (5)          (6)
∆ NFAxR                                      0.15∗∗           0.19∗∗∗    -0.17    NA        0.22∗∗      0.28∗∗∗
                                             (2.12)            (2.83)   (-1.50)              (2.21)      (2.96)
∆ RSRV                                      -0.96∗∗∗            -0.23    -0.12             -1.06∗∗∗       -0.08
                                             (-3.37)          (-0.62)   (-0.14)             (-2.72)     (-0.15)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                             -1.06∗∗                                   -1.31∗∗
                                                              (-2.33)                                   (-2.40)
∆ ln YD                                        0.13            0.14∗      -0.03              0.16         0.15
                                              (1.57)           (1.74)   (-0.11)             (1.62)       (1.52)
∆ ln TT                                        -0.16            -0.14     0.34              -0.15         -0.14
                                             (-1.22)          (-1.12)    (1.69)            (-1.10)      (-1.05)
Observations                                   75               75        22                 53           53
Countries                                      75               75        22                 53           53
R2                                            0.18             0.22      0.16                0.18        0.24
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                    0.00             0.28      0.96                0.01        0.50
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                           0.01                                      0.01
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We take
the average over 11 years for each variable (in differences) and perform a cross-sectional analysis. t-statistics
in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.


real exchange rate for this subsample.16
    This concludes our comparisons with prior work. Next we extend the specification,
and we ask whether, in line with our model, the effect of reserve accumulation on the real
exchange rate varies with the degree of capital controls. Thus we incorporate a capital
control interaction in the estimation of equation (13). We claim, again consistent with
our model, that the marginal effect is mostly neutral in countries with high financial
openness, and negative in countries with low financial openness.
    Column (2) in Table 3 shows the main result, and confirms that the association of
reserves with the real exchange rate in financially open economies is weaker than that
of NFA to GDP (net of reserves). However the association of reserves with the real
exchange rate varies with financial openness: a one percentage point increase in reserves
to GDP is associated with a statistically insignificant 0.12 percent real appreciation in
financially open countries, but a statistically significant 1.65 percent (0.12-1.77 percent)
real depreciation in financially closed economies. We also note that the wealth effect NFA
  16 We note that, since the study by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004), the ”External Wealth of Nations” data
have been revised. Among advanced countries, data for France and Netherlands are substantially revised.
With a small sample size the results for advanced countries are possibly affected by just a few outliers.


                                                         22
  Figure 1: The Real Exchange Rate Determination: Partial Scatters, All Countries, Periods 12 & 23


                               (a) dNFAxR                                                            (b) dRSRV                                                 (c) dRSRV * KAClosed
                                                PER2
           1




                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                      PER2                                                        PER2


                                                   IRN2                                                             SYR2                                                      IRN2SYR2
                                                                                                                    IRN2
                              SYR2
                                                   JPN2
                                                     BRA2                                                          JPN2                                                          JPN2
                                                                                                                                                                               BRA2
           .5




                                                                               .5




                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                                  TUR3
                                                                                                                   BRA2
                                         TUR3       SYR3
                                                      KEN3                                                                                                                             TUR3
                                                            LBY2                                                   SYR3
                                                       VEN3                                                       KEN3
                                                                                                                    CIV2                                                       NZL2 KEN3
                                                  AUT2
                                                    CHE2                                                                NZL2                                                   VEN3 CIV2 SYR3
                                                 MAR3
                                                  EGY2                                                            AUT2                                              JOR3       ESP2AUT2
                                                 ESP2
                                                 ITA2                                                             VEN3
                                                                                                                CHE2  ESP2                                               PRT2   LBY2
                                        NZL2 DNK2 JAM3
                                     CIV2                                                                      GRC3MAR3
                                                                                                                   EGY2
                                                                                                                   ITA2
                                                                                                                     LBY2
                                                                                                                      DNK2
                                                                                                                      FIN2
                                                                                                                                                                            JAM3  ITA2
                                                                                                                                                                               DNK2
                                                                                                                                                                                FIN2
                                                                                                                                                                              GTM3
                                                                                                                                                                               GRC2
                                                                                                                                                                               MEX3
                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE2
                                                                                                                                                                                     GRC3
                                       GRC3   FIN2
                                                GRC2
                                              HND3    SLB3 NGA3
                                                     IRL2                                                        KOR3
                                                                                                         PRT3 FRA2 HND3 GRC2
                                                                                                                       GTM3
                                                                                                                    CMR2                                                  PER3
                                                                                                                                                                             URY3CMR2
                                             GTM3
                                             FRA2MEX3PRT2
                                                  NLD2
                                                   ARG2                                     TTO2                     MEX3JAM3                                                  SWE2 FRA2MAR3
                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD2     EGY2
                                       PRT3 CMR2 GBR2
                                                    BEL2
                                                 URY3  ISR2
                                                        MDG3                                                  IRL2
                                                                                                               GBR3    SWE2 PRT2
                                                                                                                     NLD2
                                                                                                                    SLB3
                                                                                                                    ARG2
                                                                                                                    GBR2                                                           SLB3
                                                                                                                                                                                  GBR2
                                                                                                                                                                                   ARG2
                                                                                                                                                                                    IRL2
                                       TTO2
                                     KOR3      CYP3
                                             SWE2
                                                USA2
                                             COL3PER3   NOR2                                                     CYP3
                                                                                                                    ISL2 URY3
                                                                                                                  COL3
                                                                                                                  ARG3
                                                                                                                 CHN3
                                                                                                                    USA2
                                                                                                                    BEL2
                                                                                                                 USA3      PER3   JOR3                                        NOR2  GBR3
                                                                                                                                                                                   COL3
                                                                                                                                                                                  BEL2
                                                                                                                                                                                  USA2
                                                                                                                                                                                     CYP3
                                                                                                                                                                                  ISL2
                                                                                                                                                                                  USA3    PRT3
                                           GBR3ISL2
                                              USA3LKA3
                                                 CAN2
                                                SEN2KOR2                                                         LKA3
                                                                                                                  BRA3
                                                                                                                   NGA3
                                                                                                                    SEN2                                              TTO3 DNK3GMB2
                                                                                                                                                                                  LKA3
                                                                                                                                                                                  CAN2 ARG3 KOR3
                                                                                                                                                                                            HND3
                                          ARG3                                                                  ISR2CAN2
                                                                                                                  ISL3                                                             SEN2
                                                                                                                                                                                  ISL3
                                                                                                                                                                                   ISR2
                                      CHN3
                                        JOR3
                                            BRA3DOM3
                                                PHL2
                                              AUT3
                                            NLD3
                                            PHL3
                                             NPL3
                                              NZL3
                                                      DNK3
                                                     TZA3
                                                     ECU3
                                                   CHL3    TGO2
                                                           CHE3                                              NLD3
                                                                                                                DOM3
                                                                                                               AUT3  AUS2GMB2
                                                                                                                  MDG3
                                                                                                                   THA2
                                                                                                                   PHL3
                                                                                                                  NPL3
                                                                                                            ESP3KOR2   NOR2
                                                                                                                    PHL2
                                                                                                                    BDI2
                                                                                                                 IND3
                                                                                                                 NZL3
                                                                                                                                                                          ISR3     MDG3
                                                                                                                                                                                AUS3
                                                                                                                                                                          JPN3 MEX2  BRA3
                                                                                                                                                                                   AUT3
                                                                                                                                                                                   PHL2
                                                                                                                                                                                   AUS2
                                                                                                                                                                                    DOM3
                                                                                                                                                                                 NZL3
                                                                                                                                                                                  KOR2NLD3
                                                                                                                                                                                       NGA3
                                         ISL3
                                        GMB2AUS2MEX2
                                               AUS3
                                               ITA3       BEL3 BHR2                                               AUS3
                                                                                                                  THA3
                                                                                                                  TZA3
                                                                                                                ECU3
                                                                                                                CHL3
                                                                                                               ITA3
                                                                                                                  PRY3MEX2
                                                                                                                       DNK3                                                      CHL3
                                                                                                                                                                         SAU3 TGO2 ECU3PHL3
                                                                                                                                                                                      ESP3
                                                                                                                                                                                      NPL3
                                                                                                                                                                                   ITA3     CHN3
           0




                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                       THA2IND3
                                         ESP3    FRA3  CRI3                                                      FRA3
                                                                                                                  KEN2
                                                                                                                    NER2 ISR3TTO3
                                                                                                                 CYP2                                                             FRA3
                                                                                                                                                                                  CYP2
                                                                                                                                                                               CHE3KEN2  THA2
                                                                                                                                                                                       BDI2
                                                                                                                                                                                      TZA3
                                                                                                                                                                                        IND3
                                                                                                                                                                                      PRY3
                                        THA3
                                      BDI2  KEN2
                                            CYP2    JPN3
                                                 ISR3DEU2CIV3NOR3
                                                          IRL3                                              JOR2    TGO2
                                                                                                                   HND2
                                                                                                                 CHE3GMB3JPN3                                                PNG2
                                                                                                                                                                           BOL3   HND2
                                                                                                                                                                                CRI3
                                                                                                                                                                               TGO3      THA3
                                                                                                                                                                                      NER2
                                         NER2BHR3
                                               TTO3
                                              PAK3 FJI2 LBY3                                            BHR3        MAR2
                                                                                                                  PAK3
                                                                                                                 FIN3
                                                                                                                  BDI3
                                                                                                               BEL3 NPL2
                                                                                                                    FJI2                                                          BEL3
                                                                                                                                                                                  BDI3
                                                                                                                                                                                    GMB3
                                                                                                                                                                                   FIN3
                                             MAR2  PNG2
                                                 FJI3 CRI2                                                       CRI3
                                                                                                                 TGO3 DZA3 SAU3
                                                                                                                   LKA2
                                                                                                                DEU2                                                          NOR3FJI3
                                                                                                                                                                                     PAK3
                                                                                                                                                                                    DEU2            TTO2
   d ln(REER)




                                                                       d ln(REER)




                                                                                                                                           d ln(REER)
                                         HND2
                                            NPL2
                                         FIN3      URY2
                                                 SWE3  CAN3                                                      FJI3
                                                                                                                    PNG2
                                                                                                                   CIV3                                                MYS3 MYS2URY2 FJI2
                                                                                                                                                                                      NPL2
                                                                                                                                                                                      MAR2
                                                                                                                                                                                     LKA2JOR2
                                    JOR2    DZA3
                                           LKA2 CMR3
                                              SAU3                                                             SWE3
                                                                                                         IRL3 BHR2   URY2
                                                                                                                  CMR3
                                                                                                                  SEN3LBY3
                                                                                                                   TUR2    BOL3                                                CAN3  CIV3BHR3
                                                                                                                                                                                   SWE3
                                                                                                                                                                                   BHR2
                                    GMB3TGO3
                                     BDI3      TUR2
                                             BOL3
                                             SEN3        PNG3                                                       CRI2
                                                                                                                   NOR3                                                              CMR3
                                                                                                                                                                                   TUR2
                                                                                                                                                                                     CRI2
                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL3
                                              MYS2 GTM2                                                            CAN3 MYS2                                                IDN3SLB2
                                                DEU3
                                             DOM2                                                              DEU3  SLB2
                                                                                                                  DOM2
                                                                                                                  GTM2
                                                                                                                   PNG3                                                           PNG3
                                                                                                                                                                                    DEU3SEN3
                    PRY3                        MYS3                                                                         MYS3                                                   GTM2
                                                                                                                                                                                      DOM2
                                         SLB2IND2 CHL2
                                                 EGY3
                                                  DZA2
                                                COL2  JAM2 SAU2
                                                   NER3                                                            COL2
                                                                                                                  IND2
                                                                                                                  EGY3
                                                                                                                    CHL2  IDN3                                                  DZA2
                                                                                                                                                                                  IND2
                                                                                                                                                                                NER3COL2
                                                                                                                                                                                    EGY3
                                                 BOL2                                                               DZA2
                                                                                                                 NER3MDG2
                                                                                                                    BOL2
                                                                                                                  CHN2                                                         JAM2BOL2          DZA3
                                           IDN3VEN2
                                            CHN2                                                                     ECU2
                                                                                                                  VEN2 JAM2                                                        ECU2CHL2
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHN2
                                                   PAK2                                                                                                                         PAK2VEN2
                                                                                                                                                                                       MDG2      LBY3
                                          ECU2                                                         SAU2        PAK2
                                MDG2
           -.5




                                                                               -.5




                                                                                                                                                  -.5
                                           TZA2                                                                     TZA2
                                                                                                                     IDN2                                                           TZA2
                                                                                                                                                                                  IDN2   SAU2
                                         IDN2
                                               PRY2                                                                 NGA2                                                         NGA2
                                                                                                                                                                                PRY2
                                                                                                                   PRY2

                           NGA2
           -1




                                                                               -1




                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                            IRN3                                                                   IRN3
                                                                                                                                                                                      IRN3
           -1.5




                                                                               -1.5




                    -1        -.5        0             .5        1                    -.3      -.2      -.1    0           .1       .2            -1.5   -.2        -.1     0      .1                  .2
                                      dNFAxR                                                              dRSRV                                                     dRSRV * KAClosed
                  coef = .23685162, (robust) se = .09866104, t = 2.4                  coef = .12011033, (robust) se = .34743816, t = .35                 coef = -1.7728668, (robust) se = .47044226, t = -3.77




Notes: Pooled cross-sectional analysis for 75 countries over the period 1975–2007. The REER increases
when appreciates. We take the average of variables over the periods 1975–1985, 1986–1996, and 1997–2007,
then take the difference for pooled cross-sectional analysis. Results correspond to Table 3, column (2).


to GDP (net of reserves), is robust and stable as compared to the results in column (1).
     To get a clearer view of the story, Figure 1 shows partial scatterplots using the results
for the augmented specification (column (2)). The negative relationship between reserves
and the real exchange rate is seen in a quantitatively large and statistically significant
downward slope, a finding is consistent with our model. There is a clear departure in
the marginal effect of reserve accumulation, as compared to NFA net of reserves, and it
varies with the financial openness measure.
     Once again, we also see a distinction between the results in period 12 and the period
23, with the new findings emerging more strongly in later periods. In period 12, the
effect of RSRV and NFAxR is similar, as in Column (2), and the coefficient on reserves
and the interaction term is not statistically significant. However in period 23, there is
a much clearer distinction. Column (2) in Table 5 shows that a one percentage point


                                                                                                       23
increase in reserves to GDP is associated with a statistically insignificant 0.23 percent
real depreciation in financially open countries, but a statistically significant 1.29 percent
real depreciation in financially closed economies. An F-test shows that the hypothesis
β NFAXR = β RSRV ×Ccontrol can be rejected for developing countries during the period.
   Again, the result is mainly driven by developing countries. If we compare columns
(4) and (6) of Tables 4 and 5, the results are similar in developing countries but not
in advanced countries. We argue that our new findings are clearest in high-reserve-
accumulation periods and countries of recent international economic experience.

Determinants of the Real Exchange Rate: Panel Analysis Next, to make full use of
the all the observations in our dataset, we explored panel estimation, using annual data,
with the specification

               log( REERit ) = αi + Dt + β NFAxR NFAxRit + β RSRV RSRVit
                                 + βYD log(YDit ) + β TT log( TTit ) + eit ,              (14)

where Dt denotes a year fixed effect, and t denotes years rather than the period T. Here we
split the sample into financially open and closed economies based on KAClosed. We now
have many more observations and many results will appear statistically more significant.
   Regression estimates for equation (14) are shown in Tables 6, 7, and 8. We can
see that the wealth effect of NFAxR has a mostly positive effect in all cases. Column
(1) in Table 6 shows that that a one percentage point increase in NFA to GDP (net of
reserves) is associated with a 0.17 percent appreciation of the real exchange rate. The
coefficient from within estimation is thus similar to that in cross-sectional analysis, which
was 0.19 percent. Again, it is consistent with the result of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2004), and mostly driven by developing countries. However we see a difference in the
advanced countries group. Column (2) in Table 7 for advanced countries in period12
shows that a one percentage point increase in NFA to GDP (net of reserves) is associated
with a 0.22 percent appreciation of the real exchange rate. However, the result is not
stable and vanishes in the period of 1997–2007. As in cross sections, the real exchange
rate depreciation with reserve accumulation is clear in developing countries, and the
magnitude is higher during the time period of 1986–2007. Column (3) in Table 6 shows
that a one percentage point increase in reserve accumulation is associated with a 0.89
percent depreciation. Column (3) in Table 7 shows that the effect of reserves is -0.57
percentage point for period 12, where Table 8 shows that the effect is not only more
significant, but large in magnitude, with a coefficient of -0.91 percent, in period 23.


                                             24
        Table 6: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects

                                                           Period 123 (1975–2007)
Dependent variable:              Full       Advanced          Developing      Financially     Financially
log(REER)                       Sample      Countries         Countries          Open           Closed
                                  (1)           (2)               (3)                 (4)         (5)
NFAxR                            0.17***        -0.03            0.19**               0.12      0.21**
                                  (2.74)      (-0.63)             (2.55)            (1.56)      (2.47)
RSRV                            -0.98***        0.20            -0.89***              -0.24    -1.28***
                                 (-3.39)       (0.63)            (-2.78)            (-0.84)     (-3.88)
ln YD                            0.16**         0.05               0.10               0.22       0.11*
                                  (2.10)       (0.39)            (1.28)             (0.91)      (1.86)
ln TT                              -0.03        0.12              -0.06                0.06      -0.08
                                 (-0.56)       (1.54)            (-0.90)             (1.07)     (-0.90)
Observations                     2,475         726               1,749              1,254       1,221
Countries                         75            22                 53                38          37
R2                               0.188         0.23              0.273              0.092       0.31
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV       0.000        0.506              0.003              0.257       0.000
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


   Now we turn to the role of capital controls. We simply split the sample into two
subgroups by financial openness, using Ccontrol. Note that except for Iceland and Greece,
during the period 12, all other advanced countries had high financial openness index and
thus are grouped in financially open countries. The implication of the within estimation
is consistent with the cross-sectional analysis, and also confirm that the effect of reserves
varies over time. Columns (4) and (5) in Table 7 show the result for period 12: a one-
percent increase in reserve accumulation is associated with a statistically insignificant
0.33 percent depreciation of real exchange rate for financially open economies, and 1.06
percent depreciation for financially closed. In columns (4) and (5) in Table 8, a one-percent
increase in reserve accumulation is associated with an 0.41 percent and 1.19 percent
depreciation in financially closed and open economies, respectively.


3.3.     Trade Balance and Capital Account Policies
In this section we document how capital account policies are associated with the trade
balance. From national accounting and the balance of payments, we know that the
adjustment in the current account—trade balance plus net factor income from abroad—is
associated with a capital account deficit— i.e., an increase in net foreign assets (private
assets plus reserves). In our model the trade balance is an important channel through
which reserve accumulation affects the real exchange rate. As another major new result

                                                      25
        Table 7: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects

                                                           Period 12 (1975–1996)
Dependent variable:              Full       Advanced         Developing       Financially    Financially
log(REER)                       Sample      Countries        Countries           Open          Closed
                                  (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)         (5)
NFAxR                           0.32***        0.22*            0.30**               0.14      0.42**
                                 (2.83)        (1.74)            (2.40)             (1.39)     (2.65)
RSRV                            -0.48*          0.38            -0.57**             -0.33     -1.06***
                                (-1.75)        (0.88)           (-2.04)            (-1.13)     (-2.95)
ln YD                             0.04          -0.10             -0.05            0.42***      -0.21
                                 (0.31)       (-0.37)           (-0.35)             (2.85)     (-1.51)
ln TT                             0.02           0.13             -0.02              0.11       -0.06
                                 (0.36)        (1.50)           (-0.20)             (1.42)     (-0.55)
Observations                     1,650         484              1,166               836         814
Countries                         75            22                53                 38          37
R2                               0.158         0.26             0.25                0.24       0.209
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV       0.020        0.725             0.016              0.164       0.001
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.




        Table 8: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects

                                                           Period 23 (1986–2007)
Dependent variable:              Full       Advanced         Developing       Financially    Financially
log(REER)                       Sample      Countries        Countries           Open          Closed
                                  (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)         (5)
NFAxR                            0.13**        -0.07             0.17**            0.11**      0.23**
                                  (2.21)      (-1.57)            (2.19)            (2.06)      (2.65)
RSRV                            -0.90***       -0.06            -0.91**            -0.41*     -1.19***
                                 (-3.07)      (-0.24)           (-2.59)            (-1.77)     (-3.33)
ln YD                             0.14*         0.05              0.14              -0.10      0.19**
                                  (1.69)       (0.43)            (1.50)            (-0.57)      (2.08)
ln TT                            -0.18**        0.11            -0.19**             -0.04     -0.26***
                                 (-2.38)       (1.05)           (-2.37)            (-0.36)     (-3.00)
Observations                     1,650         484              1,166               836         814
Countries                         75            22                53                 38          37
R2                               0.174         0.17             0.21               0.067       0.267
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV       0.001        0.986             0.003              0.033       0.000
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.



                                                      26
we perform a separate empirical consistency check for this.
   We now analyze the relationship between the trade balance and our capital account
policy instruments, reserve accumulation and capital controls, to see if these relationships
are also consistent with the theory. Letting NX be the ratio of net exports to GDP, we
estimate cross-section specifications of the form

           ∆NXi,T1 T2 = α + DT + β NFAxR ∆NFAXRi,T1 T2 + β RSRV ∆RSRVi,T1 T2
                           + β R&KAClosed ∆RSRVi,T1 T2 × KAClosedi + ei ,               (15)

where T1 T2 is period 12 and period 23, and for annual panels we estimate

                 NXit = αi + Dt + β NFAxR NFAxRit + β RSRV RSRVit + eit .               (16)

   In Tables 9 and 10, we provide estimates for equations (15) and (16). Consistent with
our model and intuitions, we find that the marginal change in net exports is correlated
with the marginal change in reserves. On the other hand, the effect of a marginal change
in NFAxR is relatively flat. In Table 9, column (1), we find that a one percentage point
increase in RSRV is associated with an 0.22 percentage point increase in NX, while a
one percentage point increase in NFAxR is virtually unrelated to a change in NX. This
bilateral association is again mostly driven by developing countries (see column 5). But
when we look at just the advanced countries (column 3), a one percentage point increase
in NFAxR is associated with an 0.07 percentage point increase in NX, while RSRV is
negatively associated with NX.
   When we incorporate the interaction term of RSRV with KAClosed, we see that most
of the correlation between reserves and net exports is driven by observations where
capital controls are in place. In column (2), a one percentage point increase in RSRV
is associated with an 0.34 increase in NX (0.06+0.28) in financially closed economies,
but only 0.06 in financially open economies. Differences are quantitatively large even
if statistical significance is not as pronounced as in the results for real exchange rate
determination.
   Moving on, the results from the annual panel strengthen our claims with much higher
levels of statistical significance, as expected. In Table 10, again, NX is more correlated
with RSRV than with NFAxR, and this result is stronger in developing countries or in
financially closed economies. For the full sample (column 1), a one percentage point
increase in RSRV is associated with an 0.16 increase in NX. However, if we estimate
with the subsample of developing countries (or with financially closed economies), this


                                             27
             Table 9: Trade Balances and Reserve Accumulations: Cross-Sectional Analysis

                                                            Periods 12 (Average 86–96 minus Average 75–85)
                                                      & 23 (Average 97–07 minus Average 86–96), Pooled Sample

Dependent variable:                                Full                         Advanced                Developing
∆Net Exports                                      Sample                        Countries               Countries
                                            (1)               (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
∆ NFAxR                                     -0.01            -0.02        0.07∗∗        NA             -0.03        -0.04
                                          (-0.44)           (-0.71)        (2.09)                    (-1.02)       (-1.31)
∆ RSRV                                    0.22∗∗              0.06          -0.29                    0.27∗∗         0.10
                                           (2.23)            (0.47)       (-1.66)                     (2.39)       (0.66)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                             0.28                                                  0.28
                                                            (1.64)                                                 (1.44)
Period23 Dummy                             0.01               0.00        -0.02∗                      0.01           0.01
                                          (0.53)             (0.44)       (-1.72)                    (0.56)        (0.65)
Observations                               144               144            43                        101           101
Countries                                   73                73            22                         51            51
R2                                         0.06              0.08          0.22                       0.08          0.10
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                 0.03              0.56          0.07                       0.02          0.39
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                         0.09                                                   0.12
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
ticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.




         Table 10: Trade Balances and Reserve Accumulations: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects

                                                                 Period 123 (1975–2007)
Dependent variable:              Full         Advanced                Developing        Financially            Financially
Net Exports                     Sample        Countries               Countries            Open                  Closed
                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)
NFAxR                             0.00              0.06∗                -0.01               0.01                 -0.00
                                 (0.22)            (2.01)               (-0.42)             (0.30)               (-0.12)
RSRV                             0.16∗∗            -0.25                0.20∗∗               0.11                0.24∗∗
                                 (2.16)           (-1.40)                (2.61)             (1.03)               (2.21)
Observations                      2379              705                  1674                 1211                1168
Countries                          75                22                   53                   38                  37
R2                                0.08              0.30                 0.09                 0.08                0.10
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV        0.06              0.12                 0.02                 0.41                0.05
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
ticity consistent standard errors.




                                                            28
effect becomes much larger. In columns (3) (or (5)), a one percentage point increase
in RSRV is associated with an 0.20 (or 0.24) increase in NX in developing countries
(respectively, financially closed economies). Again, by contrast, it is interesting that in
advanced countries, NX is more correlated with NFAxR than RSRV.
   Summing up, the choice of capital account policies, in the form of the mix of reserve
accumulation and capital controls, is indeed effective at controlling trade balances. Overall,
these results on net exports provide a strong and independent confirmation of our
theoretical mechanisms.


3.4.    Robustness Checks
So far we document how the complex interactions of capital account policies in the form
of reserve accumulation and capital controls overturn the standard wealth effect. In this
chapter we provide thorough robustness checks on these results. We mainly report results
of annual panels and those of cross-sectional analysis can be found in the appendix.

Robustness Check: Other Capital Control Indices In this section, we check the validity
of various other measures of capital controls. First, we incorporate a continuous measure
of capital controls, KAControl, instead of the binary code, KAClosed. Specifically, we
estimate annual panels

       log ( REERit ) = αi + Dt + β NFAxR NFAxRit + β RSRV RSRVit
                         + β R&KAControl RSRVit · KAControlit + βKAControl KAControlit
                         + βYD log(YDit ) + β TT log( TTit ) + eit .                     (17)

   Second, in addition, following (14), we can again split the sample into financially open
and closed economies, replacing KAClosed with alternative binary indicators constructed
from several other capital control measures. Most capital account openness indices are
built from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.
Methods of construction and country-year coverage may vary, and there is a possibility
for sample selection bias. However, our results are mostly robust under alternative capital
control measures. We employ the capital controls measures from Edwards (2007) and
Fernández, Klein, Rebucci, Schindler, and Uribe (2015), and we also try using the capital
account openness measure from Quinn and Toyoda (2008). These are available for the
years 1975–2005, 1995–2011, and 1975–2005, respectively. We show the results using these
measures in Table 12.


                                               29
Table 11: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects, Continuous
          Capital Control Measures

                                                                   Period 123 (1975–2007)
Dependent variable:                                 Full                 Advanced               Developing
log(REER)                                          Sample                Countries              Countries
                                            (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)
NFAxR                                      0.17∗∗      0.19∗∗∗          -0.01    -0.01      0.18∗∗      0.23∗∗∗
                                            (2.64)       (3.07)       (-0.28)   (-0.18)       (2.47)     (3.13)
RSRV                                      -0.96∗∗∗     -0.91∗∗∗         0.14      0.24      -0.90∗∗∗   -0.77∗∗∗
                                           (-3.29)      (-3.91)        (0.48)   (0.84)       (-2.78)    (-3.27)
RSRV×KAControl                                          -0.26∗∗                   0.07                 -0.37∗∗∗
                                                        (-2.07)                  (0.37)                 (-2.70)
KAControl                                 -0.05∗∗∗       -0.02         -0.03     -0.03       -0.03        0.02
                                           (-3.14)      (-1.02)       (-1.27)   (-1.60)     (-1.66)      (0.71)
ln YD                                       0.15∗        0.15∗         -0.04     -0.04        0.11         0.09
                                            (1.75)       (1.80)       (-0.26)   (-0.24)      (1.16)      (1.02)
ln TT                                        -0.02       -0.02          0.12      0.13       -0.04        -0.05
                                           (-0.28)      (-0.27)        (1.42)   (1.49)      (-0.65)     (-0.72)
Observations                               2446            2446        720       720         1726       1726
Countries                                   75              75          22        22          53         53
R2                                         0.21            0.22        0.26      0.26        0.27       0.29
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                  0.00            0.00       0.63      0.41        0.00       0.00
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAControl                       0.00                 0.67                   0.00
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


    In Table 11, we confirm that the effect of NFAxR is again mostly positively related
to real exchange rates (i.e., appreciation), and the effect of RSRV is mostly negatively
related to real exchange rates (i.e., depreciation). Furthermore, consistent with our theory
and similar to results with the binary code, KAClosed, there is a clear complementarity
between RSRV and KAControl. In column (1) of Table 11, we can see the effect of RSRV
and KAControl on real exchange rates is negative. If we incorporate the interaction term
in column (2), the effect of RSRV is nonlinearly decreasing if added with more stringent
capital account controls. In Table 12, we confirm that the effects of other widely used
capital control measures shows very similar patterns.17

Robustness Check: Crisis Period It could be argued that our proposed framework
should work even with disturbing times, so as a further robustness check we repeat the
key estimations, but including the period 2008–2011 in the analysis, where we refer to
  17 Forthe capital controls measure of Fernández et al. (2015), we show the result for period 23, as their
data only start in 1995.



                                                      30
Table 12: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects, Other
          Capital Control Measures

                                       Edwards                  Quinn and Toyoda             Fernández et. al.
Dependent variable:                    Period123                   Period123                    Period 23
log(REER)                    Financially    Financially       Financially   Financially   Financially   Financially
                                Open          Closed             Open         Closed         Open         Closed
                                 (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
NFAxR                          0.17**           0.17*           0.22**          0.13          0.04        0.20**
                                (2.29)         (1.76)            (2.22)        (1.12)        (0.88)       (2.63)
RSRV                            -0.34         -1.16***            -0.18      -1.37***       -1.04**      -0.54***
                               (-1.08)         (-3.40)          (-0.39)       (-4.65)       (-2.21)       (-2.88)
lnYD                           0.36**            0.09             -0.09         0.08         -0.47*        0.00
                                (2.06)         (1.06)           (-0.25)        (0.90)       (-1.78)       (0.01)
lnTT                           0.08**           -0.11              0.02         -0.10       -0.18**      -0.42***
                                (2.23)         (-1.10)           (0.28)       (-0.93)       (-2.50)       (-3.78)
Observations                   1,188           1,188            1,089         1,056          660           660
Countries                        36              36              33             32            30            30
R2                              0.21            0.22            0.09           0.26          0.17          0.23
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV      0.14           0.00              0.09          0.00          0.03          0.00
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


this last window as period4. Here we check whether the results change if we include the
Global Financial Crisis years in the sample.
    In Table 13, we document results for period 1234 and period 34. Again, the negative
effect of reserves holds in the crisis period. Thus the relationship between reserves and
real exchange rates is preserved even in the crisis period.18

Robustness Check: Oil Exporting Countries Many oil exporting countries hoard signif-
icant amounts of reserves. For example, the average reserve to GDP ratio of oil exporting
countries in our sample in period 3 (1997–2007) is 19.98%, which is much higher than
the average of all developing countries.19 The magnitude of coefficients changes and
the statistical significance decreases in cross-sectional analysis, though results in panel
analysis are broadly robust. Table 14 in this section show that our analyses are broadly
robust to the exclusion of these countries. Here we show the results of the same panel
analysis without oil exporting countries. In column (1) of Table 14, a one percentage
point increase in NFAxR is still associated with an 0.22 percent appreciation of the real
  18 Wenote that KAClosed indicators are reassigned over the period 1234.
  19 Thefourteen oil exporting countries in our sample are as follows: Algeria, Bahrain, Cameroon, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Iran, Libya, Nigeria, Norway, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago,
and Venezuela.


                                                         31
                     Table 13: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects With Crisis Period

      Dependent variable:                       Full                    Advanced               Developing           Financially Open         Financially Closed
      log(REER)                    Period1234          Period34   Period1234   Period34   Period1234   Period34   Period1234   Period34    Period1234    Period34
                                       (1)               (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)             (10)
      NFAxR                            0.08∗             0.02         0.03       0.04∗      0.17∗∗∗      0.06        0.09          0.06         0.06         0.01
                                      (1.91)            (1.31)       (1.33)     (2.02)       (2.73)     (1.11)      (1.40)        (1.37)      (1.29)        (0.48)
      RSRV                           -0.73∗∗∗          -0.45∗∗∗       -0.09      -0.34     -0.72∗∗∗    -0.44∗∗∗      -0.32      -0.24∗∗∗     -0.73∗∗∗     -0.46∗∗∗
                                      (-6.03)           (-5.25)     (-0.51)     (-1.56)     (-4.69)     (-4.11)     (-1.57)      (-3.24)      (-7.66)      (-6.48)
                                      0.16∗∗             0.14                     0.32         0.09      0.11        0.21        0.39∗∗∗        0.10         0.02




32
      ln YD                                                           -0.03
                                       (2.32)           (1.29)      (-0.31)      (1.54)      (1.49)     (0.88)      (0.93)        (3.20)       (1.69)       (0.12)
      ln TT                            -0.02            -0.15∗        0.12      0.21∗∗        -0.05     -0.18∗       0.08          -0.04       -0.10       -0.26∗∗
                                      (-0.37)           (-1.67)      (1.27)      (2.60)     (-0.80)     (-1.90)     (1.35)       (-0.32)      (-1.15)      (-2.04)
      Observations                    2775              1125         814         330        1961         795        1406          570         1369             555
      Countries                        75                75           22          22         53           53         38            38          37               37
      R2                              0.18              0.20         0.24        0.40       0.27         0.24       0.10          0.17        0.28             0.27
      p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV       0.00              0.00        0.49        0.08        0.00        0.00        0.07         0.00         0.00            0.00
     Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
     ticity consistent standard errors.
Table 14: Determinants of Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects Without Oil
          Exporting Countries

                                                        Period 123 (1975–2007)
Dependent variable:           Full       Advanced          Developing      Financially     Financially
log(REER)                    Sample      Countries         Countries          Open           Closed
                               (1)           (2)               (3)                 (4)         (5)
NFAxR                         0.22***      -0.017            0.27***               0.10      0.28***
                               (4.11)      (-0.29)            (4.19)             (1.32)       (3.84)
RSRV                         -0.66***        0.31              -0.33              -0.48      -0.57**
                              (-2.84)       (1.04)           (-1.24)             (-1.34)     (-2.10)
ln YD                          0.080        0.068            0.0027              -0.047       0.056
                               (0.95)       (0.53)           (0.032)             (-0.14)      (0.92)
ln TT                        -0.0048         0.16             -0.045               0.11      -0.068
                             (-0.083)       (1.70)           (-0.78)              (1.42)     (-0.88)
Observations                  2013          693               1320                990         1023
Countries                      63            21                40                  30          31
R2                            0.16          0.24              0.30                0.08        0.36
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV    0.00          0.33              0.04                0.12        0.01
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


exchange rate. Also, a one percentage point increase in reserve accumulation to GDP is
associated with a statistically significant 0.66 percent depreciation of the real exchange
rate. Column (4) and (5) of the same Table confirm that the effect stands out in financially
closed economies.

Robustness Check : Other Real Effective Exchange Rates As a final robustness check
in this section, we explore whether our results are robust to the use of alternative real
effective exchange rate indices. Ready-made real effective exchange rate indices are
available from IMF and BIS, from 1980 onwards and from 1995 onwards, respectively. We
repeat our main analyses with all available observations: 54 countries for the IMF index
and 41 countries for the BIS index. In Tables A.5, 15, and 16, we report our results. We
note that again, our overall results are mostly consistent, the only exception being that
the positive association between NFAxR and the real exchange rate is not as robust using
the small-sample BIS index.




                                                   33
Table 15: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effect, IMF REER
          Index

                                        1980–2007 (IMF REER available from 1980 onwards)
Dependent variable:           Full        Advanced       Developing      Financially     Financially
log(REER)                    Sample       Countries      Countries          Open           Closed
                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
NFAxR                         0.16***         -0.07        0.25***           0.04           0.22**
                               (2.82)       (-1.53)         (2.95)         (0.56)            (2.29)
RSRV                         -0.73***         0.27         -0.68**          -0.22          -0.91***
                              (-3.23)        (1.63)        (-2.72)         (-0.72)          (-3.58)
ln YD                          0.24*          0.10           0.10          0.39**             0.07
                               (1.94)        (0.68)         (1.01)         (2.21)            (0.76)
ln TT                           -0.06        0.20*          -0.09            0.08           -0.15**
                              (-0.96)        (1.85)        (-1.51)          (0.99)          (-2.25)
Observations                  1,534          631            903             942             592
Countries                      54             22             32              33              21
R2                            0.33           0.15           0.51            0.21            0.53
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV     0.00          0.09           0.00            0.44            0.00
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.




Table 16: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Annual Panel with Fixed Effects, BIS REER
          Index

                                        1994–2007 (BIS REER available from 1994 onwards)
Dependent variable:           Full        Advanced       Developing      Financially     Financially
log(REER)                    Sample       Countries      Countries          Open           Closed
                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
NFAxR                           0.04       -0.09**           0.21*           -0.01            0.17
                               (0.67)      (-2.32)           (2.06)         (-0.09)          (1.69)
RSRV                         -0.40***       -0.11           -0.28**        -0.47***         -0.29*
                              (-3.60)      (-0.40)          (-2.13)         (-3.81)         (-1.95)
ln YD                         0.27**        0.32**            0.21           0.36*            0.19
                               (2.24)       (2.08)           (1.53)         (1.97)          (1.32)
ln TT                         -0.21**       0.24**         -0.30***          -0.03         -0.31***
                              (-2.63)       (2.60)          (-4.52)         (-0.33)         (-4.51)
Observations                   574           308            266             392             182
Countries                       41            21             19              28              13
R2                             0.23          0.39           0.38            0.24            0.37
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV     0.00          0.94           0.01            0.00            0.01
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates.
t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.


                                                    34
4.      Growth Externality, Financial Crisis, and Capital Account Policies

4.1.      Extending the Model with Endogenous Capital Account Policies
So far we have documented the striking relationship between the real exchange rate and
reserves, taking as given the exogenous policy choices by the government with regard to
capital account policies (its desires for a particular combination of reserves and controls).
But this is only a partial framework. Now, to close the model, we aim to account for and
endogenize the government’s decision about the two policy instruments. We incorporate
two basic mechanisms which we use to model each of the two standard rationales for
reserve accumulation to develop an integrated framework.
       To make headway, we now add an initial period (t = 0) and assume that financial
transactions are made at the initial period. Also we assume that agents are infinitesimally
small and of measure one. With this in place, we allow for the economy to have two
frictions.

     • First, there is a risk of crisis, which is a state of output loss and temporary exclusion
         from international financial markets. After all financial decisions are made, the
         economy enters the period where there is a small, given probability of a crisis
         loss. But in crisis the private agent cannot issue additional bonds, since she is
         excluded from borrowing, and cannot insure. Instead, the government has a motive
         to stockpile reserves ex ante (as insurance) which can be liquidated if a crisis hits.20

     • Second, aggregate exports are assumed to drive a growth externality (of standard
         learning-by-doing type). We assume current period exports will enhance productiv-
         ity in the future. However, private agents cannot internalize their own contributions
         to this channel as they are atomistically small. Hence, the government has a motive
         to intervene to adjust the trade balance using capital account policies so as to thereby
         increase overall welfare.21

These two frictions provide the rationales behind what we refer to as the precautionary
and mercantilist motives for reserve accumulation, respectively. We presume that the
benevolent government optimally combines two policies to alleviate the two frictions. As
the magnitude of the two frictions—the expected size of output loss due to a crisis and
  20 We assume that the level of reserves cannot be negative, i.e., in what follows rsrv∗ ≥ 0.
  21 Thisgovernment intervention is effectively the same as an export subsidy. However, the capital account
policy considered here is a second-best instrument to implement the allocation, as compared to an export
subsidy. For further discussion, see Benigno and Fornaro (2012), Korinek (2016), and Korinek and Serven
(2016).


                                                    35
the degree of growth externality from exports—are allowed to vary, the policies interact
endogenously and, consequently, they then influence the real exchange rate in general
equilibrium.
    In an international setting, we envisage that each economy may have different parame-
ters which govern the growth externality and crisis loss. Some intuition then develops as
follows. If the home country is more vulnerable to a crisis, it tries to have more reserves
and exchanges more assets with international investors. This will induce a large gross
external position. In our model, reserve accumulation can be liquidated when a crisis hits
and thus represents a form of insurance.22 Thus, the optimal policy combination will be
high reserve accumulation with financial openness.
    However, if the home country faces a larger growth externality, it will have high
reserve accumulation but it will also want to deploy capital controls. As in Jeanne (2013),
capital account policies affect the trade balance, and can boost exports. The optimal
capital account policies will thus be mapped from the two deep parameters.
    To formalize, in period 0, the agent makes decisions on financial asset holdings, the
levels of international debt d∗ and domestic assets a, along with consumption profiles. In
period 1, after financial decisions have been made, output is realized, financial transactions
are made, and agents consume. At this time, the economy is vulnerable to a crisis with
fixed probability π.
    If there is a crisis, it has two features. First, there is a ξ T (ξ N ) share of output loss in
tradable (nontradable) goods endowments. Second, private agents are excluded from
international financial markets and thus cannot issue debt to buffer consumption loss.23
The government is also excluded, and cannot issue international debt either, but it can
instead sell accumulated reserves from the past, subject to an early liquidation penalty.24
If there is no crisis, there is a growth externality from international trade; an increase in
net exports will enhance the productivity of the tradable sector next period.
    We assume the growth rate of the tradable sector is endogenously determined as

                             g = ḡ + g(ex, ν),     if there is no crisis,                               (18)
  22 The  private agent does not have access to such an insurance instrument, by assumption, and will still
have to honor the financial contract which she made before the state is realized. The model can easily
encompass the same equilibrium allocation with the assumption that the private agents can also engage in
holding reserves with slightly additional costs.
  23 The exclusion is temporary at period 1. The agent is still obligated to repay the debt at period 2, and

there is no default.
  24 Alternatively, we can model a buffer stock of liquid assets with long-term liabilities. We instead add an

initial period for the decision of financial transactions to be consistent with Section 2.




                                                     36
where ex denotes net exports in period 1 and the parameter ν measures size of the growth
externality.25 The externality vanishes if there is a crisis, and the growth rate is then

                                   ĝ = ḡ,   if there is a crisis,                                    (19)

where, from now on, variables with a hat sign will stand for variables in a crisis.

Constrained Social Planner’s Problem In this section, we present the allocation for the
social planner’s problem with the given constraints aforementioned. We show the full
illustration of the private agent’s problem and the government’s problem in the appendix
(for which some equation references appear here), and we prove that the social planner’s
allocation can be replicated by the benevolent government.
    By combining budget constraints, (53), (54), (55), (56), (4), (5), (58), and (59), we find a
feasible consumption set,

                         c1T = (1 + ω )y T − (rsrv∗ − d∗ ),                                            (20)
                         c2T = (1 + g(ex, ν)) y T + (1 + r ∗ )(rsrv∗ − d∗ ),                           (21)
                         ĉ1T = (1 + ω − ξ T )y T − η (rsrv∗ , y T ) − (−d∗ ),                         (22)
                         ĉ2T = (1 + ḡ)y T + (1 + r ∗ )(−d∗ ),                                        (23)
                        c1N = y N ,                                                                    (24)
                        ĉ1N = (1 − ξ N )y N ,                                                         (25)
                        c2N = y N ,                                                                    (26)
                        ĉ2N = y N .                                                                   (27)

Again, variables with a hat sign stand for variables in the crisis state. From equations (20),
(21), (22) and (23), we can see that tradable consumption is intertemporarily allocated
through (rsrv∗ − d∗ ) in the non-crisis state, and through (−d∗ ) in the crisis state. Note
that aggregate exports in the non-crisis state can be rewritten as

                               ex = (1 + ω )y T − c1T = rsrv∗ − d∗ ,                                   (28)

and note also that η (rsrv∗ , y T ) is an early liquidation penalty paid to international
investors who buy the reserves, and which is a function of rsrv∗ and y T .
  25 We  note that the assumption that net exports induces a growth externality is a standard simplification
in the literature. Please see Korinek (2016) and Korinek and Serven (2016) for the detailed debates.




                                                    37
   The constrained social planner’s problem is then as follows:
                                                                                                          
               social                                                        u ( c2 )                 u(ĉ2 )
           U            ≡          max                   (1 − π ) u ( c1 ) +            + π u(ĉ1 ) +            ,            (29)
                              T ,c N ,ĉ T ,ĉ N ,
                            {c1,2 1,2 1,2 1,2
                                                                             1 + r∗                   1 + r∗
                                rsrv∗ ,d∗ }


subject to (20), (21), (22), (23), (24), (25), (26), (27), and (28).

Analytical Solutions for Social Planner’s Problem In the above problem, the social
planner’s objective is to achieve the optimal levels of reserve accumulation rsrv∗opt and
external debt holdings d∗opt , taking into account the two frictions. By pinning down
external debt and external asset positions simultaneously, we argue that this problem is
clearly identically equivalent to determining the gross capital position and the net capital
position. Given that mapping, we can now present the analytical solution with some
additional assumptions for ease of exposition.
   We henceforth assume that the growth externality from aggregate exports takes a
simple linear form,

                                                                                ex
                                                            g(ex, ν) = ν ·         .                                          (30)
                                                                                yT

Also for analytical tractability we assume the penalty for early liquidation of reserves to
be a constant fraction of tradable output y T ,

                                                          η (rsrv∗ , y T ) = η̄y T .                                          (31)

                                                         (1− π )
   Now let us define (1 − π )λ1 ,                         1+r ∗ λ 2 ,   π λ̂1 , and    π
                                                                                      1+r ∗ λ̂2   to be the Lagrangian multipliers
for the constraints (20), (21), (22), and (23) in the constrained social planner’s problem.
After several steps of tedious algebra, we can obtain some key equilibrium conditions as
follows,

                                                                   1 + r∗ + ν
                                                           λ1 =                 λ2 ,                                          (32)
                                                                     1 + r∗
                                                                   1 + r∗
                                                           λ̂1   =        λ̂2 .                                               (33)
                                                                   1 + r∗

These first and second equilibrium conditions are related to the intertemporal consump-
tion decisions in the non-crisis and crisis state, respectively. Note that we have assumed
that the probability of crisis is fixed, so we can therefore divide the problem into two



                                                                           38
independent problems.26
    The intuition is fairly simple. With reference to the non-crisis state problem, the
decision of the net capital position has to be made here since it simultaneously determines
both the trade balance and the consequent tradable goods allocation between the current
and future periods, taking the growth externality (ν) into account, and this tradeoff
is embodied in equilibrium condition (32). However, with reference to the crisis state
problem, the decision of the gross capital position has to be made here, since it determines
the war-chest available to buffer against output loss. Liquidating reserves allows more
tradable goods to be reallocated into a current crisis state from the post-crisis future state,
and this tradeoff is embodied in equilibrium condition (33).27
    To make more progress with explicit solutions, we make some functional form assump-
tions. Let us henceforth assume log utility (constant relative risk aversion of one, γ = 1)
and a unit elasticity between tradable and nontradable goods (σ = 1). The intertemporal
decisions then become linear and we can derive closed form solutions, with

                         ∗opt        1                               
                     d          =      ∗
                                         (1 + ḡ) − (1 + ω − ξ − η̄ ) · y T ,
                                                                 T
                                                                                                       (34)
                                  2+r                                    
                                     1        ν
                  rsrv∗opt      =                                   T
                                                     (1 + ḡ) − (−ξ − η̄ ) · y T ,                     (35)
                                  2 + r∗ 1 + r∗ + ν
                                  θ N 1 + r∗
                                                                    T
                          opt                                1 + ḡ     y
                    rer1        = T ·      ∗
                                             · 1+ω+             ∗
                                                                      · N.                             (36)
                                  θ    2+r               1+r +ν         y

First, we note that initial productivity or wealth of a nation ω only appears in d∗opt in
a one-to-one relation, but not in rsrv∗opt . This links to our very first proposition earlier
in the paper, which relates external private assets and current productivity. External
public saving (reserves) do not need to be adjusted in response to changes in current
productivity. It is therefore right here that we find an independent role for private and
public external asset holdings.
    Next we develop several propositions regarding how the two frictions affect external
asset positions and, consequently, the real exchange rate.

Proposition 4. Fixing all other parameters, if an economy has a higher output loss in a crisis
  26 Note   that the separation depends on the assumption that the probability of crisis and the early
liquidation penalty are independent of rsrv∗ . If these variables depend on policy instruments, it cannot be
divided into two independent problems as the government has to weigh utilities in non-crisis and crisis
state. Here we make a first cut and keep the problem as simple as possible.
   27 That is, once a crisis hits, today’s consumption is determined by reserve accumulation, which is piled

up to be liquidated and prevent severe consumption drops. Again, recall that the probability of crisis is a
constant, so both decisions are independently made.



                                                    39
(ξ T ), optimal reserve accumulation increases while the real exchange rate is not affected. That is,

                                     ∂rsrv∗opt     1
                                               =        yT         > 0,
                                       ∂ξ T      2 + r∗
                                           opt
                                      ∂rer1
                                                 =        0.
                                       ∂ξ T

Proposition 5. Fixing all other parameters, if an economy has a higher growth externality (ν),
optimal reserve accumulation increases while the real exchange rate is depreciated. That is,

                       ∂rsrv∗opt     1              ∗
                                            T (1 + r )(1 + g )
                                 =        y  ·                                     > 0,
                          ∂ν       2 + r∗      (1 + r ∗ + ν )2
                               opt
                         ∂rer1             θ N 1 + r∗      1 + ḡ      yT
                                       =                                           < 0.
                           ∂ν              θ T 2 + r ∗ (1 + r ∗ + ν )2 y N

   The proofs are immediate and the intuition is as follows. In the former case, there is a
higher output loss in a crisis: the precautionary motive strengthens, and the policymaker
wants to hold more reserves. The exchange of assets increases so the gross position
expands. However, since there is no change in the size of the growth externality, there
is no desire to manipulate the trade balance. Net external saving does not change,
hence the real exchange rate is not affected. In the closed-form solution, that is, the
partial derivatives with respect to ξ T are the same for external (official) assets rsrv∗ and
external (private) debts d∗ . The two offset each other completely. By contrast, in the
latter case, there is a higher growth externality: the mercantilist motive strengthens, and
the policymaker wants to induce a larger export surplus and thus, more net savings. In
this case it will be optimal to increase external savings, via reserve accumulation, while
maintaining the level of debt. The current real exchange rate consequently depreciates as
prices adjust to accommodate the larger trade surplus.
   Now with the closed-form solution of the real exchange rate available, we can set out
a theoretical rationale for our statistically insignificant association between the external
asset position and the real exchange rate. From (36), we can see that the real exchange
rate is composed of current and future tradable goods, and current nontradable goods.
We suggest the following argument:

Proposition 6. Assume that (1 + ω ) and y N are two independent random variables. Given
                                                                             opt
a fixed variance of the inverse of y N , the correlation between rer1              and 1 + ω increases as the
variance of 1 + ω increases.



                                                     40
                                                opt
Proof. The correlation between rer1                   and 1 + ω has the following closed form solution
                             
                  opt
          corr rer1 , 1 + ω
                               2  N                                                                        − 1
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                       Var (1/y N )
                                                 
                         1+ ḡ       θ 1+r ∗ T                 1                          2(1+ ḡ)    1
                 =     1+r ∗ + ν     θ T 2+r ∗
                                               y                     2                +   1+r ∗ +ν E(1/y N )
                                                         ( E(1/y N )) Var ((1+ω ))




   We conjecture that the volatility of the tradable endowment in a typical developing
country is larger than in an advanced country, while that of the nontradable endowment
is more similar across developing and advanced countries. If so, then the statistical
association between the real exchange rate and the tradable endowment will be relatively
weaker in advanced countries compared to developing countries, as the relatively higher
volatility of the nontradable endowment will blur the association between tradable
consumption and the real exchange rate. And again, since the private external position
(−d∗ ) is a linear multiple of the current tradable endowment as in (34), there is only a
weak association between private external positions and real exchange rates. We believe
this to be an explanation for statistically non-significant results in advanced economies.

Optimal Capital Account Policies In the previous section, we showed how two under-
lying friction parameters mapped into external asset and liability positions. Here we
derive the optimal capital account policy: the reserves and capital controls needed to
implement the constrained social planner’s allocation. The government can implement
the allocation by its choice of reserves rsrv∗ , transfer schedule { T1 , T2 , T̂1 , T̂2 }, and an
appropriate degree of capital controls κ to offset private capital inflows. That is, after
setting the optimal reserve accumulation rsrv∗opt and finding the optimal external debt
d∗opt , the government can induce the latter by an appropriate tax schedule with degree of
capital control κ.28
   It can be shown that the government’s choice of optimal capital control κ satisfies

                                                                        ∗opt          ∗opt
                                         ∗opt               (1 − π ) λ2        + π λ̂2
                             1 − τ1 (d          , κ) =                  ∗opt          ∗opt .                          (37)
                                                            (1 − π ) λ1        + π λ̂1

   This leads to our main theorem.
  28 We abstract from the domestic bond market. Basically, there are infinitely many solutions for optimal
levels of domestic bonds and domestic interest rates, along with tax schemes, which implement the same
optimal allocation. Full illustration of the decentralized economy is provided in the appendix.




                                                           41
Theorem. (Precaution Versus Mercantilism) All else equal, if an economy has a higher output
loss in a crisis (ξ T ), the optimal degree of capital control increases. And if an economy has a higher
growth externality (ν), the optimal degree of capital control increases. That is,

                                 ∂κ opt                ∂κ opt
                                        ≤ 0,    and           ≥ 0.
                                  ∂ξ T                  ∂ν

Proof. See Appendix.

   Intuitively, it is clear that the optimal degree of capital control increases with higher
growth externality (ν); since the benevolent planner wishes to encourage more aggregate
exports, she needs to both increase international reserves and boost controls for offsetting
private capital inflows at the same time. On the other hand, if the economy were to
have a higher output loss during a crisis (ξ T ), the planner wants to engage in more asset
transactions and will hold more reserves; however, as she does not want to increase
aggregate exports, she will also relax the degree of capital controls. (We should note that
the extent to which capital controls relax will critically depend on the convexity of the tax
schedule.)


4.2.   Evidence on Capital Account Policies and Economic Growth
Finally, to examine the empirical validity of the above newly proposed model mechanisms,
we document the bilateral relationship between capital account policies and economic
growth in Figure 2 and Tables 17, 18, 19. Our new model mechanisms presented in this
section would suggest that the effect of reserves on real exchange rates and the trade
balance is different in different groups of countries because each economy has a different
motivation: mercantilist exploitation of growth through exports versus precautionary efforts
to buffer a crisis via reserves. To try to assess the empirical validity of this argument,
we document whether capital account policies which potentially exploit the proposed
growth externality are, indeed, related to realized economic growth.
   We focus on period23, since “mercantilist” motivations seem to have emerged in the
1990s, as argued by Ghosh, Ostry and Tsangarides (2016) and Aizenman and Lee (2008).
We first document the bilateral association of reserve growth and real GDP per capita
or TFP growth for groups of financially open or closed economies. We take the average
level of reserves to GDP (RSRV) and log real GDP per capita or TFP for periods 2 and 3,
and take the differences. We present scatterplots in Figure 2. While there are negative
relations between reserve growth and real GDP per capita (or TFP) growth in financially
open economies, those in financially closed economies are clearly positive. The patterns

                                                  42
Figure 2: Capital Account Policies and Growth of Real GDP per Capita and TFP: Bivariate Scatters, All
          Countries


                            (a) Real GDP Growth, Financially Open Economies                                                     (b) Real GDP Growth, Financially Closed Economies
                    .5




                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOR         CHN
                                 IRL                             EGY
                    .4




                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                                                ARG

                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                    .3




                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                                                                                       DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                  THA
                    .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                                                                        LKA
                                       ESP                                                  MYS
   d ln(Real GDP)




                            PRT                                                                                                                               CYP




                                                                                                            d ln(rGDP)
                    .1




                                                                                                                     .1
                                       NLD     GRC
                                              GBR                                                                                                                  BRA
                                              AUTFIN                        BOL                                                                  CRI
                                                                             PER
                                                                                                                                                                                       TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                    NPL
                    0




                                                                                                                     0
                                             BEL
                                               SWE AUS
                                             DEU                 DNK
                                                 FRA
                                                  NZL
                                              ITAUSA
                                                                 GTM JAM ISR                                                                                             PAK TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                        PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                               HND
                                                   ISL
                                                    CAN
                    -.1




                                                                                                                     -.1
                                                                                 JPN                                                                   FJI
                                                     PRY                                                                                                                                                MAR
                                                 CHE                                              JOR                                                        COL
                    -.2




                                                                                                                     -.2
                                                                        URY                                                                                                                 SEN
                                                                                                                                 TGO                                      KEN       CIV
                    -.3




                                                                                                                     -.3
                                                                                                                                                                    MDG
                                                              GMB                                                                              NER
                    -.4




                                                                                                                     -.4


                                                                                                                                         BDI
                    -.5




                                                                                                                     -.5




                           -.1                          0                              .1         .2                              -.1                -.05                0                 .05            .1
                                                               d RSRV                                                                                                d RSRV
                          coef = -.7240086, (robust) se = .40940116, t = -1.77                                                 coef = 1.7277583, (robust) se = .74335686, t = 2.32



                                   (c) TFP Growth, Financially Open Economies                                                        (d) TFP Growth, Financially Closed Economies
                    .3




                                                                                                                         .3




                                 IRL
                    .2




                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                        LKACYP                            TZA                        CHN
                                                  FIN                                                                                                                                                    KOR
                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                    .1




                                                                                                                         .1




                                             DEU   AUS
                                             GBRUSA                                                                                                     CHL
                                                                        URY
   d ln(TFP)




                                                                                                            d ln(TFP)




                                                FRAISL
                                       NLD    AUT NZL             DNK                                                                                                                       SEN
                                              GRC                                                                                                CRI FJI                        ARG
                                                    CAN                                                                                                                                    PHL
                    0




                                                                                                                         0




                                             BEL                              ISR                                                              NER                            TUR
                                                 CHE                                                                                                   DOM                          CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                  THA
                                               ITA                                          MYS                                                                    BRA
                            PRT                                         JAM                                                                                                                             MAR
                                                                 GTM
                                                                 EGY       BOL                                                                               COL
                                       ESP                                  JPN
                    -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               HND
                                                                                                                                                                          KEN
                                                        PRY                      PER
                                                                                                  JOR
                    -.2




                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                 TGO
                    -.3




                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                         BDI

                          -.1                           0                              .1         .2                              -.1                -.05                 0                .05            .1
                                                               d RSRV                                                                                                d RSRV
                          coef = -.87397997, (robust) se = .2473481, t = -3.53                                                 coef = .70831943, (robust) se = .47238396, t = 1.5




Notes: Simple bivariate relationship between reserve growth and real GDP per capita growth between
period 2 (1986–1996) and 3 (1997–2007). Oil exporting countries are excluded. Constant is included in
bivariate regression. Real GDP per capita and TFP are from PWT9.




                                                                                                       43
            Table 17: Cross Section: Capital Account Policy and Growth of Real GDP and TFP

                                                              Period 2 and 3 (1986–2007)
Dependent variable:                          Real GDP per Capita Growth                       TFP Growth
                                             All               w/o Oil                 All           w/o Oil
                                             (1)                  (2)                   (3)            (4)
∆ RSRV                                     -0.65∗∗                -0.54              -0.47∗∗          -0.61∗∗
                                           (-2.02)              (-1.01)               (-2.37)         (-2.48)
∆ (RSRV × KAClosed)                        1.66∗∗∗               1.33∗                0.59∗∗          0.66∗∗
                                            (2.77)               (1.80)                (2.49)          (2.37)
Initial Real GDP per capita or TFP           0.06                 0.03               -0.54∗∗∗        -0.57∗∗∗
                                            (1.30)               (0.59)               (-7.28)         (-6.04)
Schooling                                  0.03∗∗                0.03∗                  0.01            0.01
                                            (2.24)               (1.90)                (1.43)          (1.13)
Inst. Quality                                -0.06                -0.03               0.03∗∗∗          0.03∗
                                           (-1.66)              (-0.87)                (2.98)          (1.80)
Trade Openness                             0.15∗∗∗                 0.05                  0.01           0.01
                                            (3.01)               (0.57)                (0.56)          (0.27)
Credit to GDP                                -0.00                -0.00                 -0.00           -0.00
                                           (-0.33)              (-0.09)               (-0.77)         (-0.32)
Terms of Trade (% change)                    0.09                 0.06                   0.03           -0.01
                                            (0.97)               (0.63)                (0.52)         (-0.17)
Observations                                 64                   54                    61              52
Countries                                    64                   54                    61              52
R2                                          0.39                 0.29                  0.70            0.69
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
ticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.


are notably driven by South Korea, China, and several other East Asian countries: the
dramatic increase in reserves in period 23 is associated with a high real GDP per capita
growth, and TFP growth, all of which is consistent with our model’s predictions.
    For a full growth analysis, we provide cross-sectional and panel analysis. We regress
the growth of real GDP per capita or TFP on the increases of reserves to GDP and its
interaction with capital controls,

              ∆log(yi ) = α + β RSRV ∆RSRVi + β R&KAClosed ∆RSRVi × KAClosedi
                              + β InitialGDP log(yi,0 ) + γ0 Zi + ei ,                                     (38)

where y is the average real GDP per capita or TFP for period 2 or 3. The initial value of
real GDP per capita or TFP comes from the the last year of the period 1. Z stands for
all other controls chosen based on Estevadeordal and Taylor (2013) or Kose, Prasad, and
Terrones (2009).29 The results for the cross-sectional analysis are reported in Table 17:
  29 Data   for real GDP and TFP come from PWT9. Real GDP per capita is constructed using real GDP


                                                     44
                                    Table 18: Annual Panel: Capital Account Policy and Growth of Real GDP per Capita

                                                                                     Period 2 & Period 3 (1986-2007)
      Dependent variable:                                      All Sample                                                    w/o Oil Exporters
      Real GDP per Capita Growth         All      Fin.Opn.   Fin.Cl.    Adv.        EM        Dev.       All      Fin.Opn.    Fin.Cl.    Adv.        EM         Dev.
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)        (12)
      Lagged ∆ RSRV                       0.07       0.04     0.23∗∗      0.01     0.19∗∗      0.02      0.03        -0.05    0.23∗∗       -0.06    0.27∗∗∗       -0.03
                                         (1.18)     (0.56)    (2.56)     (0.06)     (2.60)    (0.31)    (0.38)     (-0.49)    (2.51)     (-0.57)     (3.18)     (-0.26)
      Initial Real GDP per Capita       -0.05∗∗   -0.09∗∗∗     -0.02   -0.08∗∗∗   -0.10∗∗∗     -0.02   -0.09∗∗∗   -0.11∗∗∗   -0.08∗∗∗   -0.09∗∗∗   -0.10∗∗∗    -0.08∗∗∗
                                        (-2.54)    (-4.62)   (-0.69)    (-3.10)    (-3.62)   (-0.91)    (-6.72)    (-4.86)    (-5.28)    (-3.41)    (-3.39)     (-3.69)
      Schooling                           0.01      0.01∗      0.00       0.00     0.04∗∗       0.01    0.01∗∗      0.01∗∗     0.02∗        0.00    0.04∗∗         0.01
                                         (1.65)     (2.00)    (0.03)     (1.19)     (2.90)    (1.02)    (2.30)      (2.11)     (1.84)     (0.89)     (2.54)      (1.33)




45
      Inst. Quality                     0.01∗∗∗    0.01∗∗∗     0.00      0.00∗     0.01∗∗     0.01∗    0.01∗∗∗     0.00∗∗∗    0.01∗∗      0.00∗       0.00       0.01∗
                                         (2.93)     (3.90)    (0.81)     (1.82)     (2.60)    (1.90)    (3.30)      (2.81)     (2.52)     (1.99)     (1.38)      (1.98)
      Trade Openness                     0.03∗     0.03∗∗∗     0.04     0.02∗∗∗      -0.04      0.05     0.01∗     0.03∗∗∗      -0.03    0.02∗∗∗    -0.06∗        -0.02
                                         (1.69)     (3.51)    (1.28)     (3.51)    (-1.31)    (1.62)    (1.75)      (3.08)    (-0.91)     (2.88)    (-1.85)     (-0.63)
      Credit to GDP                    -0.00∗∗∗   -0.00∗∗∗   -0.00∗∗      -0.00      0.00    -0.00∗∗   -0.00∗∗∗    -0.00∗∗      -0.00      -0.00      -0.00       -0.00
                                        (-3.80)    (-3.08)   (-2.16)    (-1.09)     (0.03)   (-2.26)    (-3.20)    (-2.49)    (-1.60)    (-0.57)    (-0.11)     (-1.35)
      Terms of Trade                     -0.01       0.04     -0.04∗      0.03    -0.11∗∗∗    0.04∗      -0.04       -0.02    -0.05∗       -0.03   -0.11∗∗∗        0.01
      (% change)                        (-0.42)     (1.36)   (-2.05)     (0.55)   (-10.11)    (1.85)    (-1.67)    (-0.67)    (-1.90)    (-0.99)   (-10.45)      (0.51)
      Observations                      1231        724        507       424        248       559       1037        609        428        405        208         424
      Countries                          64         38         26        22         13        29         54         32         22         21         11          22
      R2                                 0.18       0.26       0.22      0.44      0.63       0.20      0.24        0.27       0.32      0.48       0.66        0.23
     Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
     ticity consistent standard errors.
                                            Table 19: Annual Panel: Capital Account Policy and Growth of TFP

                                                                            Period 2 & Period 3 (1986-2007)
      Dependent variable:                             All Sample                                                     w/o Oil Exporters
      TFP Growth                All     Fin.Opn.    Fin.Cl.     Adv.        EM        Dev.       All      Fin.Opn.    Fin.Cl.    Adv.        EM        Dev.
                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)
      Lagged ∆ RSRV              0.03     -0.02     0.20∗∗∗       0.06    0.14∗∗       -0.01    0.07∗        0.03     0.17∗∗∗      0.05    0.20∗∗        0.04
                               (0.47)    (-0.31)      (3.19)     (0.96)     (2.60)   (-0.14)     (1.79)    (0.64)      (2.92)     (0.71)     (2.86)     (0.92)
      Initial TFP            -0.11∗∗∗    -0.11∗∗    -0.09∗∗∗   -0.06∗∗∗   -0.17∗∗∗   -0.10∗∗   -0.11∗∗∗   -0.15∗∗∗    -0.07∗∗   -0.06∗∗∗   -0.20∗∗∗   -0.10∗∗∗
                              (-3.95)    (-2.63)     (-3.41)    (-3.77)    (-3.19)   (-2.31)    (-4.57)    (-4.21)    (-2.63)    (-3.28)    (-3.38)    (-3.01)
      Schooling                 -0.00     -0.00        0.00       -0.00     -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00       -0.00      -0.00     -0.00      -0.00
                              (-0.50)    (-0.61)      (0.41)    (-1.35)    (-0.40)   (-0.07)    (-0.84)    (-0.93)    (-0.44)    (-1.35)    (-0.22)    (-0.56)




46
      Inst. Quality           0.00∗∗∗    0.00∗∗∗    0.00∗∗∗        0.00       0.00   0.00∗∗     0.00∗∗∗    0.00∗∗     0.00∗∗∗       0.00       0.00    0.00∗∗
                               (3.40)     (2.74)      (3.10)     (0.98)     (1.56)    (2.25)     (3.02)    (2.68)      (2.92)     (0.59)     (0.53)     (2.43)
      Trade Openness          0.02∗∗∗    0.02∗∗∗    0.02∗∗∗     0.01∗∗∗     -0.01    0.02∗∗∗    0.01∗∗∗   0.02∗∗∗       0.03     0.01∗∗∗      -0.00      0.02
                               (6.13)     (3.37)      (7.78)     (4.05)    (-0.41)    (4.10)     (4.17)    (3.27)      (1.17)     (4.15)    (-0.27)    (0.86)
      Credit to GDP            -0.00∗     -0.00       -0.00∗      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00    -0.00∗∗     -0.00     -0.00∗∗      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00
                              (-1.95)    (-1.43)     (-1.75)    (-0.99)    (-0.55)   (-1.08)    (-2.20)    (-1.46)    (-2.17)    (-1.07)    (-1.28)    (-1.14)
      Terms of Trade          -0.03∗∗     -0.01      -0.05∗∗      -0.02   -0.10∗∗∗     -0.00     -0.03∗     -0.01      -0.05∗      -0.02   -0.10∗∗∗      0.01
      (% change)              (-2.37)    (-0.74)     (-2.75)    (-1.30)    (-7.62)   (-0.03)    (-1.93)    (-0.67)    (-2.07)    (-1.52)    (-6.75)    (0.67)
      Observations             1187        720        467       424        248        515       1013        605        408       405        208        400
      Countries                 61          37         24        22         13         26        52          31         21        21         11         20
      R2                       0.18        0.15       0.30      0.18       0.56       0.19      0.21        0.24       0.27      0.19       0.65       0.21
     Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedas-
     ticity consistent standard errors.
reserves are positively associated with economic growth in the financially closed group.
     For the corresponding analysis using annual panel data, we regress the growth of real
GDP per capita or TFP on the lagged increases of reserves to GDP for different groups,

            log(yi,t ) − log(yi,t−1 ) = αi + Dt + β RSRV ( RSRVi,t−1 − RSRVi,t−2 )
                                            + β Initial log(yi,t−1 ) + γ0 Zi,t + ei,t .              (39)

The results are reported in Table 18 and 19 are notable for a group of emerging economies.
These are consistent with our model prediction, where economies with high reserves and
high capital controls are exploiting “mercantilist” export-driven growth.30


5.    Conclusion

We have documented new stylized facts regarding real exchange rates. Economists have
argued for decades, if not centuries, that the real exchange rate is positively associated
with an economy’s net external asset position: the real exchange rate appreciates when
external wealth increases. This view has long been central to our understanding of the
mechanisms international payments and relative price adjustment.
     On the contrary, we claim that the real exchange rate implications of external assets
held by the public sector differs from those of external assets held by private agents. Our
empirical results show that for 1975–2007, controlling for GDP and the terms of trade, a
one percentage point increase in net external assets to GDP (net of reserves) is associated
with an 0.24 percent real exchange rate appreciation. Yet, a one percentage point increase
in reserve accumulation to GDP has little effect on the real exchange rate in financially
open countries (countries with low capital controls), and is associated with a 1.77 percent
real exchange rate depreciation in financially closed countries (countries with high capital
controls). Our results are robust when confronted with a battery of specification checks,
sample changes, and to alternative measures of controls, real exchange rates. Our results
are strongest in developing countries in the most recent period.
     To account for these findings, we present a new theoretical framework. Our model of
precautionary and mercantilist motives explains the result due to two competing forces: the
desire, on the one hand, to hold reserves as insurance against crisis losses and capital
(expenditure side) in PWT, divided by population. For TFP, we use TFP at constant prices (2011). Schooling
data is from Barro and Lee (2013), and quality of institutions comes from the International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG) of the PFS group. We linearly interpolate schooling to annual frequency. Other controls are
from IMF IFS or WDI. Trade Openness is constructed by Export plus Import divided by GDP. Initial real
GDP per capita or TFP is the log value for 1985.
  30 For additional sectoral evidence on these mechanisms, see Choi and Pyun (2016).



                                                    47
market exclusion; and another desire to use real exchange rate and capital account policies
to force external saving through a trade surplus when there is an export-led growth
externality. We provide further empirical evidence on growth, TFP, and wage outcomes
consistent with these model mechanisms.


References
Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. 2007. International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercan-
  tilist Views, Theory and Evidence. Open Economies Review 18(2): 191–214.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. 2008. Financial versus Monetary Mercantilism: Long-run
  View of Large International Reserves Hoarding. The World Economy 31(5): 593–611.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2014. Sovereigns, Upstream Cap-
  ital Flows, and Global Imbalances. Journal of the European Economic Associaion 11(5): 1240–1284.
Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanzuk. 2009. Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign Debt. Journal
  of International Economics 77(1): 23–36.
Bacchetta, Philippe, Kenza Benhima, and Yannick Kalantzis. 2013. Capital Controls with Interna-
  tional Reserve Accumulation: Can This Be Optimal? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  5(3): 229–262.
Barro, Robert, and Jong Wha Lee. 2013. A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,
  1950–2010. Journal of Development Economics 104: 184–198.
Bayoumi, Tamin, Joseph Gagnon, and Christian Saborowski. 2015. Official Financial Flows, Capi-
  tal Mobility, and Global Imbalances. Journal of International Money and Finance 52: 146–174.
Bayoumi, Tamin, Sarma Jayanthi, and Jaewoo Lee. 2006. New Rates from New Weights. IMF Staff
  Papers 53(2): 1–4.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R. Young.
  2016. Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary Externality
  Perspective. Journal of Monetary Economics 84(12): 147–165
Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro. 2012. Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial Crises.
  CEPR Discussion Paper 9224.
Bianchi, Javier. 2011. Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle. American
   Economic Review 101(7): 3400–3426.
Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez. 2013. International Reserves and
   Rollover Risk. NBER Working Paper 18628.
Blanchard, Olivier, Gustavo Adler, and Irineu de Carvalho Filho 2015. Can Foreign Exchange In-
   tervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks? IMF Working
   Paper 15/159.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2005. Large Devaluations and the Real
  Exchange Rate. Journal of Political Economy 113(4): 742–784.
Bussière, Matthieu, Gong Cheng, Menzie D. Chinn, and Noëmie Lisack. 2015. For a Few Dollars
  More: Reserves and Growth in Times of Crises. Journal of International Money and Finance 52(4):
  127–145.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2008. A New Measure of Financial Openness. Journal of Compara-
  tive Policy Analysis 10(3): 309–322.

                                               48
Choi, Woo Jin, and Ju Hyun Pyun. 2016. Catching Up by Deglobalization: Capital Account Policy
  and Economic Growth. University of Virginia. Unpublished.
Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2004. The Revived Bretton Woods
  System. International Journal of Finance and Economics 9(4): 307–313.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2007. Capital Controls, Sudden Stops, and Current Account Reversals. In
  Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and Consequences,
  edited by Sebastian Edwards. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 73–120.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. Is the Washington Consensus Dead? Growth,
   Openness, and the Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s. Review of Economics and Statistics 95(5):
  1669–1690.
Fernández, Andrés M., Michael W. Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Martin Uribe.
  2015. Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset. NBER Working Paper 20970.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and George Saravelos. 2012. Can Leading Indicators Assess Country Vulnerabil-
   ity? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Crisis. Journal of International Economics 87(2): 216–231.
Galstyan, Vahagn, and Adnan Velic. 2017. Debt Thresholds and Real Exchange Rates: An Emerg-
  ing Markets Perspective. Journal of International Money and Finance 70: 452–470.
Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan D. Ostry, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides. 2016. Shifting Motives: Ex-
  plaining the Buildup in Official Reserves in Emerging Markets Since the 1980s. IMF Economic
  Review 64: 1–57.
Glick, Reuven, and Michael M. Hutchison. 2011. The Illusive Quest: Do International Capital
   Controls Contribute to Currency Stability. International Review of Economics and Finance 20(1):
   59–70.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
  Allocation Puzzle. Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1484–1515.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2012. Stories of the Twentieth Century for the
  Twenty-First. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1): 226–265.
Hume, David. 1741. Of the Balance of Trade. Reprinted in Essays: Moral, Political and Literary.
  Indianapolis, Ind.: Liberty Fund.
Hur, Sewon, and Illenin O. Kondo. 2013. A Theory of Rollover Risk, Sudden Stops, and Foreign
  Reserves. Journal of International Economics 103: 44–63.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2013. Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate. NBER International
   Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012 edited by Francesco Giavazzi and Kenneth D. West. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, pp. 7–42.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2010. Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxa-
   tion Approach. NBER Working Paper 16377.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière. 2011. The Optimal Level of International Reserves for
   Emerging Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications. Economic Journal 121(555):
   905–930.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1929. The German Transfer Problem. Economic Journal 39: 1–7.
Korinek, Anton. 2016. Currency Wars or Efficient Spillovers? A General Theory of International
  Policy Cooperation. NBER Working Paper 23004.
Korinek, Anton, and Luis Serven. 2016. Undervaluation through Foreign Reserve Accumulation:
  Static Losses, Dynamic Gains. Journal of International Money and Finance 64: 104–136.


                                                49
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. Financial Globalization: A
  Reappraisal. IMF Staff Papers 56(1): 8–62.
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Macro E. Terrones. 2009. Does Openness to International Finan-
  cial Flows Raise Productivity Growth? Journal of International Money and Finance 28(4): 554–580.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2002. External Wealth, the Trade Balance and the
  Real Exchange Rate. European Economic Review 46(6): 1049–1071.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2004. The Transfer Problem Revisited: Net For-
  eign Assets and Real Exchange Rates. Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4): 841–857.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Re-
  vised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004. Journal of International
  Economics 73(2): 223–250.
Michaud, Amanda, and Jacek Rothert. 2014. Optimal Borrowing Constraints and Growth in a
  Small Open Economy. Journal of International Economics 94(2): 326–340.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2009. Financial Instability, Reserves,
  and Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008. American Economic Review Papers and
  Proceedings 99(2): 480–486.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2010. Financial Stability, the Trilemma,
  and International Reserves. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): 57–94.
Quinn, Dennis P., and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008. Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Eco-
  nomic Growth. Review of Financial Studies 21(3): 1403–1449.
Rabe, Collin. 2014. A Welfare Analysis of ’New Mercantilist’ Foreign Reserve Accumulation.
  University of Richmond. Unpublished.
Ricci, Luca Antonio, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Jaewoo Lee. 2008. Real Exchange Rates and
   Fundamentals: A Cross-Country Perspective. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(5): 845–865
Rodrik, Dani. 2008. The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity 39(2): 769–797.




                                                 50
Appendices

A.    Proof of Propositions 1–3
We note that Lagrangian multipliers λ1 , λ2 are function of ω, rsrv∗ , τ, d∗ ,

                                                       ∂c1                       1    1             1
                   λ1 (ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) = u0 (c1 )       T
                                                               =   u 0
                                                                       ( c 1 ) c σ Tσ
                                                                                 1 θ    (c1T )− σ ,
                                                       ∂c1
                                                  1                ∂c2              1                   1   1         1
                   λ2 (ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) =          ∗
                                                       u 0
                                                           ( c 2 )    T
                                                                          =             ∗
                                                                                          u 0
                                                                                              ( c 2 ) c σ Tσ
                                                                                                        2 θ   (c2T )− σ ,
                                                 1+r               ∂c2          1+r

given a composite consumption by (1), and a feasible consumption set by (6) and (7). We can then
obtain the following partial derivates,
                                         ∂λ1                     ∂λ2
                                          ∂ω       ≤ 0,           ∂ω       = 0,
                                         ∂λ1                     ∂λ2
                                        ∂rsrv∗     ≥ 0,         ∂rsrv∗     ≤ 0,                                             (40)
                                         ∂λ1                     ∂λ2
                                         ∂d∗       ≤ 0,          ∂d∗       ≥ 0.

And also,
                                                                                                 ∂λ1            1 ∂λ1
             ∂λt
             ∂κ    = 0 for t = 1, 2,           ∂λt
                                              ∂rsrv∗     = − ∂d
                                                             ∂λt
                                                                ∗          for t = 1, 2,         ∂ω      =     y T ∂d∗
                                                                                                                       .    (41)

Define the function Φ(ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) as,

            Φ(ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) ≡ (1 − τ1 (d∗ , κ )) λ1 (ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) − λ2 (ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗ ) .                     (42)

And let d∗opt (ω, rsrv∗ , κ ) be a solution to consumer’s maximization problem. We note that

                                 Φ ω, rsrv∗ , κ, d∗opt (ω, rsrv∗ , κ ) ≡ 0.
                                                                      
                                                                                                                            (43)

Partial derivatives of Φ yields,

                                      ∂Φ(·)                 ∂λ
                            Φ1 ≡              = (1 − τ1 (·)) 1 ≤ 0,                                                         (44)
                                       ∂ω                    ∂ω
                                      ∂Φ(·)                   ∂λ1        ∂λ2
                            Φ2 ≡            ∗
                                              = (1 − τ1 (·))       ∗
                                                                      −        ≥ 0,                                         (45)
                                      ∂rsrv                  ∂rsrv      ∂rsrv∗
                                      ∂Φ(·)
                            Φ3 ≡              = −τ12 λ1 ≤ 0,                                                                (46)
                                        ∂κ
                                      ∂Φ(·)                 ∂λ       ∂λ2
                            Φ4 ≡              = (1 − τ1 (·)) ∗1 − ∗ − τ11 λ1 ≤ 0.                                           (47)
                                       ∂d∗                  ∂d       ∂d
By the implicit function theorem combined with (40), (41), and (44)–(47), we have

                                            ∂d∗                            Φ1
                                      −yT <                            = −    ≤ 0,                                          (48)
                                            ∂ω           d∗ =d∗opt         Φ4
                                          ∂d∗                              Φ2
                                      0<                               = −    ≤ 1,                                          (49)
                                         ∂rsrv∗          d∗ =d∗opt         Φ4
                                            ∂d∗                            Φ3
                                                                       = −    ≤ 0.                                          (50)
                                            ∂κ           d∗ =d∗opt         Φ4


                                                              A.1
We can rewrite the equilibrium condition (9),
                                                                                  1
                                                θN 1 
                                            
                                                                T      ∗   ∗opt
                                                                                 σ
                              rer1 =                   (1 + ω )y − rsrv − d (·)      .                                                       (51)
                                                θT yN

Taking a derivative of (51), we have
                                                                   σ1         1
                                                                                   −1
                                                                                                             
                                                  1       θN 1                                       ∂d∗opt
                               ∂rer1
                                ∂ω      =         σ       θT yN
                                                                         c1T σ              yT +      ∂ω               ≥ 0,
                                                                  σ1      1
                                                                               −1
                                                                                                        ∗opt
                                                                                                               
                                                 1       θN 1
                              ∂rer1
                             ∂rsrv∗     =        σ       θT yN
                                                                    c1T σ   −1 + ∂rsrv
                                                                                   ∂d
                                                                                        ∗ ≤ 0,
                                                                  N  σ1 1  ∗opt 
                                                            1     θ 1           −1 ∂d
                               ∂rer1
                                ∂κ      =                   σ     θT yN
                                                                          c1T σ      ∂κ   ≤ 0.

Q.E.D.


B.     The Model with Endogenous Policies : Full Illustration
Private agent’s problem is given as follows. Given prices, { p1,2 , p̂1,2 }, a set of government policies,
{κ, T1,2 , T̂1,2 , r }, and growth rates g, ĝ, private agent maximizes the utility,
                                                                                                                    
                                                                 1                                     1
  U private ≡ max{cT ,c N ,ĉT ,ĉ N ,d∗ ,a} (1 − π ) u(c1 ) +        u ( c 2 )   + π   u ( ĉ 1 ) +        u ( ĉ 2 )   , (52)
                          1,2 1,2 1,2 1,2                      1 + r∗                                1 + r∗

subject to

                c1T + p1 c1N + a + τ (d∗ , κ ) ≤ (1 + ω )y T + p1 y N + d∗ + T1 ,                                                            (53)
                   c2T + p2 c2N + (1 + r ∗ )d∗                                          T
                                                           ≤ (1 + g)y + p2 y + (1 + r ) a + T2 ,      N
                                                                                                                                             (54)
                ĉ1T + p̂1 ĉ1N + a + τ (d∗ , κ )          ≤ (1 + ω − ξ T )yT + p̂1 (1 − ξ N )y N + d∗ + T̂1 ,                               (55)
                   ĉ2T + p̂2 ĉ2N + (1 + r ∗ )d∗          ≤ (1 + ĝ)yT + p̂2 y N + (1 + r ) a + T̂2 ,                                       (56)

where ĉtT ,ĉtN represents consumptions of period t with crisis, p̂t is the price of nontradable goods
for period t with crisis, T̂t is the transfer (negative tax) of period t with crisis. Note that non-crisis
budget constraints are exactly the same as in the previous section. And the level of debt (d∗ ) and
asset (a) contract cannot be renegotiated so they are the same in each state.31
    We can define solutions of private agent’s problem as,
                       Tp     Np       Tp   Np
                    {c1,2 , c1,2 , ĉ1,2 , ĉ1,2 , d∗ p , a p } ≡ argmax{cT                        N T           N     ∗       U private ,
                                                                                             1,2 ,c1,2 ,ĉ1,2 ,ĉ1,2 ,d ,a }
                                                                                                                                             (57)
                            given { p1,2 , p̂1,2 }, {κ, T1,2 , T̂1,2 , r }, and { g, ĝ}.

     The government budget constraints in the non-crisis state are the same as in (4), (5). In the
  31 Notethat r is a government determined interest rate since foreign investors cannot participate in
domestic financial market. And thus the government is the only participant and behave as a monopolitic
provider of domestic asset. Again, although it is an important issue in general, we abstract from it
throughout the anlaysis; tax and bond financing are equivalent.




                                                                           A.2
crisis state, the government budget constraints are
                                                                                  
                           rsrv∗ + T̂1 ≤ a + τ (d∗ , κ ) + rsrv∗ − η (rsrv∗ , y T ) ,                       (58)
                        T̂2 + (1 + r ) a ≤ 0,                                                               (59)

where η (rsrv∗ , y T ) is the liquidation penalty.
  Now we can write the government’s problem as
                                                                                                  
     govt                                            p       1       p           p       1        p
   U      ≡ max{rsrv∗ ,κ,T1,2 ,T̂1,2 ,r} (1 − π ) u(c1 ) +        u(c2 ) + π u(ĉ1 ) +        u(ĉ2 ) ,     (60)
                                                           1 + r∗                      1 + r∗

subject to the government budget constraints, (4), (5), (58), (59), growth rates (18) and (19),
aggregate exports (28), and the set of private agent’s solutions (57), with resource conditions (20),
(21), (22), (23), (24), (25), (26), (27), and prices such that
                              Tp                            Tp
                         θ N ct                       θ N ĉt
                                 = pσt ,        and              = p̂σt ,    for   t = 1, 2.
                         θT cN p                      θ T ĉ N p
                              t                             t

    Intuitively, we note that the government’s problem is to replicate the solution of the constrained
social planner’s problem (29). Indeed, there are infinitely many policies that solve the government’s
problem. Instead of documenting all of them, we propose one set of policies. First, set r strictly
smaller than r ∗ . This will guarantee a to be zero in U private . Then set rsrv∗ = rsrv∗opt . And set κ opt
to satisfy the following condition
                                                                            opt      opt
                                                              (1 − π )λ2 + π λ̂1
                                   1 − τ1 (d∗opt , κ ) =                    opt      opt                    (61)
                                                              (1 − π )λ1 + π λ̂1
                  opt   (1−π ) opt        opt                 opt
where (1 − π )λ1 ,       1+r ∗ λ 2 ,   π λ̂1 , and     π
                                                      1+r ∗ λ̂1     are the Lagrangian multipliers of (53), (54),
                                                                                    opt
(55), and (56), respectively. Finally set the transfer scheme: T1 = −rsrv∗opt + τ (d∗opt , κ opt ),
  opt                       opt                                                  opt
T2 = (1 + r ∗ )rsrv∗opt , T̂1 = τ (d∗opt , κ opt ) − η (rsrv∗opt , y T ), and T̂2 = 0. These define one of
solutions to the government’s problem and attain U govt .
     If we assume a form of log utility (relative risk aversion γ = 1) and unit elasticity between
tradable and nontradable goods (σ = 1), closed form solutions are given by (34),(35), and

                                      1 + r∗
                                                                                    
                             opt −1                                  1
                               
                 opt
               c1    = λ1           =             (1 + ω ) +                 (1 + ḡ) ,                    (62)
                                      2 + r∗                  1 + r∗ + ν
                                      1 + r∗ + ν
                                                                                        
                             opt −1                                        1
                               
                 opt
               c2    = λ2           =                 (1 + ω ) +                 (1 + ḡ) ,                (63)
                                        2 + r∗                      1 + r∗ + ν
                                                      1 + r∗
                                                                                                        
                             opt −1      opt −1                                           1
                                          
           opt   opt
         ĉ1 = ĉ2   = λ̂1          = λ̂2          =        ∗
                                                                (1 + ω − ξ − η̄ ) +            (1 + ḡ).   (64)
                                                      2+r                               1 + r∗




                                                           A.3
C.    Proof of Theorem
Let κ opt be a optimal capital control which satisfies the condition (37). Then we can rewrite the
equilibrium condition as an identity,
                                                                     opt
                                                                         !
                                                1 + r∗
                                                      
                              1                                π c1
                                           ≡ 1+          1+                .
                       τ1 (d∗opt , κ opt )        ν          1 − π ĉopt
                                                                            1

Taking derivatives on each side with respect to ξ T yields
                                                                              
           opt
                             ∗            opt     opt                  ∗ opt
        ∂κ               1+r        π     c1     ∂ĉ1                 ∂d                −1
               =  1+                                   τ1 (·)2 − τ11           τ12 (·) ≤ 0.
                                                                              
            T                                 2     T
                                  1 − π opt                            ∂ξ T
                                       
         ∂ξ                ν                     ∂ξ
                                         ĉ1

Taking derivatives on each side with respect to ν yields
                                              opt                               opt
                                                  !                                 !
   ∂κ opt                               π   c       1
                                                         
                                                           1 + r ∗   π    1 ∂c
          = (τ1 (·))−2 (τ12 (·))−1 1+         1
                                                      − 1+                      1
                                                                                      ≥ 0.
    ∂ν                                1 − π ĉopt ν2         ν      1 − π ĉ1 ∂ν
                                                   1

Q.E.D.


D.    Robustness Checks: Cross-Sectional Analysis
In this section, we check the validity of the robustness checks using cross-sectional analysis rather
than annual panel data. In Table A.1, we report the results of the specification

            ∆log ( REERi,T1 T2 ) = α + DT + β NFAxR ∆NFAXRi,T1 T2 + β RSRV ∆RSRVi,T1 T2
                                      + β R&KAControl ∆ ( RSRVi,T1 T2 ) · KAControli,T1 T2
                                      + βKAControl KAControli,T1 T2
                                      + βYD ∆ log(YDi,T1 T2 ) + βT1 T2 ∆ log( TTi,T1 T2 ) + ei ,   (65)

Table A.2 reports the results with the binary interaction term constructed using other capital
control measures from Edwards (2007) and Fernández et al. (2015), and capital account openness
measure from Quinn and Toyoda (2008). In Table A.3, we analyze period 3 and 4, to include
real exchange rate determination during the crisis period; interestingly, the negative association
between reserve accumulation and the real exchange rate still holds. In Table A.4, we document
the result without oil exporting countries. And in Table A.5, we incorporate the real effective
exchange rate index from the IMF. All results are broadly robust and consistent with previous
results in the main text.


E.    List of Countries
The list of sample countries and their binary financial openness indicator (1 − KAClosed) by
period is shown in Table A.6.




                                                       A.4
Table A.1: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis, Continuous
           Capital Control Measures

                                                                    Periods 12 (Average 86–96 minus Average 75–85)
                                                            Periods 23 (Average 97–07 minus Average 86–96), Pooled Sample
Dependent variable:                                         Full                      Advanced                    Developing
∆ log(REER)                                                Sample                     Countries                   Countries
                                                   (1)                (2)       (3)               (4)     (5)               (6)
∆ NFAxR                                          0.18∗              0.25∗∗     -0.11           -0.11      0.20            0.31∗∗
                                                 (1.67)            (2.41)     (-1.47)        (-1.44)     (1.65)            (2.60)
∆ RSRV                                           -0.66∗          -0.70∗∗∗      -0.09            0.05    -0.96∗∗          -0.79∗∗∗
                                                 (-1.92)          (-2.82)     (-0.22)         (0.09)    (-2.45)           (-3.24)
∆ RSRV × KAControl                                               -0.57∗∗∗                       0.09                     -0.84∗∗∗
                                                                  (-2.82)                     (0.21)                      (-3.90)
KAControl                                       -0.04∗∗             -0.02       0.01           0.01       -0.00             0.03
                                                (-2.21)           (-1.23)      (0.35)         (0.27)    (-0.16)            (1.35)
∆ ln YD                                           0.05              0.07         0.02          -0.00       0.03             0.01
                                                 (0.49)            (0.68)      (0.09)        (-0.01)     (0.24)            (0.07)
∆ ln TT                                           0.09              0.10      0.35∗∗∗        0.35∗∗∗       0.04             0.04
                                                 (0.82)            (1.01)      (3.02)         (2.93)     (0.36)            (0.40)
Time Dummy                                        0.07             0.08∗        -0.03          -0.03    0.19∗∗∗           0.19∗∗∗
                                                 (1.55)            (1.74)     (-0.54)        (-0.53)     (3.21)            (3.23)
Observations                                      150                 150       44             44         106              106
Countries                                          75                  75       22             22          53               53
R2                                                0.13                0.17     0.20           0.20        0.13             0.20
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                        0.03                0.00     0.96           0.77        0.01             0.00
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                                  0.00                    0.62                         0.00
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based
on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.



Table A.2: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis, Other Capital
           Control Measures

                                                                                             Quinn                       Fernández
Dependent variable:                                        Edwards                         and Toyoda                       et al.
∆ log(REER)                                                Period 123                      Period123                      Period23
                                                              (1)                                 (2)                          (3)
∆ NFAxR                                                      0.22∗∗                          0.23∗∗                        0.12∗∗
                                                             (2.09)                           (1.99)                        (2.15)
∆ RSRV                                                        0.11                             0.43                         -0.47
                                                             (0.21)                           (0.79)                       (-0.84)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                           -1.36∗∗                         -1.81∗∗∗                        -0.57
                                                            (-2.15)                          (-2.75)                       (-0.87)
∆ ln YD                                                       0.11                            -0.00                         -0.05
                                                             (0.99)                          (-0.01)                       (-0.34)
∆ ln TT                                                       0.10                             0.06                        -0.38∗∗
                                                             (0.92)                           (0.38)                       (-2.40)
Time Dummy                                                   0.11∗∗                          0.12∗∗∗
                                                             (2.40)                           (2.66)
Observations                                                  144                             130                               60
Countries                                                      72                              65                               60
R2                                                            0.12                            0.13                             0.29
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                                    0.84                            0.73                             0.30
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                          0.02                            0.00                             0.30
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based
on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.



                                                                      A.5
Table A.3: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis With Crisis Period

                                                                    Period 34 (Average 08–11 minus Average 97–07)
Dependent variable:                                     Full                                  Advanced                         Developing
∆ log(REER)                                            Sample                                 Countries                        Countries
                                              (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)           (5)                 (6)
∆ NFAxR                                       0.02                  0.02             0.04∗               -0.04         -0.01               0.04
                                             (1.24)                (1.44)             (1.78)           (-1.16)        (-0.07)            (0.62)
∆ RSRV                                      -0.52∗∗∗               -0.11               -0.45             -0.19        -0.52∗∗             -0.07
                                             (-2.70)              (-0.87)            (-1.53)           (-0.93)        (-2.64)           (-0.47)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                                -0.52∗∗∗                              -1.63∗∗                         -0.58∗∗∗
                                                                  (-2.80)                              (-2.49)                          (-2.75)
∆ ln YD                                       0.05                  0.04              0.01                0.19         0.01               0.01
                                             (0.34)                (0.27)            (0.02)             (0.41)        (0.07)             (0.06)
∆ ln TT                                       0.00                 -0.01            0.27∗∗∗             0.24∗∗         -0.02              -0.05
                                             (0.03)               (-0.16)            (3.11)             (2.44)        (-0.23)           (-0.53)
Observations                                   75                   75                 22                               53                   53
Countries                                      75                   75                 22                               53                   53
R2                                            0.26                 0.31               0.44                0.48         0.26                 0.32
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                    0.00                 0.33               0.09                0.48         0.02                 0.49
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                               0.00                                   0.02                              0.01
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We take the average over 11 or 4
years for each variable (in differences) and perform a cross-sectional analysis. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.




Table A.4: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis Without Oil
           Exporting Countries

                                                                                    Period 12 & 23 Pooled Sample
Dependent variable:                                              Full                            Advanced                      Developing
∆ log(REER)                                                     Sample                           Countries                     Countries
                                                        (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)      (5)                 (6)
∆ NFAxR                                               0.21∗∗∗             0.22∗∗∗             -0.10          NA        0.24∗∗           0.24∗∗
                                                      (2.64)               (2.79)            (-1.07)                   (2.43)            (2.50)
∆ RSRV                                                 -0.32                0.32              0.05                      -0.11              0.34
                                                      (-0.99)              (0.81)            (0.11)                    (-0.25)           (0.70)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                                         -1.23∗∗                                                         -0.75
                                                                          (-2.19)                                                       (-1.33)
∆ ln YD                                                0.05                 0.09           0.05                          -0.04            -0.02
                                                      (0.49)               (0.85)         (0.29)                       (-0.34)          (-0.16)
∆ ln TT                                                0.07                 0.08         0.37∗∗∗                          0.01            0.01
                                                      (0.86)               (0.95)         (2.76)                        (0.09)           (0.17)
Time Dummy                                            0.10∗∗               0.11∗∗          -0.03                       0.18∗∗∗          0.18∗∗∗
                                                      (2.24)               (2.45)        (-0.79)                        (3.10)           (3.08)
Obs                                                    122                 122                 42                        80                  80
Countries                                               61                  61                 21                        40                  40
R2                                                     0.12                0.14               0.20                      0.21                0.22
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV                             0.12                0.81               0.76                      0.48                0.85
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                                       0.01                                                             0.10
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. t-statistics in parentheses based
on heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.




                                                                     A.6
Table A.5: Determinants of the Real Effective Exchange Rate: Cross-Sectional Analysis, IMF REER Index

                                                                                           Period 23
Dependent variable:                                           Full                       Advanced                      Developing
∆ log(REER)                                                  Sample                      Countries                     Countries
                                                     (1)                (2)        (3)                 (4)       (5)                (6)
∆ NFAxR                                              0.09             0.10∗      -0.20∗           -0.20∗       0.19∗∗          0.23∗∗
                                                    (1.47)             (1.74)    (-2.07)          (-2.07)       (2.21)          (2.32)
∆ RSRV                                             -0.88∗∗              -0.33     -0.18            -0.18      -1.32∗∗∗           -0.63
                                                   (-2.37)            (-0.81)    (-0.28)          (-0.28)      (-2.77)         (-1.01)
∆ RSRV × KAClosed                                                     -0.92∗                        0.00                         -0.97
                                                                      (-1.85)                        (.)                       (-1.64)
∆ ln YD                                            0.21∗∗             0.21∗∗      -0.17            -0.17       0.30∗∗∗         0.27∗∗∗
                                                   (2.40)              (2.55)    (-0.96)          (-0.96)       (3.35)          (3.60)
∆ ln TT                                             0.02                0.04      0.41∗            0.41∗         0.06            0.07
                                                   (0.17)              (0.48)     (2.06)           (2.06)       (0.66)          (0.94)
Observations                                         54                 54         22                            32                  32
Countries                                            54                 54         22                            32                  32
R2                                                  0.27               0.32       0.29               0.29       0.40                0.45
p-value:  β NFAxR6= β RSRV                          0.02               0.31       0.97               0.97       0.01                0.18
p-value: β NFAxR 6= β RSRV ×KAClosed                                   0.05                          0.05                           0.07
Notes: *,**,*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, 1% levels. The REER increases when it appreciates. We take the average over 11
years for each variable (in differences) and perform a cross-sectional analysis. t-statistics in parentheses based on heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors. Constant terms not reported.




                                                                  A.7
                                                                              Table A.6: List of Countries

                         Advanced Countries                                                                            Developing Countries
                            22 counries                                                                                    53 counries


                                 Financial Openness Index                                         Financial Openness Index                                       Financial Openness Index
                           1975–2007    1975–1996     1986–2007                             1975–2007    1975–1996     1986–2007                            1975–2007    1975–1996    1986–2007
       Australia                1            1            1        Algeria                      0             0            0        Korea, Republic of          0            0               0
       Austria                  1            1            1        Argentina                    0             0            0        Libya                       0            0               0
       Belgium                  1            1            1        Bahrain, Kingdom of          1             1            1        Madagascar                  0            0               0
       Canada                   1            1            1        Bolivia                      1             1            1        Malaysia                    1            1               1
       Denmark                  1            1            1        Brazil                       0             0            0        Mexico                      1            1               1
       Finland                  1            1            1        Burundi                      0             0            0        Morocco                     0            0               0
       France                   1            1            1        Cameroon                     0             0            0        Nepal                       0            0               0
       Germany                  1            1            1        Chile                        0             0            0        Niger                       0            0               0
       Greece                   1            0            1        China, P.R.: Mainland        0             0            0        Nigeria                     0            0               0
       Iceland                  1            0            1        Colombia                     0             0            0        Pakistan                    0            0               0
       Ireland                  1            1            1        Costa Rica                   0             0            0        Papua New Guinea            0            1               0




A.8
       Italy                    1            1            1        Cote d’Ivoire                0             0            0        Paraguay                    0            0               1
       Japan                    1            1            1        Cyprus                       0             0            0        Peru                        1            0               1
       Netherlands              1            1            1        Dominican Rep.               0             0            0        Philippines                 0            0               0
       New Zealand              1            1            1        Ecuador                      1             1            0        Saudi Arabia                1            1               1
       Norway                   1            1            1        Egypt                        0             0            1        Senegal                     0            1               0
       Portugal                 1            1            1        Fiji                         0             1            0        Solomon Islands             0            1               0
       Spain                    1            1            1        Gambia, The                  1             1            1        Sri Lanka                   0            0               0
       Sweden                   1            1            1        Guatemala                    1             1            1        Syrian Arab Rep.            0            0               0
       Switzerland              1            1            1        Honduras                     0             1            0        Tanzania                    0            0               0
       United Kingdom           1            1            1        India                        0             0            0        Thailand                    0            1               0
       United States            1            1            1        Indonesia                    1             1            1        Togo                        0            0               0
                                                                   Iran, Islamic Rep. of        0             0            0        Trinidad and Tobago         1            1               1
                                                                   Israel                       1             0            1        Turkey                      0            0               0
                                                                   Jamaica                      1             0            1        Uruguay                     1            1               1
                                                                   Jordan                       1             0            1        Venezuela, Rep. Bol.        1            1               0
                                                                   Kenya                        0             0            0
      Notes: Countries with IMF IFS code less than 199 are classified as advanced, except for Turkey. For financial openness indexes, we calculate the average of capital account openness
      measure from Chinn and Ito (2008) over the given period, and dichotomize into a binary code.
