NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS IN THE U.S. HOUSING MARKET
Corina Boar
Denis Gorea
Virgiliu Midrigan
Working Paper 23345
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23345

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We thank Sonia Gilbukh and Federico Kochen for excellent research assistance, Jarda Borovicka,
VV Chari, Morris Davis, Greg Kaplan, Ellen McGrattan, Karel Mertens, Giuseppe Moscarini, Kristoffer
Nimark, Yaz Terajima, Gianluca Violante and Albert Zevelev for helpful suggestions, as well as Neil
Bhutta for kindly sharing his data with us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Corina Boar, Denis Gorea, and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Constraints in the U.S. Housing Market
Corina Boar, Denis Gorea, and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 23345
April 2017, Revised May 2020
JEL No. E21,E30
ABSTRACT
We study the severity of liquidity constraints in the U.S. housing market using a life-cycle model with
uninsurable idiosyncratic risks in which houses are illiquid, but agents can extract home equity by
refinancing their mortgages. The model implies that four-fifths of homeowners are liquidity constrained
and willing to pay an average of 13 cents to extract an additional dollar of liquidity from their home.
Most homeowners value liquidity for precautionary reasons, anticipating the possibility of income
declines and the need to make mortgage payments. The model reproduces well the observed response
of consumption to tax rebates and mortgage relief programs and predicts large welfare gains from
policies aimed at providing temporary liquidity relief to homeowners.

Corina Boar
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
corina.boar@gmail.com

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu

Denis Gorea
IDIS Viitorul
Chisinau, Moldova
denis.gorea@viitorul.org

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23345

1

Introduction

Housing wealth is the most important savings instrument for most U.S. households, twothirds of whom own a home. Housing equity is by far the largest component of homeowners’
balance sheets and accounts for approximately 80% of their wealth.1 Housing is, however,
a relatively illiquid asset because accessing home equity by selling or remortgaging a house
involves considerable costs. Moreover, most mortgage contracts require homeowners to repay
principal and build equity over time, thus exposing them to the risk of being unable to
meet their mortgage obligations in the event of a transitory income loss or a large housing
maintenance expense. This risk is exacerbated by the presence of payment-to-income (PTI)
constraints which preclude individuals with a temporary drop in income from tapping home
equity and may lead to large swings in consumption in the face of transitory shocks.
Our goal in this paper is to ask: how liquid is housing wealth in the U.S.? We study
this question using a quantitative life-cycle model with uninsurable idiosyncratic risks in
which we explicitly model the key institutional details of the U.S. housing and mortgage
markets. We parameterize the model to match salient characteristics of households’ balance
sheets, their income, as well as refinancing decisions. Our model predicts that four-fifths of
homeowners are liquidity constrained, in that they would be better off if they could convert
housing equity into liquid wealth. These homeowners are willing to pay 13 cents, on average,
for every additional dollar of liquidity extracted from their homes. Overall, the frictions that
prevent homeowners from tapping home equity are sizable.
This finding has important implications for our understanding of consumption responses
to fiscal stimulus transfers. A large empirical literature (Johnson et al., 2006, Parker et al.,
2013) has documented large marginal propensities to consume (MPC) out of tax rebates, a
feature inconsistent with the prediction of simple one-asset Bewley models. We show that
our model explains two-thirds of the consumption response to cash transfers in the data,
quantitatively consistent with Kaplan and Violante (2014), who study a simpler model with
liquid and illiquid assets, but abstract from the details of the U.S. housing market. By
taking a bottom-up approach and explicitly microfounding the illiquid asset, our paper thus
complements a large recent literature studying two-asset models.
Motivated by our finding that housing wealth is illiquid, we evaluate the effects of two
types of mortgage assistance programs that provide relief to liquidity constrained homeown1

See Section 2 for a description of the data source underlying these numbers.

1

ers. We show that a mortgage modification program that reduces short-term payments, but
does not entail wealth transfers to homeowners, has a sizable impact on consumption. Its
effect is almost as large as that of a program that reduces both short- and long-term debt
obligations, thus entailing a wealth transfer to homeowners. This result is consistent with
the empirical findings of Ganong and Noel (2019), who study similar interventions that were
part of the Home Affordable Mortgage Program (HAMP). We also show that mortgage forbearance programs, which provide automatic relief for homeowners who experience a spell of
low income, have substantial welfare gains. We therefore conclude that policies that provide
short-term liquidity to homeowners, as opposed to long-term debt relief, are very effective, a
result that echoes the point made by Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014).
Agents in our model face persistent and transitory income shocks and can save in a liquid
asset at a relatively low interest rate. They can either rent or purchase housing subject to
transaction costs. Homeowners face transitory home maintenance shocks. They can borrow
against the value of their home, at a relatively high interest rate, and are subject to loan-tovalue and payment-to-income constraints. Mortgage loans are 30-year, fixed-rate contracts
which require payment of interest and principal over time. Homeowners have the option to
extract home equity by refinancing their mortgage. We assume that there are both monetary
and non-pecuniary costs of obtaining a new mortgage. The non-pecuniary costs are a standin for other barriers to obtaining a mortgage such as time costs, information gathering costs
and other behavioral factors.
We parameterize the model using data from the 2001 SCF on the poorest 80% of households and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).2 We choose parameter values to
match moments that describe household income, the homeownership rate, the distribution
of liquid assets, the ratio of home values and mortgage debt to aggregate income, as well as
the frequency of home equity extraction. We document using PSID data that approximately
8% of homeowners extract home equity per year, a number very close to that reported by
Bhutta and Keys (2016) using a large panel of consumer credit records.
Even though we calibrate the parameters of the model to only reproduce a number of
unconditional moments from the data, the model also reproduces a wide range of characteristics of household balance sheets, as well as conditional moments that describe the
characteristics of households who refinance and their refinancing behavior. Notably, owing
2

As we show below, agents in the top 20% of the wealth distribution have very large holdings of liquid
assets and are unlikely to be liquidity constrained.

2

to the non-pecuniary costs of mortgage origination, the model is successful in reproducing the
low fraction of households that refinance following a decline in mortgage rates, a pervasive
finding in the literature.
We evaluate the severity of liquidity constraints by conducting an experiment in which
we increase homeowners’ liquid assets and mortgage debt by the same amount, leaving their
overall wealth unchanged. This experiment effectively offers homeowners a one-time opportunity to extract home equity for free. We find that 82% of homeowners are better off, with the
average homeowner willing to pay 13 cents for every dollar of home equity extracted. We thus
conclude that liquidity constraints are severe and bind for most homeowners, even though
much fewer of them are hand-to-mouth in the sense of hitting the borrowing constraint on
liquid assets.
This result suggests that there is a critical distinction between whether a household is
hand-to-mouth and whether a household is liquidity constrained. Intuitively, a household
may have a positive amount of liquid savings, and therefore not be hand-to-mouth, yet
it may be better off with an even more liquid portfolio that would allow it to respond to
potentially bad income realizations in the future. Such a household would value the option to
convert home equity into liquid assets, yet is unable to do so because of the costs of mortgage
origination.
Though we focus most of our analysis on studying the steady-state implications of liquidity constraints, we also consider the effect of a decline in house prices and changes in
mortgage interest rates. An increase in mortgage rates exacerbates the severity of liquidity
constraints because refinancing becomes more costly, as it entails an increase in mortgage
payments. Similarly, a fall in house prices, which leaves many borrowers underwater, also
makes liquidity constraints more severe and makes mortgage modification programs that
increase homeowners’ liquidity more valuable.
Related Work Our paper is related to several strands of the literature on housing and
macroeconomics.
First, it contributes to research that studies the role of housing in allowing households to
smooth consumption. Hurst and Stafford (2004) provide empirical evidence that households
use home equity to insure against bad income shocks. On the theory side, two closely related
papers are Chen et al. (2020) and Kaplan et al. (2019). Both of these papers study models in
which houses are illiquid, mortgages have long durations and there are costs of home equity
3

extraction but, unlike us, focus on the response of consumption to aggregate business cycle
shocks. In contrast to these papers, our work measures the importance of housing equity in
smoothing idiosyncratic shocks.
Second, our paper is related to the literature studying models of household refinancing
behavior in the aftermath of aggregate shocks such as interest rate or house price changes.
Consistent with the findings of this literature, in our model refinancing activity also drops
after a decline in house prices (Berger et al., 2018, Beraja et al., 2018) and an increase in
interest rates (Berger et al., 2020, Eichenbaum et al., 2019).
Third, on the technical side, ours is a model in which households have three assets in their
portfolios, owing to frictions on mortgage refinancing. In that sense, we build on the work
of Chambers et al. (2009a,b), Chen et al. (2020), Campbell and Cocco (2003), Chatterjee
and Eyigungor (2015), Corbae and Quintin (2015), who also consider economies with three
assets but focus on answering different questions. Owing to numerous non-convexities in
the households’ budget sets, solving such models is challenging. In contrast, a much larger
literature on housing abstracts from frictions in mortgage refinancing, which reduces the
number of assets in households’ portfolio (Davis and Heathcote, 2005, Rı́os-Rull and SánchezMarcos, 2008, Kiyotaki et al., 2011, Iacoviello and Pavan, 2013, Landvoigt et al., 2015,
Favilukis et al., 2017).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some evidence that
motivates our modeling choices. Section 3 describes the model. Section 4 discusses our
calibration strategy. Section 5 performs several tests of the model. Section 6 studies the
severity of liquidity constraints and the consumption response to cash transfers. Section
7 studies the impact of different mortgage assistance programs. Section 8 presents several
robustness checks we have conducted. Lastly, Section 9 concludes.

2

Motivating Evidence

We document that a large fraction of U.S. homeowners hold most of their wealth in the form
of housing equity. Though this fact has been documented elsewhere,3 we report additional
statistics on the distribution of housing equity and liquid assets that we then use to evaluate
our quantitative model. We also summarize the evidence on the amount of home equity
extraction.
3

See Kaplan and Violante (2014).

4

2.1

Data

We use data from the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to compute measures of
the various components of household wealth. We focus on this time period in order to
isolate salient features of household portfolios from adjustments in balance sheets induced
by the large house price fluctuations over the subsequent decade. Here we briefly discuss the
variables we use.4 Our measure of housing is the value of the primary residence owned by each
household. We calculate mortgage debt by adding the outstanding principal on all mortgages
secured by the primary residence, including home equity loans and other second-lien loans.
Our measure of liquid assets adds balances on all checking and savings accounts, money
market deposits and mutual funds, certificates of deposit, directly held pooled investment
funds, bonds, stocks, and secondary residential real estate. We subtract from these the
amount owed on credit cards, installment loans, and debt secured by secondary properties.
Our inclusion of secondary properties in our measure of liquid assets is motivated by the
observation that these are transacted quite often and are thus relatively liquid.5 Most households do not own such properties, so this choice does not greatly affect our results.
We define total wealth as the sum of liquid assets and housing, net of mortgage debt, thus
excluding balances held in retirement accounts. We account for the latter in our model by
directly subtracting transfers into and out of these accounts from the household’s measure
of disposable income. As Kaplan and Violante (2014) point out, retirement accounts make
up less than 2% of the median household’s wealth in the U.S., so excluding these from our
definition of wealth does not change our statistics much.
We also use data from the 1999-2001 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
to compute several statistics that describe patterns of home equity extraction. We restrict
the sample to homeowners who do not report a change in their main residence between 1999
and 2001 and follow Bhutta and Keys (2016) in defining home equity extractors as those who
report an increase in their mortgage balance of more than 5% between these two surveys.

2.2

Stylized Facts

Panel A of Table 1 reports several key features of the data. We report statistics for the
entire sample, as well as separately for those in the top 20% and bottom 80% of the wealth
4
5

See our Appendix for a more detailed description of our measures of wealth and disposable income.
See our Appendix for evidence on this.

5

distribution.
The aggregate stock of liquid assets is quite high: its per-capita average is equal to
$154,000, or about two-thirds of overall wealth and more than three times annual income.6
This average masks, however, a great deal of heterogeneity in the households’ portfolio composition. The richest 20% of households have an average stock of liquid assets of $670,000,
seven times their annual income. The poorest 80% of households, in contrast, have an average
stock of liquid assets of only $17,000, less than half their average annual income.
The lower tail of the distribution of liquid assets reveals an even more striking pattern.
The richest 20% of households have sizable amounts of liquid assets even at the low end of
the distribution – the 10th percentile is equal to $32,000. In contrast, the poorest 80% of
households have very few liquid assets. Among households in this group, the 10th percentile of
liquid assets is equal to −$1,600, the 25th percentile is equal to zero, while the 50% percentile
is equal to only $2,700, less then one-tenth of the average annual income of these households.
We find a similar pattern when we restrict our calculations to the sample of households
who own a home. As Panel A of Table 1 indicates, 71% of all households own a home.
Among those in the bottom 80% of the wealth distribution, 64% of households own a home.
The 25th percentile of liquid assets is equal to $400 for homeowners in this latter group, thus
about 1% of their average income. The median liquid assets of these homeowners is also
small, approximately $5,700.
Consider finally the share of housing equity (housing net of mortgage debt) in households’
total wealth. Table 1 shows that for the sample of all homeowners, the median share of
housing equity in total wealth is equal to 77%. This pattern is even more pronounced when
we focus on the poorest 80% of households: housing wealth accounts for 87% of all of the
wealth of the median homeowner in this group.
To summarize, a large fraction of households in the US, and especially those in the bottom
80% of the wealth distribution, hold most of their wealth in the form of housing equity, and
have very little additional liquid wealth. This group of households will be the focus of our
quantitative analysis.
Frequency of Home Equity Extraction. Whether housing wealth is liquid or not depends on the availability of opportunities to extract home equity. We use the 1999-2001
6

We have adjusted all variables for household size using the OECD equivalent scales. All numbers are
expressed in 2016 USD.

6

waves of the PSID to calculate that 15% of mortgage borrowers who do not move increase
their mortgage balance by more than 5% over this two–year period, corresponding to an
annualized refinancing rate of 7.5%. As Panel B of Table 1 shows, the median homeowner
who extracts equity increases their mortgage balance by 24% and the loan-to-value ratio by
11%. These numbers are similar to those reported by Bhutta and Keys (2016) who study
a large, nationally representative panel of consumer credit records. They report that 8.5%
of mortgage borrowers who did not move extracted home equity in 1999 and 7.3% in 2000.
Though the fraction of homeowners who extract equity increased in the subsequent years of
the boom in the U.S. housing market (to a high of 18.4% in 2003), the frequency of home
equity extraction returned to pre-2000 level by 2008.
Homeowners may refinance for two reasons: to extract home equity and to take advantage
of lower interest rates after a period of mortgage rate declines. We argue next that home
equity extraction was an important driver of refinancing activity in the 1999-2000 period.
First, as Bhutta and Keys (2016) show, the median increase in monthly mortgage payments
in those years was larger than the median increase in mortgage balances, suggesting that the
majority of those who refinanced did not secure lower interest rates. For example, in 1999
the median increase in monthly payments was 27%, larger than the 23% median increase
in the mortgage balance. Second, we document using the PSID data that homeowners who
extracted equity between 1999 and 2001 had much lower liquid assets at the beginning of this
period. For example, the median liquid assets of those who extracted equity was $800, much
lower than the $6,000 median liquid assets of the remaining homeowners, and their median
liquid asset to wealth ratio was only 4%, compared to 16% for the other homeowners. These
findings corroborate those of Hurst and Stafford (2004), who document a similar pattern
using older data.

3

Model

Motivated by these observations we next develop a model that we use to measure how liquid housing wealth is and the implications of refinancing frictions for households’ ability to
smooth consumption. This is an overlapping generations economy. Agents live for a finite
number of periods, are subject to idiosyncratic income and housing maintenance shocks, derive utility from consumption and housing, disutility from home production, and can save
using a one-period liquid asset or by purchasing a home. We study a partial equilibrium
7

model, so interest rates and house prices are exogenously given.7 Agents can either rent or
own their homes. Selling one’s home entails a fixed transaction cost. Agents can borrow
against their home by taking on a mortgage, but doing so entails a fixed monetary mortgage origination cost as well as a random utility cost that captures non-pecuniary barriers
to borrowing.

3.1

The Economy

We start by describing preferences, the income process, and the assets available for trade.
Preferences. Agents live for T periods. The utility function is time-separable and the
life-time utility of an agent is
E

T
X

β

t=1

t−1




c1−σ
h1−σ
n1+γ
(1 + wT +1 )1−σ
t
t
t
+α
−
− ξt + β T B
,
1−σ
1−σ 1+γ
1−σ

where c denotes consumption, h denotes housing services, n is the amount of time spent on
home (non-market) production, ξ is the utility cost of obtaining a new mortgage and wT +1 is
terminal wealth, which includes liquid assets and the equity in the home in the last period of
life. The utility function is characterized by the discount factor β, the relative risk aversion
σ, the elasticity of home production hours 1/γ, the weight of housing in preferences α and
the strength of the bequest motive B. Notice that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
and between housing and consumption is equal to 1/σ.
Income. An agent i of age t receives income
yi,t = λt zi,t ei,t ,
where λt is the deterministic life-cycle component of income, zi,t is the persistent component
and ei,t is the transitory component. The persistent component evolves over time according
to an AR(1) process
log(zi,t+1 ) = ρz log(zi,t ) + σz εi,t+1 ,
7

See Gorea and Midrigan (2015, 2018) for versions of the model with endogenous house prices that are
consistent with the comovement of house prices, refinancing activity and consumption over the 2002-2008
boom-bust cycle, as well as the evidence in Zevelev (2019) on how the option to refinance affects house prices.

8

where σz is the volatility of innovations and ρz is the persistence. The transitory component
e is iid and is drawn from a distribution with volatility σe . Both the transitory and persistent
innovations are drawn from a standard normal distribution.8
Home Production. An agent who supplies n hours of home production produces φn
units of output at a utility cost

n1+γ
.
1+γ

We think of this home production technology as

capturing other means through which households can actively smooth their consumption,
such as providing various non-market services to neighbors and family members (Morduch
and Schneider, 2019).
Liquid Assets. Agents can save using a one-period risk-free liquid asset a at an interest rate
rl (a), which is allowed to increase with the amount the agent saves to capture heterogeneity in
rates of return across the wealth distribution (Benhabib et al., 2019). We impose a borrowing
limit a < 0.
Housing. We let h denote the amount of housing the agent owns and p the price of housing.
Housing is subject to transaction costs that are proportional to the value of the home and
equal to fs ph. These costs are incurred whenever one sells their home. Thus an agent
who would like to change their housing stock from h to h0 pays fs ph + p (h0 − h) units of
output. Agents derive utility from the end-of-the-period housing stock. We assume, in our
computations, that the stock of houses is indivisible, but have chosen a grid size sufficiently
large so that these indivisibilities do not impact the agents’ decision rules.
We assume that homeowners are exposed to depreciation or maintenance shocks that
constitute an additional source of risk in disposable resources. We model these costs as a
two-point iid process which takes a value δt = δ̄ with probability πδ and zero otherwise.
Rental Market. An agent who does not own a home can rent h units of housing services
at a rental rate R. Rental housing is not subject to adjustment costs or indivisibilities. In our
quantitative section we calibrate R in order to match the homeownership rate in the data. We
interpret the difference between this rental rate and the user cost of owner-occupied housing
as capturing a number of reasons that make ownership preferable to renting, including moral
8

See Gorea and Midrigan (2018) for an extension with fat tailed shocks, which does not substantively
change our findings.

9

hazard problems that exacerbate maintenance costs of rental property.9
Mortgages. Agents can borrow against the value of their homes using mortgages. Since
most mortgages in the US are fixed-rate, 30-year contracts, we assume that a mortgage in
the model has a maturity of 30 years. An agent who borrows an amount b promises to make
a minimum payment m̄ in every period of the contract. No arbitrage implies that
m̄ =

rm
1 − (1 + rm )−D

× b,

where rm is the interest rate on mortgages and D is the maturity of the contract. We assume
no prepayment penalty, so the borrower can repay more than the minimum required amount,
m ≥ m̄. The mortgage balance thus evolves over time according to
b0 = (1 + rm ) b − m.
Mortgage Refinancing. We assume that agents who do not sell their homes have only
one means of home equity extraction, which we refer to as refinancing. Homeowners in the
U.S. have a number of options to extract home equity, by either cash-out refinancing, taking
on a home equity loan, a home equity line of credit, or a second mortgage. Since the details of
how these alternative approaches vary are quite complex, here we purposefully chose to keep
the model simple by assuming a single means of home equity extraction that stands in for
all these alternatives. Gorea and Midrigan (2015) explicitly model the distinction between
home equity loans and cash-out refinances and find results similar to those here.
We assume that the monetary cost of mortgage origination has two components, a fixed
component, f0,m , independent of how much one borrows, as well as a proportional component,
f1,m b0 , that depends on the size of the mortgage b0 . These two components capture closing
costs, a portion of which is independent of the amount borrowed, as well as fees that are
proportional to the amount borrowed. We assume that these costs are the same regardless
of whether the agent finances the purchase of a new home, or refinances a mortgage on an
existing home.
In addition to monetary costs of obtaining a mortgage, we assume that agents incur nonpecuniary utility costs, meant to capture other barriers to refinancing that homeowners may
face, including information gathering costs, time costs and other behavioral factors, which
9

See, for example, Chambers et al. (2009a,b).

10

have been shown to be important in the literature (Keys et al., 2016, Andersen et al., 2020).
We assume that these costs are iid random draws from an exponential distribution with mean
ν. As we show below, these utility costs imply that the probability of refinancing is a smooth,
rather than a discontinuous step function of the gains from refinancing, with the parameter
ν determining the rate at which the probability of refinancing increases in the gains from
doing so.10
Agents who obtain a new mortgage face two constraints on the amount they can borrow:
a loan-to-value (LTV) constraint that restricts the total amount of debt to be below a fraction
θm of the value of the home:
b0 ≤ θm ph,

(1)

as well as a payment-to-income (PTI) constraint that requires that the minimum mortgage
payment not exceed a fraction θy of the household’s income:
rm
1 − (1 + rm )

−D

b0 ≤ θy y.

(2)

These constraints only apply at mortgage origination. We allow agents to roll over the
cost of refinancing the mortgage into their debt. An agent who refinances faces no upfront
out-of-pocket costs, but has a mortgage balance equal to
b̂0 = f0,m + (1 + f1,m ) b0 .

(3)

Budget Constraints. Consider an agent who enters the period with a house of size h,
outstanding mortgage debt b, liquid assets a and income y + φn. The budget constraint of
the agent varies depending on whether she rents, purchases a new home or remains in the
existing home, as well as on whether she chooses to extract home equity.
Agents who rent face the budget constraint
c + a0 + Rh0 = y + φn + (1 + rl (a)) a − (1 + rm )b + (1 − fs )ph − δh.

(4)

The right-hand side represents the agent’s liquid wealth after she sells the original house,
incurs the selling cost fs ph and the maintenance cost δh, repays the principal and interest
on the outstanding mortgage debt, (1 + rm ) b, and receives income y + φn and interest and
10

The approach of assuming random costs of taking a discrete action mirrors a long tradition in the (S,s)
literature. See Dotsey et al. (1999) and Khan and Thomas (2008), as well as Beraja et al. (2018) in a model
with refinancing activity.

11

principal on the liquid account, (1 + rl (a)) a. The left-hand side sums consumption, c, liquid
savings, a0 , and rental spending, Rh0 .
Agents who purchase a new home have a budget constraint
c + a0 + ph0 − b0 = y + φn + (1 + rl (a)) a − (1 + rm )b + (1 − fs )ph − δh.

(5)

The right-hand side is identical to that of the renter. The left-hand side sums the agent’s
consumption and liquid savings, the cost of the new home, ph0 , net of the new mortgage debt,
b0 , if the agent chooses to borrow. If the agent does borrow, she incurs the fixed mortgage
closing cost f0,m , a cost proportional to the amount borrowed, f1,m b0 , and faces the LTV and
PTI constraints (1) and (2). Recall that we subsume the mortgage cost into the mortgage
balance, which is given by equation (3).
Inactive homeowners neither transact their house, nor extract home equity and face the
budget constraint
c + a0 = y + φn + (1 + rl (a)) a − m − δh,

(6)

where m ≥ m̄ is the mortgage payment, required to be above the minimum amount m̄
determined at origination.
Finally, agents who refinance their mortgage face the budget constraint
c + a0 − b0 = y + φn + (1 + rl (a)) a − (1 + rm )b − δh.

(7)

These agents repay the entire balance on their original mortgage, (1 + rm )b, and take on a
new mortgage b0 , the size of which is limited by the LTV and PTI constraints (1) and (2).

3.2

Recursive Formulation and Decision Rules

We next characterize the problem of renters and homeowners recursively and describe their
decision rules.
Recursive Formulation. An agent’s state variables are the age t, the liquid assets a, the
remaining mortgage balance b, the minimum mortgage payment m̄, the house size h, the
realization of the persistent and transitory income components z and e, and the maintenance
shock δ. Let s = (t, a, b, m̄, h, z, e, δ) be a vector that collects all of these state variables.
Each period agents have five options: 1. rent, 2. purchase a new home without a mortgage,
3. purchase a new home with a mortgage, 4. refinance an existing mortgage, 5. remain
12

inactive. Let V i (s) denote the value of option i = 1, . . . , 5, absent the utility cost ξ of
obtaining a new mortgage. Let
Z

V̄ (s) = max V 1 (s), V 2 (s), V 3 (s) − ξ, V 4 (s) − ξ, V 5 (s) dF (ξ),
be the envelope over these options, integrating over the iid utility cost ξ, drawn from an
exponential distribution with mean ν:


ξ
F (ξ) = 1 − exp −
.
ν
We next describe each of these options in detail. The value of renting is
(h0 )1−σ
n1+γ
c1−σ
+α
−
+ βEV̄ (t + 1, a0 , 0, 0, 0, z 0 , e0 , 0)
c,a ,h 1 − σ
1−σ
1+γ
subject to the budget constraint in (4) and the borrowing constraint on liquid assets a0 ≥ a.
V 1 (s) = max
0 0

The expectation operator integrates over the possible realizations of income shocks.
The value of purchasing a new home without a mortgage is
(h0 )1−σ
n1+γ
c1−σ
V (s) = max
+
α
−
+ βEV̄ (t + 1, a0 , 0, 0, h0 , z 0 , e0 , δ 0 ),
c,a0 ,h0 1 − σ
1−σ
1+γ
2

subject to the budget constraint
c + a0 + ph0 = y + φn + (1 + rl (a)) a − (1 + rm )b + (1 − fs )ph − δh,

(8)

and the borrowing constraint on liquid assets. The expectation operator now integrates both
the income shocks, as well as the housing maintenance shocks.
The value of purchasing a new home with a mortgage is
V 3 (s) = max
0 0 0
c,a ,h ,b

c1−σ
(h0 )1−σ
n1+γ
+α
−
+ βEV̄ (t + 1, a0 , b̂0 , m̄0 , h0 , z 0 , e0 , δ 0 ),
1−σ
1−σ
1+γ

subject to the budget constraint in (5), the borrowing constraint on liquid assets, and the
LTV and PTI constraints in (1) and (2). Since mortgage origination costs are rolled over
into the mortgage loan, the balance on the mortgage is
b̂0 = f0,m + (1 + f1,m )b0 ,
and the minimum mortgage payment is
m̄0 =

rm
−D

1 − (1 + rm )
13

b̂0 .

The value of refinancing a mortgage on the current home is
V 4 (s) = max
0 0
c,a ,b

c1−σ
h1−σ
n1+γ
+α
−
+ βEV̄ (t + 1, a0 , b̂0 , m̄0 , h, z 0 , e0 , δ 0 ),
1−σ
1−σ 1+γ

subject to the budget constraint in (7), the borrowing constraint on liquid assets, and the
LTV and PTI constraints in (1) and (2). The balance on the new loan and the minimum
mortgage payment are determined as above.
Lastly, the value of remaining inactive is
V 5 (s) = max
0 0
c,a ,b

c1−σ
h1−σ
n1+γ
+α
−
+ βEV̄ (t + 1, a0 , b̂0 , m̄, h, z 0 , e0 , δ 0 ),
1−σ
1−σ 1+γ

subject to the budget constraint in (6), the borrowing constraint on liquid assets, and the
constraint that the agent makes the minimum mortgage payment m̄, which implies a limit
on the agents’ mortgage debt,
b0 ≤ (1 + rm )b − m̄.

(9)

Decision Rules. We briefly discuss the first-order conditions characterizing households’
optimal choices. Conditional on renting, the optimal choice of rental housing is
 − σ1
R
h =
c.
α
0

Consider next the discrete choice of whether to rent or own. This choice is determined by a
comparison of the implicit user cost of owning a home and the rental rate R. The user cost of
owning a home depends on the households’ implicit rate of time preference, the maintenance
cost and the fixed cost of selling the home. Liquidity constraints distort the implicit rate of
time preference so poorer households are more likely to rent.
The optimal choice of home production is
1

σ

n = φ γ c− γ .
Poorer households who have lower consumption engage in more home production. The
parameter φ determines the effectiveness of home production in smoothing household consumption.
The Euler equation for liquid savings is
c−σ ≥ βE (1 + rl (a0 ) + rl0 (a0 ) a0 ) c0−σ ,
14

and that for mortgage debt is given by
c−σ ≥ βE (1 + rm ) c0−σ − βE (1 + rm ) µ0 ,
where µ is the homeowners’ marginal valuation of liquidity, that is, the multiplier on the
liquidity constraint (9) for inactive homeowners. Combining these two expressions shows
that agents borrow up to the point at which their marginal valuation of liquidity is equal to
the spread between the mortgage and liquid interest rates:
βE (1 + rm ) µ0 ≥ βE (rm − rl (a0 ) − rl0 (a0 ) a0 ) c0−σ .
Intuitively, borrowing more against one’s home has both a cost and a benefit. The cost is
the interest cost of servicing a mortgage, which is greater than the rate of return on the
liquid asset. The benefit is that borrowing more against one’s home increases liquid assets
and allows households to smooth consumption. At an interior solution the agent equates the
cost and the benefit.
Note that there is a critical distinction between whether a household is hand-to-mouth in
the sense of hitting the borrowing constraint on liquid assets a0 ≥ ā and whether a household
is liquidity constrained in the sense of the mortgage borrowing constraint (9) binding. As we
show below, the latter constraint binds for a much larger fraction of homeowners. Intuitively,
a household may have some liquid savings, yet they may choose to only make the minimum
required mortgage payment in anticipation of potentially bad income realizations in the
future. Such homeowners would value the option to convert home equity into liquid assets,
yet are unable to do so because of the costs of mortgage origination.
Figure 1 illustrates the decision to refinance as a function of an agent’s cash-on-hand,
y + (1 + rl (a)) a, for a simplified version of the model in which homeowners cannot sell their
home. Panel A of Figure 1 shows that the welfare gain from refinancing is decreasing in
cash-on-hand. A household that refinances can use the equity extracted to finance a higher
level of consumption, as shown in Panel B, and a higher level of liquid savings, as shown in
Panel C. Given the exponentially distributed utility cost of refinancing, the probability of
refinancing, shown in Panel D of Figure 1, is given by
!
 R
N
max
V
−
V
,
0
.
π R = 1 − exp −
ν
To understand the role of the random utility costs of refinancing, Figure 2 shows how the
probability of refinancing increases in the welfare gains from doing so. To make the numbers
15

interpretable, we convert the welfare gains from refinancing, V 4 − maxi6=4 V i , into monetary
equivalents by scaling these by the marginal utility of consumption of the median household
and translating them into 2016 US dollars.11 The numbers in Figure 2 are based on the
calibration of the model discussed in the next section. Notice that in our baseline model
with ν = 1/3 the probability of refinancing is equal to 35% for an agent with welfare gains
from refinancing of $5,000. Since the random utility draws are iid, such a homeowner is likely
to refinance over the course of three quarters. As ν decreases, the probability of refinancing
increases and reaches 75% when ν = 1/10. In the limit, as ν → 0, the decision to refinance is
of the (S, s) form and the refinancing probability jumps discontinuously at 0. The parameter
ν thus determines how rapidly a household refinances when the welfare gains from doing so
increase.

4

Quantification

We parameterize the model to match salient features of households’ portfolio composition
and frequency of home equity extraction described in Section 2, as well as moments of
their income. We describe our calibration strategy and evaluate the model along a number
of dimensions not explicitly targeted in calibration. Given our focus on the steady-state
implications of liquidity constraints, the statistics we target are those for 2001, the year prior
to the boom-bust episode in the U.S. housing market. In the robustness section below we
show that our results are robust to targeting moments from 2016.

4.1

Parameterization

We divide the parameters of the model into two groups. The first includes parameters that
we assigned based on external evidence. The second includes parameters that are chosen in
order to minimize the distance between a number of moments in the model and in the data.
We next describe each set of parameters and report them in Panel B of Table 2.
4.1.1

Assigned Parameters

We first describe the assigned parameters.
11
To convert units in the model to dollars in the data, we note that the average income of the bottom
80% of households was 70,000 2016 US dollars in 2001 and scale units in the model appropriately. We use a
similar conversion every time we report monetary amounts.

16

Demographics and Preferences. A period in the model is 1 quarter. Agents enter at
age 25 and live for T = 244 quarters, that is, up to age 85. We set the coefficient of relative
risk aversion σ = 2 and the elasticity of home production hours γ = 1, both common choices
in the literature. This value of σ implies an elasticity of substitution between consumption
and housing services of 0.5.
Mortgage Debt. The mortgage contract is characterized by four parameters, the maturity
of the contract D, the interest rate rm , the maximum loan-to-value ratio, θm , as well as the
maximum payment-to-income ratio, θy . We set the maturity of the contract to 120 quarters,
or 30 years.
The average 30-year fixed mortgage rate in 2001 was equal to 6.97%. We multiply this
number by 1 − 0.239, the average marginal subsidy on mortgage interest and subtract the
2.8% inflation rate in 2001, which implies a real after-tax interest rate of rm = 2.5%.12
We set the maximum LTV equal to 0.85 to match the upper tail of the LTV distribution
in the data. Finally, we set the maximum payment-to-income ratio at origination equal to
0.35, consistent with the evidence in Greenwald (2018). Since mortgage payments in our
model are, in contrast to the data, net of the tax deduction and inflation, we must adjust
the PTI ratio in the model accordingly. In addition, we adjust the PTI to reflect the share
of mortgage payments in overall household debt payments, since it is the latter that matters
for the PTI constraint. Overall, our calculations, described in detail in the Appendix, imply
a maximum PTI ratio at origination of 0.21.
Fixed Costs. Consistent with the post-2000 Freddie Mac PMMS data, we set the proportional mortgage origination cost f1,m = 0.005, in line with average fees and points on 30-year
mortgages. As we discuss below, we choose f0,m , the fixed cost of mortgage origination, to
match the frequency of home equity extraction in the data. We set fs = 0.06, a typical
estimate of the cost of transacting a house. Without loss of generality, we normalize the
price of one unit of housing to p = 1 in the initial steady-state.
Non-Pecuniary Mortgage Origination Costs. We set ν =

1
3

in our baseline parame-

terization. As we show below, this choice of ν allows the model to match the evidence on how
12

See our Appendix for the data sources underlying these numbers.

17

mortgage refinancing responds to changes in interest rates. However, we also report results
for lower values of ν, including ν = 0.
Maintenance Costs. We use data from the PSID to measure the magnitude of housing
maintenance costs. Most homeowners report negligible such expenses. However, a small
fraction of homeowners experience quite large maintenance expenses, with the 95th percentile
spending 6.3% of the value of their home in a given year on home repairs. Based on this
evidence, we set the annual probability of a maintenance shock πδ = 10% and the size of the
shock δ̄ = 0.063.
4.1.2

Calibrated Parameters

We next discuss how we calibrate the rest of the parameters of the model. We divide these
into two groups: those that characterize the income process, and the remaining parameters
that determine the households’ savings and refinancing decisions. We choose the latter to
jointly match a number of moments in the data.
Income Process. We use data from the 1999-2007 waves of the PSID to parameterize
the idiosyncratic income process. We compute taxable income for each household by adding
wages (net of pension contributions), social security income, pension income, unemployment
compensation and other transfers. We then subtract federal and state income taxes and
deflate the resulting data using the CPI and the OECD equivalence scales. The Appendix
contains a more detailed description of our computations. Our notion of income captures
disposable income net of contributions or withdrawals from retirement accounts. This allows
us to focus our analysis on a household’s choice between housing and liquid wealth, and
abstract from the choice of how much to save using retirement accounts.
We assume that the deterministic component of income λt is a cubic age polynomial and
estimate its coefficients using the PSID data. We choose the persistence ρz and the standard
deviations σz and σe to match the variance of log income, the autocovariance of log income
at 2- and 4-year horizons and the standard deviation of log income growth over a two year
period. These moments allow us to separately identify the volatility of the transitory and
persistent income components. As suggested by Krueger and Perri (2012), we scale down
the volatility of the transitory shock by 55% to account for measurement error. We report
the statistics we target in Panel A of Table 2 and the parameter values that minimize the
18

distance between the moments in the data and in the model in Panel B of Table 2. The
model matches the income moments very well.
Additional Parameters. We choose the remaining parameters listed in Panel B of Table
2 to jointly match a number of moments in the data listed in Panel A of the table. The wealth
moments we target are those for the poorest 80% of the households in the SCF sample. It
is clear from Table 1 that the wealthier group of households have very large holdings of
liquid assets and are thus unlikely to be liquidity constrained. Accounting for the large
liquid holdings of the richer households would require additional sources of heterogeneity
(say in the discount rates or income processes), which would complicate the model, without
substantially changing any of our conclusions given our partial equilibrium assumption. See
Gorea and Midrigan (2015) for an extension along these lines.
Even though all these parameters are jointly identified, below we discuss which moments
are most helpful in pinning down each parameter. We set the discount factor β = 0.944
(annualized) to match an aggregate wealth to income ratio of 1.45, the preference weight for
housing in the utility function α = 0.687 to match the aggregate housing to income ratio
of 1.82, the strength of the bequest motive B = 10.27 to match that households older than
65 have twice more wealth than younger households, and the efficiency of home production
φ = 0.939 to match the 0.23 ratio of home production to consumption reported by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis.13 We choose a rental rate of housing R = 0.045 to ensure that the
homeownership rate is equal to 0.64. Intuitively, the higher the rental rate R is, the larger
the spread between the user cost of owning vs. renting and the more attractive owning a
home is.
We choose the fixed cost of refinancing a mortgage f0,m , to match the fraction of borrowers
who extract equity. Recall from our discussion in Section 2 that in the PSID 15% of mortgage
borrowers increased their mortgage balance between the survey waves of 1999 and 2001, so
we target an annual rate of home equity extraction of 7.5%. The implied value of the fixed
cost is $1,330, in line with existing estimates (Agarwal et al., 2013).14 As Panel A of Table
2 shows, the model matches all these targets very well.
Lastly, we assume the following functional form for the return on the liquid asset
rh − rl
rl (a) =
+ rl ,
1 + exp (−τ0 (a − τ1 ))
13
14

See https://apps.bea.gov/scb/2019/06-june/0619-household-production.htm for a detailed description.
See also www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/refinancings/, as well as our Appendix.

19

where rl is the lowest possible interest rate, rh is the highest possible interest rate, τ0 governs
how rapidly the interest rate increases with liquid assets and τ1 determines the level of assets
at which the interest rate starts increasing.15 We normalize the lower bound rl = −2.8%,
corresponding to a nominal interest rate of 0 and an inflation rate of 2.8%, and choose the
remaining parameters to match moments of the distribution of liquid assets and mortgage
debt in the data.
We target the mean mortgage debt to income, the mean and median liquid assets of all
households as well as of homeowners, the fraction of all households and of homeowners who
are hand-to-mouth,16 and the 90th percentile of the liquid asset distribution of homeowners.
As Panel A of Table 2 shows, the model reproduces all the targeted moments well. For
example, the average mortgage debt to income ratio is 0.83 in the data and 0.82 in the
model, while the mean liquid assets to income ratio is 0.46 in the data and 0.44 in the model.
The median liquid assets relative to mean annual income is 0.07 in the data and 0.08 in
the model. A large fraction of households are hand-to-mouth (41% in the model and 37%
in the data). Though homeowners are richer on average, a substantial fraction of them is
hand-to-mouth as well: 32% in the data and 26% in the model.

5

Testing the Model

We next evaluate the model’s ability to account for a number of additional features of the
data not targeted in our calibration. Since our focus is on measuring the severity of liquidity
constraints faced by individual homeowners, it is imperative that the model reproduces well
unconditional moments that describe household’s portfolio composition, as well as conditional
moments that describe who is more likely to refinance, as well how refinancing activity
responds to changes in interest rates. We next discuss how the model does along these
dimensions, as well as report a number of life-cycle statistics.
15

Here we apply the same interest rate schedule irrespective of whether the household is saving or borrowing.
Gorea and Midrigan (2015) show that the results are robust to allowing agents access to unsecured credit
at credit card borrowing rates, as long as the model matches the low fraction of homeowners with negative
liquid asset holdings observed in the data.
16
In the spirit of Kaplan and Violante (2014), we define hand-to-mouth households as those with liquid
wealth that is less than two weeks of income.

20

5.1

Households’ Portfolio Composition

We first report various quantiles of the distribution of individual household balance sheets in
both the model and the data.
Panels A and B of Table 3 report the distribution of liquid assets for all households and
for homeowners. The model reproduces well the distribution of liquid assets of homeowners
as well as the bottom 75% of the overall liquid asset distribution. The model under-predicts
the concentration of liquid assets at the top, owing to the fact that in the model there are
no rich households who rent. In the robustness section, we introduce additional frictions
to homeownership that allow the model to reproduce the liquid asset distribution of renters
much better. Since these frictions do not affect our substantive conclusions, we opted to
relegate this extension to the robustness section for expositional clarity.
Panels C and D of Table 3 show that the model reproduces very well the distribution
of household wealth and the distribution of the share of home equity in household wealth.
For example, the poorest 25% of households have almost no wealth both in the model and
in the data, while households at the 90th percentile have wealth that is four times greater
than average annual income. Similarly, the median homeowner has 87% of all their wealth in
housing in both the model and the data, while 25% of homeowners have effectively no wealth
other than their home.
Panels E and F of Table 3 show that the model is also able to capture the distribution of
the loan-to-value and payment-to-income ratios in the data. As discussed in the Appendix,
we scale down the payment-to-income ratio in the data to reflect that, unlike in the model,
payments include inflation and taxes. For example the median LTV ratio is 0.62 in the data
and 0.70 in the model, and the median PTI ratio is 0.11 in the data and 0.10 in the model.
Panel G of Table 3 shows that the model reproduces well the dispersion in the housing
to income ratio in the data, which ranges from 1 at the 10th percentile to 6 at the 90th
percentile in both the model and the data. Lastly, Panel H of Table 3 shows that the model
also reproduces the distribution of the age of mortgage contracts well, reinforcing the ability
of the model to capture the frequency with which homeowners reset their mortgages in the
data.

21

5.2

Role of the LTV and PTI Constraints

We have shown above that the model reproduces well the distribution of LTV and PTI ratios
in the data. We next ask: what is the relative importance of these two constraints in hindering
homeowners’ ability to tap equity from their homes? To do so, we calculate the fraction of
all new mortgages for which the LTV or PTI constraints are binding. We find that 60% of all
new mortgages are at the 85% LTV limit, 12% of new mortgages are against the PTI limit,
while only 28% of mortgages are unconstrained. This suggests that both constraints play an
important role, but the LTV constraint more so, quantitatively consistent with the evidence
in Greenwald (2018).
Even though the PTI constraint seems to bind for relatively fewer households, we next
argue that it nevertheless plays an important role. To do so, we permanently remove this
constraint and find substantial welfare gains, averaging $1,100 for all households and $1,300
for homeowners, numbers similar to the magnitude of the fixed cost of mortgage refinancing.
As before, we compute these welfare gains by comparing the value of the agents in the new
and old regime and scaling the difference by the marginal utility of consumption to convert
it into monetary units. The frequency of refinancing increases by 30% immediately following
the elimination of the PTI constraint, suggesting that the payment-to-income constraint is
indeed an important barrier to accessing home equity.

5.3

Characteristics of Borrowers who Refinance

We next evaluate the ability of the model to reproduce conditional evidence on the characteristics and behavior of households who extract home equity.
Panel A of Table 4 shows that 23% of mortgage borrowers are ahead on their payments in
the model, a number very close to the corresponding 21% that we document in the SCF data,
and also in line with the evidence in Adelman et al. (2010), who report that 22% of homeowners curtailed their mortgage.17 Since a household in the model is liquidity constrained if
the minimum mortgage payment constraint (9) binds, that we match this fraction suggests
that the model reproduces well the share of liquidity constrained homeowners in the data.
Consider next the amount of home equity extracted conditional on refinancing. In the
PSID data the median borrower who extracts home equity increases their mortgage balance
17

Note that both in the data and in the model the statistic refers to the fraction of mortgage borrowers
that have curtailed at least once in the lifetime of a mortgage contract. The fraction who curtail in any given
period is, of course, much smaller.

22

by 24%, a number close to that reported by Bhutta and Keys (2016). In the model the
corresponding statistic is 19%. Similarly, the median borrower who extracts increases their
LTV by 11 percentage points in the data and 12 percentage points in the model. The model
thus reproduces well the amount of equity that homeowners extract.
Panel B of Table 4 evaluates the model’s ability to reproduce the characteristics of home
equity extractors. Recall from our discussion in Section 2 that homeowners who extract have
much lower liquid assets. The model reproduces this pattern: the median liquid asset to
wealth ratio of those who extract is 0.04 in both the model and the data, while the median
liquid asset to wealth ratio of non-extractors is 0.16 in the data and 0.15 in the model.
We therefore conclude that the model replicates well the characteristics of borrowers who
refinance, as well as of those who do not.

5.4

Refinancing in Response to Mortgage Interest Rate Declines

A pervasive puzzle documented in the literature on household finance is that a substantial
fraction of mortgage borrowers fail to refinance after large declines in mortgage interest rates,
even though there are large apparent financial gains from doing so (Johnson et al., 2019, Keys
et al., 2016, Andersen et al., 2020). We argue next that our model reproduces this evidence
well, owing to the random utility costs of refinancing. Specifically, we focus on the evidence in
Johnson et al. (2019), who study a sample of 800,000 borrowers who were given the option to
reduce their mortgage rates by a median of 1.75 percentage points under the Home Affordable
Refinance Program (HARP) at no upfront cost between 2011 and 2013. These homeowners
were approved for a mortgage refinance and stood to experience substantial savings, in excess
of $15,000 on average, from locking in a lower interest rate. Johnson et al. (2019) find that
only 16% of those who received such offers chose to refinance, a number close to that reported
by Keys et al. (2016) based on a smaller sample of households in Chicago.18
We gauge the model’s ability to reproduce these patterns by conducting the following
experiment: we engineer a permanent fall in the pre-tax interest rate on mortgages rm of
1.75 percentage points and solve for the household’s decision rules. We consider three versions
of the model: our baseline with the mean random utility cost ν = 1/3, as well as ν = 1/10 and
ν = 0, the latter corresponding to an economy without utility costs. Each of these economies
has been recalibrated to match the set of moments discussed in the previous section. We
18

See also Caplin et al. (1997), who document a similar pattern using older data.

23

report the full set of parameter values and moments in the Appendix. We note here that
models with lower utility costs require a larger fixed monetary cost f0,m of obtaining a new
mortgage. As Panel A of Table 5 shows, this fixed cost increases from $1,330 in our baseline
to $3,580 in the absence of utility costs.
We first describe how these utility costs shape refinancing activity in steady-state, when
mortgage interest rates are constant at 2.5%. Panel A of Table 5 shows that 22% of homeowners with a mortgage would refinance in the absence of utility costs. That is, 22% of
homeowners have a value of refinancing, V 4 , that exceeds the value of all other options. For
this subset of households, the welfare gains from refinancing, scaled by the marginal utility
of consumption,
V 4 − maxi6=4 V i
,
u0 (c)
are equal to $1,020. The utility costs prevent most of these homeowners from refinancing:
only 1/10 of them actually do so in a given quarter. Thus, the overall frequency of refinancing
is 2% per quarter, or 8% per year.
Consider next the models with lower utility costs of obtaining a new mortgage. As these
utility costs decrease and the monetary costs increase, the fraction of those who would benefit
from refinancing falls, but the probability of refinancing conditional on benefiting from doing
so increases, so that the fraction of households who refinance remains unchanged at 2% per
quarter.
We next study the effect of a decline in the mortgage interest rate rm . As Panel B of Table
5 shows, now a much larger fraction of households has positive welfare gains from refinancing
absent utility costs, in that V 4 > maxi6=4 V i . This fraction ranges from 79% in our baseline
model with ν = 1/3 to 44% when ν = 0. The average welfare gains from refinancing range
from $2,730 with ν = 1/3 to $480 when ν = 0.
To see why these gains are so much larger, we calculate the difference between the present
value of the mortgage payments under the original mortgage contract and that under the
new mortgage contract, net of the mortgage origination costs. We refer to this difference as
the savings from refinancing. These savings are very large, on the order of $15,000, much
larger than the actual welfare gains from refinancing. The reason the actual welfare gains
are lower is that the interest rate drop we consider is a permanent one, so some households
exercise the option value of waiting to refinance at a later date.
The last row in Panel B of Table 5 reports the fraction of households who actually

24

refinance in the first quarter following the interest rate drop. Even though most households
would be better of refinancing absent utility costs, only 16% of them actually do so in our
baseline model, a number identical to that reported by Johnson et al. (2019) and Keys et
al. (2016). As the utility cost decreases, the fraction of homeowners who refinance increases
to 24% when ν = 1/10 and 44% when ν = 0. We thus conclude that a value of ν = 1/3 is
required to match this evidence, but show below that our main results on the importance of
liquidity constraints are largely unaffected by the choice of ν.

5.5

Life-Cycle Statistics

Figure 3 reports how average income, the wealth to income ratio, the home value to income
ratio and the housing wealth to income ratio evolve over the life-cycle. We used the SCF to
calculate the data counterpart of these statistics. Panel A of the figure shows how income
evolves over the life-cycle. The model matches the hump-shaped income profile in the data
by construction. As shown in Panels B–D, the model also reproduces well the life-cycle
evolution of overall wealth, home values and housing wealth.
To summarize, we calibrate the parameters of the model to reproduce a number of unconditional moments from the data, but the model succeeds in also reproducing salient features
of the distribution of households’ liquid assets, mortgage debt and housing, as well as conditional moments that describe the characteristics of households who refinance and their
refinancing behavior in normal times as well as in response to changes in mortgage interest
rates. The model also matches reasonably well the life-cycle profiles of income, wealth and
housing equity in the data. We thus view it as a useful laboratory to study the importance
of liquidity constraints faced by homeowners and evaluate the effect of policies aimed at
alleviating them.

6

Importance of Liquidity Constraints

We next study the model’s implications for the severity of liquidity constraints. We find
that these constraints play a substantial role in distorting homeowners’ consumption choices.
Four-fifths of homeowners are liquidity constrained. As we show below, most agents value
liquidity for precautionary reasons, anticipating the possibility of ending up hand-to-mouth
in future periods. We then show that, owing to the severity of these liquidity constraints,
25

the model is able to reproduce the large marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of an
unaticipated one-time cash transfer, akin to the tax rebates provided under various fiscal
stabilization programs.

6.1

Severity of Liquidity Constraints

We evaluate the severity of liquidity constraints by asking: how much do homeowners in our
model value liquidity? We answer this question by conducting an experiment which we refer
to as liquidity injection. We increase all homeowners’ liquid assets and mortgage debt by the
same amount, ∆b, thus leaving their overall wealth unchanged. We set ∆b equal to 1% of the
value of one’s home, thus effectively offering homeowners a one-time opportunity to extract
home equity up to 1% of the value of their home for free.
Panel A of Table 6 shows that 82% of all homeowners benefit from such an opportunity.
Thus, approximately four-fifths of homeowners are liquidity constrained in our benchmark
economy, in that they would be better off with a more liquid portfolio allocation. The
remaining rows of the panel report constrained homeowners’ average valuation of liquidity,
which we compute as the change in the households’ value upon the liquidity injection, scaled
by their marginal utility of consumption and the amount of the transfer,

∆V 1
.
∆b u0 (c)

In effect, this valuation tells us the amount that the household is willing to pay for every
dollar they can extract from their housing wealth. The table shows that the average household
is willing to pay 13 cents for every dollar of housing wealth extracted, with substantial
heterogeneity across households. The value of liquidity ranges from 1 cent on the dollar at
the 10th percentile to 27 cents on the dollar at the 90th percentile. Notice that the implied
value of liquidity is relatively insensitive to the size of the random utility costs of mortgage
origination. Even in the absence of such costs (ν = 0), 80% of homeowners are liquidity
constrained and the mean valuation of liquidity is 12 cents on the dollar. We conclude that
even though random utility costs are important in determining the decision to refinance after
changes in interest rates, they do not substantively alter our model’s implications regarding
the severity of liquidity constraints. Of course, in drawing this conclusion we recalibrated
each alternative model to match the same set of facts as the benchmark model.
We also note that the fraction of liquidity-constrained homeowners is much larger than the
fraction of hand-to-mouth homeowners. Recall that one quarter of homeowners in our model
have liquid wealth that is less than two weeks of their income, yet nearly 80% of homeowners

26

value liquidity. To see why this is the case, Panel B of Table 6 reports the fraction of the
transfer that homeowners consume in the period in which they receive it, ∆c/∆b. Notice that,
on average, homeowners only consume 13 cents of every dollar received in the same quarter.
This fraction ranges from 0.02 at the 10th percentile to 0.27 at the 90th percentile. This
suggests that homeowners choose to save most of the additional liquidity for precautionary
reasons, in anticipation of future negative income and home maintenance shocks. The next
two columns of the table show that the random utility costs do not substantively change this
calculation.
Figure 4 shows how the average valuation of liquidity varies across different types of
homeowners. Panel A of the figure shows that homeowners with the highest LTV ratios have
the largest valuation of liquidity, in excess of 20% compared to zero for homeowners without
a mortgage. This result reflects selection, as high LTV homeowners are poor on average and
thus have higher payment-to-income ratios. This pattern is confirmed in Panels B–D, which
show that the value of liquidity is increasing in the payment-to-income ratio and decreasing in
the amount of liquid assets and income. Intuitively, homeowners with low required payments,
high liquidity and high income have sufficient resources to finance their mortgage payments
and smooth consumption, and therefore value an additional dollar of liquidity less.

6.2

Value of Liquidity After Increase in Mortgage Interest Rates

So far we have conducted our analysis in a stationary environment with constant interest
rates. The value of liquidity is, however, also influenced by the time path of interest rates.
If interest rates are higher (lower) relative to historical levels, the implicit cost of refinancing
may be higher (lower) since refinancing would lock in a higher (lower) interest rate. Given
that most mortgages in the US are fixed rate mortgages, we next investigate the extent to
which the value of liquidity responds to changes in interest rates.
Specifically, we consider a one-time permanent 1 percentage point increase in mortgage
interest rates above their initial level and calculate homeowners’ valuation of liquidity in the
first period after this shock. The last column of Table 6 shows that the value of liquidity
increases considerably. Though the fraction of homeowners who value liquidity changes little,
from 0.82 in steady state to 0.83, the average value of liquidity increases from 0.13 to 0.20.
Intuitively, the fraction of homeowners who refinance falls, as refinancing implies paying a
higher interest rate for the remainder of the mortgage contract.

27

6.3

Marginal Propensity to Consume Out of a Cash Transfer

Motivated by the evidence of large consumption responses to cash transfers such as tax
rebates provided in fiscal stimulus packages (Johnson et al., 2006, Parker et al., 2013), we
ask whether liquidity frictions in the housing market can account for the large MPC observed
in the data.
As is well known, standard one-asset models with idiosyncratic risk and incomplete markets are not able to reproduce the evidence that household consume, on average, 20-25 cents
of a every dollar of cash transfer. Kaplan and Violante (2014) augment this model by assuming that households have access to a second illiquid asset that has a higher rate of return
and requires a fixed cost to adjust its balance. They find that such a model can generate
two-thirds of the consumption response to a $500 dollar cash transfer, akin to the tax rebate
studied by Johnson et al. (2006). Since in the data the vast majority of illiquid wealth is
in the form of housing, here we study whether a model that is consistent with the institutional details of the US housing market and the frequency of home equity extraction, thus
microfounding the two-asset model of Kaplan and Violante (2014), can reproduce the large
consumption responses to cash transfers.
Table 7 shows that the marginal propensity to consume out of an unanticipated one-time
$500 cash transfer is, on average, 0.17. This number is similar to that predicted by the
Kaplan and Violante (2014) model and equal to two-thirds of the magnitude observed in the
data. The MPC ranges from 0.03 at the 10th percentile to 0.33 at the 90th percentile. Since
homeowners are wealthier on average than renters, their MPC is lower, 0.14 on average, but
nevertheless substantially higher than that predicted by a standard one-asset model. Notice,
once again, that the magnitude of the utility adjustment costs does not meaningfully impact
this calculation, as shown by Panels B and C of Table 7.
Figure 5 shows that the MPCs are highest exactly for those homeowners with the highest
valuation of liquidity: those with high LTV, PTI and low levels of liquid assets and income.
We therefore conclude that the frictions that make home equity illiquid go a long way towards
explaining the large MPCs documented in the data and that there is a tight connection
between the value of liquidity and households’ inability to smooth consumption, as proxied
by a high MPC. The conclusion that the US housing market is relatively illiquid suggests
that providing relief to homeowners in distress requires interventions that directly improve
their liquidity position. We next study two such interventions.

28

7

Impact of Mortgage Assistance Programs

Motivated by the observation that a large fraction of homeowners in our model are liquidity
constrained, we next evaluate the impact of policies aimed at providing liquidity relief for
homeowners. We consider two types of programs: a mortgage modification program akin to
the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP), and a mortgage forbearance policy that
reduces mortgage payments for homeowners experiencing a transitory spell of low income.
We show that both of these policies have a substantial impact on household welfare.

7.1

Mortgage Modification Program

We first consider two modifications of mortgage contracts that change homeowners’ debt
obligations and allow us to disentangle the effect of short- and long-term debt reductions.
These interventions attempt to replicate the essence of the loan modification programs that
were part of HAMP, studied by Ganong and Noel (2019). These researchers exploit two
natural experiments. The first one is a mortgage modification that resulted in a payment
reduction, but no change in the mortgage principal. The second one resulted in both a
payment and a principal reduction. By exploiting quasi-experimental assignment of borrowers
to each of these modifications, they find that the policies had a similar impact on borrowers’
consumption expenditure. The authors therefore conclude that it is liquidity, and not wealth,
that determines consumption decisions.
To capture the economic background against which these policies were implemented,
we simulate an unanticipated 25% fall in house prices, which leaves a substantial fraction
of homeowners underwater and no longer able to refinance. Consistent with the evidence of
Beraja et al. (2018), who find that declines in house prices greatly reduce refinancing activity,
in our model only 2% of homeowners refinance in the first year after the shock, compared
to 8% in the steady-state. We then conduct two experiments. The first one, which we
label “Only Payment Reduction”, consists of a one-time reduction in borrowers’ mortgage
payments of $8,000, as in the data, but leaves their mortgage balance unaffected. This
intervention thus backloads payments by extending the maturity of the mortgage contract.
The second one, which we label “Payment and Principal Reduction”, consists of the same
one-time reduction in mortgage payments of $8,000, but also reduces the mortgage principal
by the same amount, thus forgiving a fraction of the mortgage debt.
Table 8 reports the welfare implications of these two policies. Since HAMP was targeted
29

at underwater borrowers, in the table we report both the effect of the interventions on
all borrowers, as well as on underwater borrowers, those with an LTV in excess of 95%.
We find that the majority of borrowers (87%), and an even larger fraction of those who
are underwater (97%) benefit from the payment reduction. These households experience a
welfare gain equal to 16 cents, on average, for every dollar of payment reduction. The welfare
gains are even larger, 22 cents on the dollar, for underwater borrowers. We also calculate
the consumption response to these payment reductions and find that, on average, households
increase their consumption in the first year by 36 cents for every dollar of payment reduction.
This consumption response is even larger, 46 cents on the dollar, for underwater borrowers.
Thus, a policy that backloads mortgage payments leads to a substantial increase in welfare
and consumption, especially for underwater homeowners, even though it does not change the
mortgage debt of households.
Consider next the effect of simultaneously reducing the mortgage payment and forgiving
a fraction of the mortgage principal. Not surprisingly, all borrowers benefit from this policy.
Interestingly, the consumption response to this alternative program is quantitatively similar
to that resulting from the payment reduction only: 39 cents on the dollar overall and 46 cents
on the dollar for underwater borrowers. This result is in line with the evidence in Ganong
and Noel (2019) who find similar consumption responses across the two programs. Hence,
payment reduction policies go a long way towards increasing household consumption and
welfare even if they are not associated with principal reduction.

7.2

Mortgage Forbearance Program

Mortgage forbearance programs provide temporary relief to borrowers by reducing their mortgage payment in the event of a job loss, natural disaster or major illness. Although most
lenders in the U.S. have such programs, these are limited in scope.19 We next consider the
impact such a policy has in our model. The policy we consider reduces the required quarterly
payment on one’s mortgage to at most 15% of income. The required payment is therefore


rm
m̄t = min
× b, 0.15 × yt ,
1 − (1 + rm )−D
where b is the initial loan. Since in the steady-state of our model 25% of borrowers have
a PTI that exceeds 15%, such a policy provides automatic temporary relief to a quarter of
19

See our Appendix for more details on existing forbearance policies.

30

mortgage borrowers. For inactive households who are liquidity constrained and therefore
make the minimum mortgage payment, the budget constraint reads
ct + at+1 = yt + φnt + (1 + rl (at )) at − m̄t − δht ,
so the policy effectively provides additional liquidity to these households, but does not change
their mortgage balance.
Panel A of Table 9 shows the impact of such a policy on the model’s steady state implications. Notice that the homeownership rate increases substantially, from 65 to 72%, as does
the mortgage debt to income ratio, from 0.82 to 1. Intuitively, owning a home is now more
attractive, inducing marginal households to enter the housing market. The frequency with
which households extract home equity is unchanged, at 8% a year, a result that reflects two
opposing forces. On one hand, mortgage forbearance reduces the need to extract equity, since
the policy acts as an automatic stabilizer that provides liquidity in bad times to homeowners
in need. On the other hand, the marginal households who enter the housing market are
poorer and more constrained and thus have a higher propensity to refinance. Overall, 26%
of homeowners receive these payment reductions in any given quarter. For these households,
the reduction in the mortgage payment is $520, on average.
Panel B of Table 9 reports the welfare consequences of such an intervention. As usual,
we convert the welfare gains into monetary equivalents by scaling them by the marginal
utility of consumption. The average welfare gains are large, on the order of $1,800. To
interpret this magnitude, recall that the fixed cost of mortgage refinancing is equal to $1,300.
Not surprisingly, homeowners benefit relatively more from mortgage forbearance, but renters
benefit too, with welfare gains equal to $1,600 on average, owing to the anticipation of a
more attractive housing market. Clearly, poorer households benefit more, with the poorest
25% gaining $2,600.
We thus conclude that policies aimed at providing relief for homeowners have a substantial
impact, a result that reflects the tightness of liquidity constraints in our model.

8

Robustness

We next discuss the robustness of our results. We consider an alternative calibration to more
recent data from 2016, a version of the model without heterogeneity in the rate of return on
liquid assets, an extension with moving shocks and additional barriers to homeownership, as
31

well as a version of the model without home production. We recalibrate all these models and
we show that our conclusion that liquidity constraints in the U.S. housing market are sizable
is robust to these perturbations.

8.1

Calibration to 2016

We calibrate our benchmark model to data from 2001 in order to ensure that the moments
we target are not driven by the large boom and bust in the U.S. housing market during
the subsequent period. Here we show that calibrating the model to data from 2016, the
latest available period in our data, reinforces our conclusions that the U.S. housing market
is illiquid.
Our calibration strategy is identical to that in our benchmark model. We report the key
set of moments and parameters for this variation of the model in Table 10.20 A comparison
of this table and Table 2 reveals that households have less liquid assets in 2016 compared
to 2001: the average (median) liquid asset to average income ratio is 0.33 (0.03) in 2016
compared to 0.46 (0.07) in 2001. A second notable change is that the fraction of homeowners
who extracted equity in the preceding two-year period in PSID declined, from 15% to 9%.
As Panel B of Table 10 shows, liquidity constraints are much more severe for this calibration of the model, owing to the lower frequency of refinancing and lower liquid asset holdings.
The mean willingness to pay for one dollar of home equity extracted is equal to 20 cents,
compared to 13 cents in our benchmark model. Agents spend an average of 16 cents for every
dollar extracted, compared to 12 cents in the benchmark model. Therefore, our conclusion
that the U.S. housing market is illiquid is reinforced if we target moments from 2016 instead.

8.2

Constant rl

We assume in our benchmark model that the return on the liquid asset increases with liquid
asset holdings in order to capture heterogeneity in rates of return across the wealth distribution. Here we illustrate the consequences of assuming that the interest rate on the liquid
asset is constant. We report the key moments we target and implied parameter values in
Panels A and B of Table 11. As the table shows, the model does a poorer job at reproducing
the low liquid asset holdings at the bottom of the distribution. For example, median liquid
assets relative to annual per-capita income is 0.07 in the data, compared to 0.14 in the model.
20

See the Appendix for the full list of moments and parameters for this and all other robustness checks.

32

Recall that our benchmark model predicts a ratio of median liquid assets to income of 0.08,
much closer to the data. Owing to the counterfactually larger holdings of liquid assets at the
bottom of the distribution, the model now predicts that liquidity constraints are slightly less
severe. Only 76% of homeowners are constrained, with an average willingness to pay equal
to 0.11. In contrast, in our benchmark model 82% of homeowners are liquidity constrained,
with an average willingness to pay of 0.13.

8.3

Moving Shocks

Our benchmark model assumes no non-pecuniary barriers to homeownership. Agents in the
model therefore only rent if they are relatively poor and cannot take advantage of the lower
user cost of owner-occupied housing due to the LTV and PTI constraints on borrowing.
Owing to this feature, the model fails to match the upper tail of the liquid asset distribution
for renters. For example, the 90th percentile of liquid assets to income of renters is equal to
1 in the data and only 0.29 in the model. Since renters account for almost one-third of all
households, the model is also unable to match the upper tail of the overall distribution of
liquid assets to income. For example, the 90th percentile of this distribution is 1.50 in the
data and 0.66 in the model.
To ensure that we have some rich households who rent, here we introduce an iid moving
shock. Specifically, with probability πh,r a homeowner receives a moving shock and sells the
home to become a renter. In addition, not all renters can enter the housing market: we
assume a constant hazard πr,r with which a renter continues to rent. We choose these two
additional parameters to match the 8% frequency of housing turnover in the 2001 Mortgage
Bankers Association data, as well as moments of the distribution of liquid assets for renters.
Table 11 shows that this extension reproduces the distribution of liquid assets of all
households much better. For example, the 90th percentile of liquid assets to income is equal
to 1.28, much closer to the 1.5 in the data. However, our conclusions regarding the severity
of liquidity constraints are largely unchanged. We now find that 84% of homeowners are
liquidity constrained, and willing to pay 12 cents for every dollar of home equity extracted,
numbers very similar to those in our benchmark.

33

8.4

No Home Production

We finally illustrate the role home production plays in our benchmark model by setting φ,
the parameter that governs the productivity of the home production sector, to zero. Table
11 shows that the model has a harder time rationalizing the very low liquid asset holdings of
the bottom 50% of households: the median liquid assets to income is equal to 0.14, compared
to 0.07 in the data and 0.08 in our benchmark calibration. Because agents cannot use home
production to insure against bad income realizations, they compensate by accumulating more
precautionary savings. Consequently, the model predicts that liquidity constraints are less
severe: the mean willingness to pay for an additional dollar of home equity is now equal to
9 cents, compared to 13 cents in the benchmark model.

9

Conclusions

This paper is motivated by the observation that most U.S. households hold a disproportionately large share of their wealth in the form of housing equity. If home equity is illiquid,
households are potentially exposed to large fluctuations in consumption stemming from idiosyncratic shocks. Whether this is indeed the case has important implications for the design
of stabilization policies. We quantify how illiquid housing equity is by studying a life-cycle
economy that explicitly models the key institutional details of the U.S. housing and mortgage
market and that is parameterized to match salient features of household balance sheets and
the frequency of home equity extraction.
We find that the U.S. housing market is very illiquid. Specifically, four-fifths of U.S.
homeowners are liquidity constrained, in that they would benefit from a more liquid portfolio composition. On average, these homeowners would pay 13 cents for every dollar of home
equity extracted, a sizable liquidity premium. The majority of liquidity constrained households have positive holdings of liquid assets and are therefore not hand-to-mouth. Rather,
these homeowners value additional liquidity for precautionary reasons, in anticipation of the
possibility of negative income shocks that might make it harder to finance mortgage payments
and smooth consumption.
Our findings have implications for understanding consumption responses to various stabilization policies. First, the model can account for two-thirds of the consumption response
to cash transfers of the type studied by Johnson et al. (2006), a number similar to that of
the two-asset model by Kaplan and Violante (2014). In that sense, our paper complements
34

a large recent literature studying two-asset models by taking a bottom-to-top approach and
explicitly microfounding the illiquid asset. Second, we show that the model can also reproduce the evidence in Ganong and Noel (2019) that the consumption of homeowners responds
much more to payment rather than debt reductions. Owing to the severity of liquidity constraints, the model predicts sizable welfare gains from mortgage assistance policies aimed at
providing temporary liquidity relief to homeowners.

References
Adelman, Saul W., Mark L. Cross, and David G. Shrider, “Why Do Homeowners
Make Mortgage Curtailment Payments?,” Journal of Housing Research, 2010, 19 (2), 195–
212.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C Driscoll, and David I Laibson, “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed-Form Solution,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2013, 45 (4),
591–622.
Andersen, Steffen, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ramadorai, “Sources of Inaction in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage
Market,” American Economic Review, 2020.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo, “Wealth Distribution and Social Mobility
in the US: A Quantitative Approach,” American Economic Review, May 2019, 109 (5),
1623–47.
Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra, “Regional Heterogeneity and the Refinancing Channel of Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
09 2018, 134 (1), 109–183.
Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra, “House
Prices and Consumer Spending,” Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (3), 1502–1542.
Berger, David W, Konstantin Milbradt, Fabrice Tourre, and Joseph Vavra, “Mortgage Prepayment and Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy,” Working Paper 25157,
National Bureau of Economic Research March 2020.
Bhutta, Neil and Benjamin Keys, “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction during the
Housing Boom,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1742–74.
Campbell, John Y and Joao F Cocco, “Household Risk Management and Optimal
Mortgage Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1449–1494.
Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy, “Collateral Damage: Refinancing Constraints and Regional Recessions,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1997,
29 (4), 496–516.
35

Chambers, Matthew, Carlos Garriga, and Don E Schlagenhauf, “Accounting for
Changes in the Homeownership Rate,” International Economic Review, 2009, 50 (3), 677–
726.
Chambers, Matthew S, Carlos Garriga, and Don Schlagenhauf, “The Loan Structure
and Housing Tenure Decisions in an Equilibrium Model of Mortgage Choice,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 2009, 12 (3), 444–468.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Quantitative Analysis of the US Housing
and Mortgage Markets and the Foreclosure Crisis,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015.
Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov, “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage
Refinancing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty,” The Journal of Finance, 2020, 75 (1), 323–
375.
Corbae, Dean and Erwan Quintin, “Leverage and the Foreclosure Crisis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2015, 123, 1–65.
Davis, Morris A and Jonathan Heathcote, “Housing and the Business Cycle,” International Economic Review, 2005, 46 (3), 751–784.
Dotsey, Michael, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman, “State-Dependent
Pricing and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1999, 114 (2), 655–690.
Eberly, Janice and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “Efficient Credit Policies in a Housing Debt
Crisis,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014.
Eichenbaum, Martin, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong, “State Dependent Effects of
Monetary Policy: the Refinancing Channel,” Working Paper 25152, National Bureau of
Economic Research August 2019.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 140–223.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel, “Liquidity vs. Wealth in Household Debt Obligations:
Evidence from Housing Policy in the Great Recession,” Working Paper, 2019.
Gorea, Denis and Virgiliu Midrigan, “Liquidity Constraints in the U.S. Housing Market,” Working Paper, 2015.
and

, “Liquidity Constraints in the U.S. Housing Market,” Working Paper, 2018.

Greenwald, Daniel L., “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,”
Working Paper, 2018.
Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford, “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
and Household Consumption,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2004, pp. 985–1014.
36

Iacoviello, Matteo and Marina Pavan, “Housing and Debt Over the Life Cycle and Over
the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (2), 221 – 238.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household
Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96
(5), 1589–1610.
Johnson, Eric, Stephan Meier, and Olivier Toubia, “Whats the Catch? Suspicion of
Bank Motives and Sluggish Refinancing,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32 (2),
467495.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Response to
Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.
, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante, “The Housing Boom and Bust: Model
Meets Evidence,” Working Paper, 2019.
Keys, Benjamin J., Devin G. Pope, and Jaren C. Pope, “Failure to Refinance,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 2016, 122 (3), 482 – 499.
Khan, Aubhik and Julia K. Thomas, “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,” Econometrica, 2008, 76 (2), 395–436.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Alexander Michaelides, and Kalin Nikolov, “Winners and
Losers in Housing Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43 (2-3), 255–
296.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri, “How do Households Respond to Income Shocks?,”
Working Paper, 2012.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, “The Housing Market(s)
of San Diego,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1371–1407.
Morduch, J. and R. Schneider, The Financial Diaries: How American Families Cope in
a World of Uncertainty, Princeton University Press, 2019.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American
Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2530–2553.
Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos, “An Aggregate Economy with
Different Size Houses,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008, 6 (2-3), 705–
714.
Zevelev, Albert, “Does Collateral Value Affect Asset Prices? Evidence from a Natural
Experiment in Texas,” Working Paper, 2019.

37

Table 1: Motivating Evidence
A. Liquid Assets of US Households. 2001 SCF

All HHs

Richest 20%

Poorest 80%

49,000
241,000
154,300
0.71

92,200
947,000
670,000
0.97

37,300
54,000
17,100
0.64

mean income
mean wealth
mean liquid assets
fraction homeowners

Lower tail of distribution of liquid assets. All households
10th percentile
25th percentile
50th percentile

-900
200
7,000

32,100
96,700
232,100

-1,600
0
2,700

Lower tail of distribution of liquid assets. Homeowners
10th percentile
25th percentile
50th percentile

-500
1,600
15,600

30,600
94,600
225,000

-1,400
400
5,700

0.24
0.43
0.70

0.64
0.87
0.99

Share of housing equity in homeowner’s wealth
25th percentile
50th percentile
75th percentile

0.46
0.77
0.96

B. Home Equity Extraction. 1999-2001 PSID

fraction per year
median % increase in balance
median change in LTV
mean liquid assets
median liquid assets
mean liquid assets to wealth ratio
median liquid assets to wealth ratio

Extract

Do Not Extract

0.08
0.24
0.11

0.92

15,600
800
0.09
0.04

52,900
6,000
0.21
0.16

Note: All statistics adjusted for HH size using OECD equivalence scales and reported in 2016 US Dollars.
See Section 2.1 for a description of the variables we use.

38

Table 2: Parameterization

A. Moments Used in Calibration

Data

Model

Data

Model

variance log income
autocov log income 2 years
autocov log income 4 years
std dev log income growth 2 years

0.44
0.33
0.31
0.41

0.43
0.34
0.31
0.41

mean liquid assets
median liquid assets
mean liquid assets homeowners
median liquid assets homeowners

0.46
0.07
0.53
0.15

0.44
0.08
0.64
0.15

fraction homeowners
mean wealth
mean housing to income
mean mortgage debt to income

0.64
1.45
1.82
0.83

0.65
1.38
1.77
0.82

fraction hand-to-mouth
fraction hand-to-mouth homeowners
90th pct liquid assets homeowners
mean wealth retirees to workers

0.41
0.32
1.69
2.00

0.37
0.26
1.69
2.04

fraction borrowers who extract

0.08

0.08

home production to consumption

0.23

0.25

B. Parameter Values

Assigned
T
σ
γ
D
rm
θm
θy
f1,m
ν
fs
πδ
δ̄
rl

61
2
1
30
0.025
0.85
0.21
0.005
1/3
0.06
0.10
0.063
-0.028

Calibrated

number of adult years
relative risk aversion
home production elasticity
mortgage maturity
mortgage interest rate
maximum LTV
maximum PTI
proportional cost mortgage
mean utility cost mortgage
cost of selling home
prob. maintenance shock
size maintenance shock
lower bound liquid i-rate

β
α
φ
B
R
f0,m
τ0
τ1
rh
ρz
σz
σe

0.944
0.687
0.939
10.27
0.045
1,330
0.358
10.33
0.016
0.964
0.150
0.327

discount factor
preference weight on housing
efficiency home production
bequest motive
rental rate of housing
fixed cost mortgage, 2016 USD
slope liquid i-rate schedule
location liquid i-rate schedule
upper bound liquid i-rate
AR(1) persistent income comp.
volatility persistent income comp.
volatility transitory income comp.

Note: We scale the moments of the distribution of liquid assets, mortgage debt, wealth and
housing by average annual income. A period in the model is equal to one quarter. All parameter
values reported in Panel B are appropriately annualized.

39

Table 3: Households’ Portfolio Composition

Data

Model

Data

A. Liquid Assets, All

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

-0.04
0
0.07
0.48
1.50

B. Liquid Assets, Homeowners

-0.05
-0.01
0.08
0.27
0.66

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

C. Wealth

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

0
0.04
0.73
2.34
3.94

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

0.18
0.39
0.62
0.77
0.88

-0.03
0.07
0.60
1.46
3.60

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

1.02
1.62
2.48
3.78
6.43

-0.04
0.01
0.15
0.68
1.69

-0.04
0.02
0.15
0.36
1.69

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

0.36
0.64
0.87
0.99
1.04

0.54
0.72
0.87
0.97
1.05

F. PTI, Borrowers

0.33
0.54
0.70
0.79
0.83

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

G. Housing Value to Income Ratio

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

D. Share Home Equity, Homeowners

E. LTV, Borrowers

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

Model

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

0.05
0.08
0.11
0.17
0.24

0.05
0.07
0.10
0.15
0.23

H. Mortgage Age, Years

1.45
1.89
2.70
4.08
6.07

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

0
1
3
6
10

0
1
3
6
9

Note: We scale the distribution of liquid assets and wealth (Panels A to C) by average annual
income.

40

Table 4: Additional Model Implications

Data

Model

A. Mortgage Debt Management

fraction ahead on payments
median growth in balance when extract
median change in LTV when extract

0.21
0.24
0.11

0.23
0.19
0.12

B. Characteristics of Borrowers who Refinance

mean liquid assets to wealth: extractors
mean liquid assets to wealth: non-extractors

0.09
0.21

0.05
0.17

median liquid assets to wealth: extractors
median liquid assets to wealth: non-extractors

0.04
0.16

0.04
0.15

41

Table 5: Refinancing After A Decline in Mortgage Rate

Data

ν = 1/3

ν = 1/10

ν=0

A. Refinancing in Steady State

monetary cost of refinancing, f0,m , 2016 USD

1,330

2,590

3,580

fraction who would refinance absent utility cost
average welfare gains from refinancing, 2016 USD

0.22
1,020

0.08
920

0.02
1,520

fraction who refinance

0.02

0.02

0.02

1.75

1.75

1.75

fraction who would refinance absent utility cost
average welfare gains from refinancing, 2016 USD

0.79
2,730

0.75
1,500

0.44
480

fraction with positive savings from refinancing
average savings from refinancing, 2016 USD

1.00
15,970

0.99
14,600

0.98
13,610

0.16

0.24

0.44

B. Refinancing After Decline in Mortgage Rate

decline in pre-tax mortgage rate

1.75

fraction who refinance

0.16

Notes: The statistics in the data are from Johnson et al. (2019). The welfare gains from
refinancing are computed as the difference between the value of refinancing and the best alternative
option, scaled by the marginal utility of consumption. The average savings from refinancing are
calculated as the difference between the PV of the mortgage payments under the original mortgage
contract, net of the mortgage payments upon refinancing to the lower interest rate and the mortgage
origination costs.

42

Table 6: Importance of Liquidity Constraints

A. Value of Liquidity

Fraction better off

ν = 1/3

ν = 1/10

ν=0

ν = 1/3
and rm increase

0.82

0.81

0.80

0.83

0.13

0.13

0.12

0.20

Willingness to pay
mean
th

percentile

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.02

th

percentile

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.07

50th percentile

0.12

0.12

0.10

0.19

10
25

th

percentile

0.20

0.19

0.18

0.30

th

percentile

0.27

0.26

0.25

0.38

75
90

B. Fraction Consumed

ν = 1/3

ν = 1/10

ν=0

ν = 1/3
and rm increase

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.14

percentile

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.02

25th percentile

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.06

mean
th

10

th

percentile

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.11

th

percentile

0.17

0.16

0.15

0.18

th

percentile

0.27

0.26

0.27

0.27

50
75
90

Note: The table reports results from a one-time liquidity injection that increases homeowners’
liquid assets and mortgage debt by 1% of the value of their homes, leaving their wealth unchanged.

43

Table 7: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of a $500 Cash Transfer

A. Economy with ν = 1/3
all

homeowners

renters

0.17

0.14

0.22

percentile

0.03

0.02

0.06

25th percentile

0.07

0.06

0.12

mean
th

10

th

percentile

0.14

0.11

0.20

th

percentile

0.22

0.18

0.25

th

percentile

0.33

0.27

0.43

50
75

90

B. Economy with ν = 1/10

mean

all

homeowners

renters

0.16

0.13

0.22

th

percentile

0.03

0.02

0.06

th

percentile

0.07

0.05

0.13

50th percentile

0.13

0.10

0.20

10

25

th

percentile

0.22

0.18

0.25

th

percentile

0.33

0.27

0.43

75

90

C. Economy with ν = 0

mean

all

homeowners

renters

0.15

0.11

0.21

th

percentile

0.02

0.02

0.06

th

percentile

0.06

0.05

0.13

50th percentile

0.13

0.10

0.19

10

25

th

percentile

0.21

0.17

0.24

th

percentile

0.33

0.29

0.39

75

90

Note: The table reports the marginal propensity to consume out of a one-time $500 cash transfer.

44

Table 8: Mortgage Modification Program

Only Payment Reduction

Payment and Principal Reduction

All

Underwater

All

Underwater

fraction better off

0.87

0.97

1

1

∆ welfare/transfer

0.16

0.22

1

1

∆ consumption/transfer

0.36

0.46

0.39

0.47

Table 9: Mortgage Forbearance Program

Before

After

A. Steady State Comparisons
fraction homeowners
mortgage debt to income
fraction borrowers who extract

0.65
0.82
0.08

fraction homeowners with reduced payments
mean payment reduction, 2016 USD

0.72
1
0.08
0.26
520

B. Average Welfare Gains, 2016 USD
all households
homeowners
renters
poorest 25%

1,770
1,880
1,580
2,630

45

Table 10: Robustness: 2016 Calibration
A. Moments

2016 Data

Model

0.59
1.27
1.86
0.92
0.34
0.05

0.60
1.24
1.80
0.89
0.33
0.05

-0.05
0.00
0.03
0.30
1.12

-0.05
-0.03
0.05
0.25
0.73

I. Aggregate Moments
fraction homeonwers
wealth to income
housing to income
mortgage debt to income
mean liquid assets to income
fraction borrowers who extract
II. Distribution of Liquid Assets
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

B. Parameter Values

discount factor, β
preference housing, α
fixed refi cost, f0,m , 2016 USD
upper bound liquid rate, rh
rental rate housing, R

0.944
0.700
5,400
0.012
0.049

C. Severity of Liquidity Constraints

2001 calibration

2016 calibration

0.82
0.13
0.12

0.83
0.20
0.16

fraction liquidity constrained
mean valuation liquidity
mean fraction consumed

46

Table 11: Additional Robustness Checks
A. Moments

Data

Constant rl

Moving shocks

No home prod.

0.64
1.45
1.82
0.83
0.46
0.08

0.64
1.40
1.70
0.73
0.43
0.07

0.65
1.37
1.76
0.87
0.48
0.08

0.67
1.32
1.71
0.84
0.45
0.08

-0.04
0.00
0.07
0.48
1.50

-0.03
0.02
0.14
0.39
0.87

-0.05
0
0.10
0.30
1.28

-0.04
0.03
0.14
0.29
0.62

Constant rl

Moving shocks

No home prod.

0.952
0.475
1,030
0.007
0.042

0.945
0.793
160
0.014
0.054

0.914
0.976
990
0.021
0.048

Constant rl

Moving shocks

No home prod.

0.76
0.11
0.09

0.84
0.12
0.14

0.82
0.09
0.05

I. Aggregate Moments
fraction homeowners
wealth to income
housing to income
mortgage debt to income
mean liquid assets to income
fraction borrowers who extract
II. Distribution of Liquid Assets
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile
percentile

B. Parameter Values

discount factor, β
preference housing, α
fixed refi cost, f0,m , 2016 USD
upper bound liquid rate, rh
rental rate housing, R

C. Severity of Liquidity Constraints

fraction liquidity constrained
mean valuation of liquidity
mean fraction consumed

47

Figure 1: Decision to Refinance

Figure 2: Probability of Refinancing

48

Figure 3: Life-Cycle Statistics

Figure 4: Value of Liquidity

49

Figure 5: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of a Cash Transfer

50

