                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



   INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS AS SOURCES OF STATE EFFECTIVENESS

                                        Michael Carlos Best
                                           Jonas Hjort
                                         David Szakonyi

                                       Working Paper 23350
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23350


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2017, Revised October 2019

We are grateful to Ben Olken for his very helpful discussion of the paper at the AEA meetings. We also
thank John M. Abowd, Daron Acemoglu, Hunt Allcott, Tim Besley, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Raj
Chetty, Allan Collard-Wexler, Francesco Decarolis, Andres Drenik, Pascaline Dupas, Ben Faber,
Fred Finan, Matthew Gentzkow, Josh Gottlieb, Caroline Hoxby, Amit Khandelwal, Brad Larsen,
DavidMargolis, Torsten Persson, Andrea Prat, Imran Rasul, Jimmy Roberts, Jonah Rockoff, Tobias
Salz, Orie Shelef, Andrei Shleifer, David Silver, Eric Verhoogen, Guo Xu, and Danny Yagan for
valuable comments; Andrei Yakovlev for institutional guidance; Andrey Druzhaev, Len Goff,
Vinayak Iyer, and Georgiy Syunyaev for outstanding research assistance; and seminar
participants at the AEA meetings, U.C. Berkeley, University of British Columbia, Central
European University, Columbia, University of Copenhagen, Duke, the Econometric Society,
Higher School of Economics, McGill, University of Michigan, the NBER Development
Economics Program meeting, NEUDC, NYU, Northwestern, University of Oslo, Paris School of
Economics, Santa Clara, Stanford, University College London, UCLA, University of Toronto,
University of Virginia, and the World Bank for comments. Best thanks the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research, where he was a postdoctoral fellow while much of the work on the
paper was done. The study has been funded within the framework of the Basic Research Program at
the National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE) and by the Russian Academic
Excellence Project “5-100”. Any remaining errors are ours alone. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.



NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Michael Carlos Best, Jonas Hjort, and David Szakonyi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Individuals and Organizations as Sources of State Effectiveness
Michael Carlos Best, Jonas Hjort, and David Szakonyi
NBER Working Paper No. 23350
April 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. H11,O2

                                         ABSTRACT

How important are bureaucrats for the productivity of the state? And to what extent do the
tradeoffs between different policies depend on the implementing bureaucrats’ effectiveness?
Using data on 16million public procurement purchases in Russia during 2011–2016, we show
that over 40 percent of the variation in quality-adjusted prices paid—our measure of performance
—is due to the individual bureaucrats and organizations that manage procurement processes.
Such differences in effectiveness matter for policy design. To illustrate, we show that a common
procurement policy— bid preferences for domestic suppliers—dramatically improves
performance, but only when implemented by ineffective bureaucrats.

Michael Carlos Best                             David Szakonyi
Department of Economics                         Department of Political Science
Columbia University                             George Washington University
420 West 118th Street                           2115 G St. NW
New York, NY 10027                              Suite 440
and NBER                                        Washington, DC 20052
michael.best@columbia.edu                       dszakonyi@gwu.edu

Jonas Hjort
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hjort@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23350
1       Introduction
A successful state is the foundation economic development is built on (Besley & Persson, 2009, 2010;
Acemoglu et al. , 2015; Page & Pande, 2018). A key feature of states is that policy implementation is
delegated to a bureaucracy—the state’s middle management tier. Some bureaucracies are equipped
with the skills and organizational capacity to implement complex policy directives, while others are not;
some bureaucracies do not share policymakers’ priorities, while others do. In sum, the individuals and
organizations who make up the bureaucratic apparatus may play an important role in determining the
productivity of the state.
        Our goals in this paper are twofold. First, to quantify the importance of the bureaucracy for public
sector output. Second, to explore how the tradeoffs between different policies depend on the effective-
ness of the bureaucracy in charge of implementation.1 These questions are challenging to address in
part because bureaucracies produce a wide array of outputs, many of which cannot be measured in
public-sector wide, administrative data. However, one particular task—the procurement of off-the-shelf
goods—is performed throughout the state enterprise, and has a well-defined and quantifiable output:
prices paid.
        We use a simple conceptual framework of procurement with endogenous supplier entry to guide
our analysis of administrative data covering the universe of public procurement in Russia. Using an
empirical specification derived from the model, we estimate that over 40 percent of the variation in
prices paid is attributable to the procurers who manage procurement processes—individual procure-
ment officers and the public organizations paying for and using the goods—and that individuals and
organizations each contribute roughly half to this. Differences in effectiveness of such magnitude may
have far-reaching implications for policy design. To provide a concrete example, we study the introduc-
tion of a bid preference regime common throughout the world. Under Russia’s bid preference policy,
contract winners offering goods manufactured abroad are paid only 85 percent of their bid. Our model
predicts that the impact of such a differential will vary systematically with procurement managers’ effec-
tiveness. Consistent with the model, we estimate that cost savings and the increase in the likelihood of
domestic producers winning the contract are both considerably larger when the policy is implemented
by less effective bureaucrats. The magnitude of the differences in the policy’s impact we estimate suggest
that the gains from tailoring policy to the effectiveness of the implementing bureaucracy can be large.
    1
    These two goals are closely related, as states can increase bureaucratic effectiveness either by directly improving the pro-
ductivity of the bureaucracy or by optimizing the policies the bureaucracy is asked to implement. The answers depend on the
state’s “production function”, an object that remains almost entirely unknown. Existing evidence does offer clues, however.
First, a growing body of research has documented dramatic differences in abilities and practices across individual public sector
workers and across the organizations they work for (see e.g. Bloom et al. , 2015; Finan et al. , 2017; Khan et al. , 2016, 2018). What
remains unclear is the extent to which such differences influence public sector output, and how this varies with the policies in
use (for evidence that front-line public sector workers such as teachers and health and community workers do, at least to some
extent, influence public sector output, see the excellent overview of the literature by Finan et al. (2017)). Second, empirically,
many policies appear to work well in some countries or regions and poorly in others (Rodrik, 2009). For example, value-added
taxes generate the intended tax compliance in most developed countries, but rarely do so in developing countries (Bird & Gen-
dron, 2007); the NREGA employment guarantee scheme supports poor workers and helps complete important infrastructure
projects in some Indian states, but is largely unused in others (Gulzar & Pasquale, 2017); and the postal services in Algeria,
Barbados, and Uruguay comply with the policy of returning incorrectly addressed letters to sender, but the ones in Cambodia,
Russia, and Tajikistan do not (Chong et al. , 2014).


                                                                  1
       Public procurement in Russia is an ideal setting to study micro level state effectiveness. First, pro-
curement makes up roughly 8 percent of worldwide GDP (Schapper et al. , 2009). Second, for purchases
of items that are precisely defined (“off-the-shelf” goods), procurers’ mandate is simply to pay the lowest
possible price while following the government’s policy rules (see also Bandiera et al. , 2009; Ferraz et al.
, 2015). This makes performance measurable and comparable across the entire state enterprise. Third,
Russia is a massive and diverse country, with a bureaucracy spanning the range of state effectiveness.2
       In our stylized model of public procurement, bureaucratic effectiveness affects procurement out-
comes in two ways. First, ineffective bureaucracies impose costs (e.g. unusual product specifications)
that raise the cost to suppliers of fulfilling the contract. Second, ineffective bureaucracies impose higher
participation costs (e.g. required deposits, or bribes to enter the auction) on sellers wishing to bid on gov-
ernment contracts. As a result, less effective bureaucracies attract fewer and less diverse participants,
and pay higher quality-adjusted prices.
       Introducing bid preferences favoring locally manufactured goods that are, on average, more expen-
sive in turn also has two impacts. First, penalizing bids by foreign bidders makes them less competitive,
tending to increase prices paid. Second, such differential penalization makes participation less attractive
for foreign bidders and more attractive for local bidders. When state effectiveness is high, baseline par-
ticipation is high and so the participation effect is small and procurement outcomes worsen. However,
when state effectiveness is low, baseline participation is low and so the likelihood that a local bidder who
enters has to face a more efficient, foreign, bidder is low. As a result, the introduction of bid preferences
has a large impact on the likelihood that a local bidder can win the contract, and hence on their will-
ingness to participate. In this case the participation effect dominates and overall procurement outcomes
improve.
       To compare the performance of bureaucrats and organizations across the country empirically, we
need to ensure that they are performing the same task—buying the same type and quality of good. To do
this, we adapt tools from machine learning to develop a methodology that uses the text of procurement
contracts to classify purchases into homogeneous bins.3 We also confirm that our results are very similar
in a subsample of goods that are by nature homogeneous—pharmaceuticals—for which we do not need
to rely on a machine learning classifier. To estimate the causal impacts of individual bureaucrats and
organizations on procurement performance, we exploit the fact that many end-user organizations (e.g.
ministries, schools or hospitals) are observed working with multiple bureaucrats (procurement officers)
and vice versa, providing us with thousands of quasi-experiments for identification. Event studies reveal
sharp decreases in prices paid for a given good when organizations switch to more effective bureaucrats
(for example, prices decrease by 18 percent when an organization switches from a bureaucrat in the
worst quartile of average prices to a bureaucrat in the best quartile), and corresponding increases when
   2
      Russia spends over half of its total public procurement budget on such goods. Unlike in most low- and middle-income
countries, detailed administrative datasets covering all levels of government and the entire country are publicly available.
    3
      Our methodology ensures that within-category quality differences are minimal, while maintaining generality by not re-
stricting the sample to very specific types of goods. The difficulty of categorizing goods accurately so as to ensure like-for-like
comparison has long dogged several literatures. In foregoing conventional methods and instead using text analysis to classify
goods, we follow Hoberg & Phillips (2016). They classify firm similarity based on the goods produced, while we classify the
similarity of the goods themselves.



                                                                2
organizations switch is to a less effective bureaucrat. The event studies also provide clear evidence
supporting a causal interpretation of these effects.4
    To aggregate the impacts of individual bureaucrats and organizations on prices into an estimate of
the share of the total variation in priced paid that is explained by the bureaucratic apparatus, we extend
the variance decomposition approach pioneered by Abowd et al. (1999, 2002) (hereafter AKM) in two
ways. First, we correct the fixed-effect estimates for sampling error (Neyman & Scott, 1948; Lancaster,
2000). To do so, we adapt split-sample (see e.g. Finkelstein et al. , 2016; Silver, 2016) and shrinkage (Kane
& Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al. , 2014a) methods to a two-dimensional context, explicitly accounting for the
covariance between the estimation error in the bureaucrat and the organization dimension (Andrews
et al. , 2008).5 Second, we address the missing links that arise because we estimate performance effects
attributable to workers and organizations engaged in the same task. That is, the switches that identify
individuals’ and organizations’ impacts on prices do not link all individuals and organizations in our
setting.6 We show that (i) the combined productivity effect of pairs of workers and organizations can
nevertheless be identified, and (ii) a suitable normalization of the effects allows estimation of lower
bounds on the shares of the variation in performance explained by bureaucrats and organizations.
    We find that the individuals and organizations of the bureaucracy together account for more than
40 percent of the variation in prices paid, of which individuals and organizations account for roughly
equal shares. These results, from the baseline policy regime that treats all suppliers’ bids equally, imply
that, in weak institutional contexts such as Russia, the impact on public sector output of improving
micro level state effectiveness would be massive. Moving the worst-performing quartile of procurers to
75th percentile-effectiveness would reduce procurement expenditures by around 11 percent, or USD 13
billion each year—roughly one fifth of the total amount spent on health care by the Russian government
at federal, regional, and municipal level combined.
    We next correlate our estimates of procurer effectiveness with a rich set of indicators on each pro-
curer’s auctions (see also Lacetera et al. , 2016)—measures of initial entry barriers, how the auction was
executed, procurer experience, etc. We find, consistent with our theoretical framework, that lowering the
participation cost imposed on suppliers is a key part of what enables procurers to pay low prices: effec-
tive procurers set lower reservation prices, attract more applicants, and revise contracts less frequently.
    The second part of the paper focuses on the implications of the heterogeneity in effectiveness we
document in the first part for the design of policy. To shed light on how the costs and benefits of specific
policies depend on the effectiveness of policy implementers in the bureaucracy, we focus on a particular
    4
      The assumptions needed for causal interpretation are that bureaucrats do not sort across organizations based on unmod-
elled match effects, and that drift in effectiveness and switches are uncorrelated. The event studies provide compelling support
for these assumptions, as does a battery of additional tests. Studies of the wages of workers and firms in the private sector
from the labor economics literature tend to find the same (see e.g. Mendes et al. , 2010; Card et al. , 2013, 2016; Goldschmidt &
Schmieder, 2017; Shelef & Nugyen-Chyung, 2015; Alvarez et al. , 2018; Bloom et al. , 2018, forthcoming). In the public sector
there are additional institutional reasons to expect these assumptions to hold (see Section 2).
    5
      To our knowledge, two-dimensional shrinkage estimators like the ones we develop have not been used before.
    6
      Worker mobility is often high enough that almost all workers and firms belong to the biggest “connected set” if the outcome
being compared across job spells is wages, as in the existing literature. This paper is to our knowledge the first to estimate
performance effects attributable to workers and organizations engaged in the same task. Workers and organizations performing
the same task form a less connected network.



                                                               3
policy change in Russia—the introduction of bid preferences for domestically manufactured goods. Bid
preferences are a ubiquitous policy tool used to favor local bidders in public procurement purchases.7
We identify the impact of the bid preference regime using a generalized difference-in-differences ap-
proach that takes advantage of the fact that preferences apply to an evolving set of goods and are in
effect for only parts of each year. Our results show that, on average, bid preferences achieve the Rus-
sian government’s goal of channeling demand to domestic manufacturers, and do so at no cost to the
government, in that average prices paid if anything decrease slightly.8
       To test our model’s predictions that bid preferences will have better impacts when implemented by
less effective bureaucracies, we interact the bid preference regime with our estimates of the effectiveness
of the bureaucrats in charge of implementation. We find that the small negative average treatment ef-
fect on prices paid masks considerable heterogeneity. Our estimates imply savings of 17.5 percent when
the policy is implemented by the least effective quartile of bureaucrats, but only 0.7 percent when im-
plemented by the most effective quartile of bureaucrats, and that prices increase for the most effective
bureaucrats (as has been shown for similar policies implemented in the U.S.).9 This dependence of policy
impact on state effectiveness may be part of the reason why some policies work well in some countries
or regions and poorly in others. It also suggests that tailoring the design of policy to the effectiveness
of the implementing bureaucracy may be very advantageous, and can partly offset the costs of a less
effective bureaucracy.
       This paper contributes to two main strands of literature on the causes and consequences of state
effectiveness. We develop a new approach to measuring workers’ and organizations’ task-specific pro-
ductivity and use it to demonstrate the extent to which state effectiveness is embodied in the bureaucratic
apparatus. Our performance measure is free of the limitations that arise from comparing workers and/or
organizations (e.g. firms) (i) engaged in different activities and/or (ii) based on wages and profits.10 In
this sense our paper is most closely related to recent work by Khan et al. (2016, 2018) analyzing how
the incentives of bureaucrats matter for tax revenue in Pakistan (see also Bertrand et al. (2016) on how
bureaucrat incentives matter for perceived performance and aggregate outcomes in India), and to the lit-
   7
      The WTO’s Government Procurement Agreement seeks to restrict countries’ ability to use procurement in this way. How-
ever, the agreement has only 10 signatories to date, presumably due to the appeal of favoring local bidders in procurement.
    8
      The average treatment effect of Russia’s “buy local” program suggests that industrial policies in public procurement may
on the whole be more successful in countries with low average bureaucratic effectiveness, such as Russia. The average treat-
ment effect we estimate contrasts, in particular, with the effect of similar policies found in higher state effectiveness contexts.
(For example, a five percent bid preference for small businesses in Californian road construction procurement is estimated to
increase average costs by 1-4 percent (Marion, 2007; Krasnokutskaya & Seim, 2011).) This foreshadows our findings on how
the impact of the policy varies with the effectiveness of the policy implementers within Russia.
    9
      In the pharmaceuticals sample, where we observe goods’ origin, we also find that purchases administered by ineffective
bureaucrats see a bigger increase in the probability that an auction is won by a supplier selling locally manufactured goods
when bid preferences apply, consistent with our theoretical framework.
   10
      The seminal work of Abowd et al. (1999, 2002) spawned a large empirical literature using employer–employee matched
datasets to address a range of important questions in labor economics (see, among many others, the papers cited in footnote 4,
and also Bertrand & Schoar (2003) and the literature that followed on CEO effects). Wages do not necessarily reflect productivity
(Eeckhout & Kircher, 2011; Card et al. , 2016), but are important objects in and of themselves. Existing applications of the AKM
method have used samples that include workers performing many different tasks. Carneiro et al. (2012) and Cardoso et al.
 (2016) show the potential importance of accounting for differences in tasks. On the organization/firm side, conventional
methods estimate productivity from revenue or profits data and thus risk conflating productivity itself with mark-ups and
quality differentiation (see e.g. Goldberg & De Loecker, 2014).



                                                                4
eratures on management practices in organizations and individual characteristics in the public sector.11
Since we compare workers and organizations pursuing a single objective, we avoid concerns about mul-
titasking and unobserved dimensions of performance. Moreover, our empirical approach allows us to
quantify, to our knowledge for the first time, the importance of the bureaucracy for public sector output
relative to (all) other contributors.12
      Second, our paper contributes to an emerging body of evidence on how public policy design should
be tailored to context (see e.g. Laffont, 2005; Duflo et al. , forthcoming; Best et al. , 2015; Hansman et al.
, 2017). We do so by focusing on the often overlooked fact that policy implementation is delegated to
bureaucracies. Bureaucracies are likely to differ in effectiveness across contexts. We provide tools for
the measurement of the effectiveness of a bureaucracy and show that effectiveness systematically affects
the relative costs and benefits of different policies (see also Vivalt, 2017; Dehejia et al. , 2016).13 We are
not aware of previous studies that estimate treatment effects conditional on an unobserved characteristic
such as effectiveness (see e.g. Heckman & Smith, 1997; Angrist, 2004; Deaton, 2010; Heckman, 2010, for
discussion of the estimation of treatment effects conditional on observed characteristics).
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents background on the Russian public
procurement system and the data we use. Our conceptual framework is in Section 3, and in Section
4, we estimate the effectiveness of individual bureaucrats and organizations and their contribution to
public sector output. In Section 5 we estimate the impact of the “buy local” policy and its interaction
with bureaucratic effectiveness. Section 6 concludes.


2     Background and Data on Public Procurement in Russia
2.1     A decentralized system with centralized rules

In 1991, the Russian government created an extremely decentralized system to perform public procure-
ment, which now makes up about 10 percent of Russia’s non-resource GDP.14 Each government entity
   11
      In addition to Bertrand et al. (2016); Khan et al. (2016, 2018), see also Burgess et al. (2012); Duflo et al. (2013); Callen et al.
(2016a,b); Deserranno (forthcoming) for important evidence on how performance incentives affect public sector workers’ per-
formance; Rasul & Rogger (2018); Bloom et al. (2015); Janke et al. (2018) on management practices in public sector organizations;
and Dal Bo et al. (2013); Duflo et al. (2013); Ashraf et al. (2014a,b); Hanna & Wang (2017); Callen et al. (2016a,b); Deserranno
(forthcoming); Bertrand et al. (2016) on the characteristics of front-line public sector workers and public goods provision. In
addition to Bandiera et al. (2009); Ferraz et al. (2015)—who, like us, focus on purchases of off-the-shelf goods—Lewis-Faupel
et al. (2016); Decarolis et al. (2016); Coviello & Gagliarducci (2017); Coviello et al. (2017, 2018); Decarolis et al. (2018) also study
state effectiveness in the context of public procurement. The innovative study by Decarolis et al. (2018) is especially related to
this paper. The authors investigate how bureaucratic competence affects procurement outcomes in a setting where there are
multiple dimensions to both competence and procurement outcomes, and find large effects.
   12
      In this sense our paper is related to Yao & Zhang (2015). They estimate the share of the variance in cities’ economic growth
in China attributable to mayors. Their study belongs to an important body of work analyzing how public sector leaders and
politicians matter for aggregate economic outcomes (Jones & Olken, 2005; Bertrand et al. , 2016; Easterly & Pennings, 2017).
Most recently, Xu (forthcoming) convincingly shows that governors of colonies in the British Empire were more likely to be
promoted if they were connected to their superior, despite raising less revenue and investing less.
   13
      The treatment effect heterogeneity we find resonates with the findings of the first studies to compare experimentally iden-
tified program effects across branches of companies or private-versus-public status of the implementing agency (see Bold et al.
, forthcoming; Allcott, 2015).
   14
      The Soviet Union, like other socialist states (see e.g. Bai & Jia, 2016), operated a centralized bureaucracy (see e.g. Chere-
mukhin et al. , 2016). Since 1991, the Russian bureaucracy has become very decentralized (Enikolopov & Zhuravskaya, 2007).


                                                                   5
has the legal authority to make its own purchases and there are no centralized purchases (such as frame-
work contracts). Conversely, the legal framework for procurement is centralized. Competitive bidding
for all purchases above USD 35,000 is mandatory and the rules and regulations governing tender pro-
cesses at federal, regional, and municipal levels of government were harmonized under Federal Law
No. 94-FZ in 2005 (Yakovlev et al. , 2010; Krylova & Settles, 2011). Electronic auctions are the most com-
mon method of procurement. They were used for 53.5 percent of Russian procurement during our data
period (2011–2016, see Online Appendix Table OA.4) and so our analysis will restrict attention to these
electronic auctions in order to study bureaucrats and organizations each performing the exact same task.
   Electronic auctions are conducted through one of five designated, independent web platforms. At the
time of the auction, only the platform knows the identities of the bidders, making it possible to conduct
auctions in which the bidding firms are anonymous to the procurers making the purchase. Figure 1
traces out the steps involved in a procurement process together with the number of purchases in 2011–
2016 that followed each path from announcement to contract.
   Each purchase starts with an auction announcement. The announcement contains technical details
on the item(s) to be purchased, a maximum allowable price for the lot, the required security deposit
(between 0.5 and 5 percent of the maximum price), other participation requirements, and the date of the
electronic auction. Purchasing bureaucrats oversee this entire process, collecting information on tech-
nical specifications from clients and directing subordinates to draw up procurement plans. In order to
participate in an auction, suppliers must first obtain accreditation from the platform. This requires not
being in a state of bankruptcy, not being sanctioned under administrative law, not having substantial
unpaid taxes, and not being listed in the registry of suppliers who have committed violations of pro-
curement rules during the last two years. Once accredited, suppliers must prepare a formal application,
consisting of two parts. The first part describes the good that they are offering to fulfill the procurement
order. The second part—which cannot be accessed by the procurers until the auction is concluded—
contains information on the supplier itself (name, etc.).
   A five-member commission, including the purchasing bureaucrat and organization, is designated to
oversee the auction. The commission receives and evaluates the anonymized first part of each applica-
tion from the platform before the auction is held. The purchasing bureaucrat takes the lead in directing
the review work of the commission. Applications to participate are denied if the supplier is not ac-
credited, cannot pay the security deposit, or if its proposal does not comply with the requested item
specifications. In the event that only one supplier is approved to participate, the auction is declared “not
held”, the commission receives the second part of the approved supplier’s application, and a contract
is drawn up with that supplier at the maximum allowable price. This is relatively common; in 1.4 mil-
lion cases, or 22 percent of purchases, there is only one eligible participant. If there are no approved
applicants, the purchase is cancelled. This occurs in 13 percent of purchases.
   If more than one supplier is approved, the auction is held. Approved suppliers remain anonymous
and are each assigned a participant number. All participants log in to the online platform and participate
in a descending, open-outcry auction. When a participant enters a bid lower than the current winning
bid, the bid amount, time, and participant number are made available to all auction participants. The



                                                     6
auction continues until ten minutes have passed since the most recent qualifying bid.
       Following the conclusion of the auction, the commission receives and reviews the second part of the
applications. These contain the identifying information for the participants, but do not allow for suppli-
ers to be linked to bids. The commission checks the materials to make sure the suppliers’ accreditations,
licenses, names, tax ID numbers, registration, and documents confirming participation in the auction are
correct. Among the set of bidders deemed to be in accordance with the rules, the contract is signed with
the participant who submitted the lowest bid. Purchasing bureaucrats then monitor contract fulfillment.


2.2      The role of bureaucrats and organizations in procurement

Purchases are made for the public entity that pays for and uses the goods; an entity that we will refer to
as an organization. The organization may, for example, be a school, hospital or ministry, at the municipal,
regional or federal level. To make a purchase, the organization must work with a procurement officer—
we refer to these individuals as bureaucrats. Together, the organization and bureaucrat, who we will refer
to as the procurers, are tasked with acquiring the good the organization requires according to the centrally
set rules, and at the lowest possible price. Any policy goals the central government may have, such as
influencing which types of goods or firms win contracts, manifest themselves in the rules followed by all
procurers. Conditional on following those rules, procurers’ only mandate is to pay the lowest possible
price. As such, under any given set of central rules, the price paid should be considered the main
measure of how effective procurers have been at implementing the government’s procurement policy.
       Each regional authority sets rules dictating that the organizations under its jurisdiction use either
a bureaucrat who is an employee of the organization or a bureaucrat who is an employee of an exter-
nal public agency—agencies whose bureaucrats conduct procurement auctions with and for multiple
organizations—for a given type of purchase. The type of purchase is defined by the maximum price
of the contract and the nature of the item.15 Bureaucrats can thus either be “in-house” or “external”.
This means that instances in which a given bureaucrat is observed working with more than one organi-
zation (and vice versa) occur for two different reasons in Russian public procurement. The first is that
bureaucrats change employers—from working for one organization (or external procurement agency)
to another, as organizations hire and separate from bureaucrats. The other is that external bureaucrats
may conduct purchases with multiple organizations, and a given organization may end up using mul-
tiple external bureaucrats. On average, bureaucrats in our data are observed working with 5.2 different
organizations, and organizations with 4.8 different bureaucrats. This high degree of churn is a powerful
source of variation for this paper’s empirical exercise.16
  15
      External procurement agencies can be organized by a given authority (for example an education or health min-
istry/department), at the federal, regional, or municipal level. Part of the motivation for allowing the creation of such public
agencies was to allow different organizations purchasing the same or similar goods to join forces so as to achieve lower per-unit
prices. In practice, the decentralized management of procurement in Russia and coordination required to co-purchase means
that joint purchases are very rare. Note that we control for the factors that authorities with an external procurement agency use
to determine whether an item can be purchased by an in-house bureaucrat or must be purchased by external bureaucrats—the
type of good and/or maximum allowable price of the contract—in our empirical analysis below.
   16
      Our setting features more turnover than would be observed in comparable data on private sector labor markets. For
example, German workers work at an average of 1.19 firms over the period 2002–2009 (authors’ calculations based on Card
et al. , 2013).


                                                               7
       The education and labor markets for procurement officers are decentralized. Individuals interested
in working in public procurement seek out educational and employment opportunities as in the private
sector.17 In particular, the Russian government does not educate bureaucrats, nor does it operate a cen-
tralized civil service administration to recruit, train, and assign public servants to postings (Barabashev
& Straussman, 2007). In all cases we are aware of, procurement bureaucrats are paid a flat salary.
       Since 2014, the division of labor between a procuring organization and an external procurement
officer has been specified by law. The organization submits all technical documentation, and chooses
and justifies a maximum allowable price. The organization and bureaucrat then together designate the
commission to oversee the auction process. The bureaucrat is on the committee, except in special cir-
cumstances, and manages its workflow. With the help of the committee, she or he is in charge of first
stage review of applications, the auction itself, and second stage review. Procurement officers act as
professional managers of a team of specialists who provide consultations to the organization and collect
information needed to design the tender. At the end of the process, the organization signs the contract
with the winner and signs for delivery. The same or a similar division of labor applies when in-house
bureaucrats, i.e. the procurement managers working directly for the organization, are used, and in pur-
chases conducted before 2014.


2.3      Preferences for domestically manufactured goods

As part of the 2005 law, the Russian government established a system to provide for special treatment
of—a “preference” for—some types of goods in electronic auctions. Certain categories of goods manu-
factured in Russia received a 15 percent bid preference for parts of each year from 2011 through 2016.18
If among the first stage offers there was at least one bidder offering foreign-made goods and at least one
bidder offering locally manufactured goods, then if the winning bidder had offered a foreign good, the
contract she was offered to sign would be for 85 percent of her final bid.
       The application of the preference regime was determined as follows. Each year from 2011 to 2014
a list of good categories for which a preference for domestic goods was to apply was drawn up.19 The
presidential order defining the list was passed in May or June and remained in effect through the year,
after which the preference ceased to operate until a new list had been created and approved the following
year (except in 2015 and 2016, when the 2014 list was extended through 2016). Preferences were not
applied during the first period of each year from 2011–2014. Organizations filing procurement requests
for goods on the list were required to publicly inform potential suppliers that the preference would
be applied. Preferenced goods spanned many categories, including automobiles, clocks, various food
  17
      Examples of private academies offering trainings in the procurement sector include ArtAleks http://artaleks.ru/ and
the Granit Center http://www.granit.ru/. Interviews with experts and a review of recent vacancies posted to open online job
boards revealed that the primary requirements are a legal education, management experience, and knowledge of the existing
laws governing procurement.
   18
      The country of origin of a good was defined as that where the good was “completely produced”, or where it underwent
“significant reprocessing”.
   19
      Preferences were first given to domestic manufacturers in 2008 to stimulate the economy during the period of crisis. The
list of goods covered was slightly changed in 2009, before expiring completely on December 31, 2010. The government then
adopted an annual approach to determining which goods were covered beginning in 2011.



                                                              8
products, medical equipment, pharmaceuticals, textiles and furs (see Online Appendix Table OA.5).
       Our analysis of the role of the bureaucratic apparatus in driving variation in procurement perfor-
mance in sections 4 and 4.5 restricts attention to the standard policy regime without preferences. In
section 5.1 we analyze the average impact of the preference regime, while in section 5.2 we show that
variation in procurer effectiveness drives heterogeneity in the impact of the preference regime.


2.4      Building a dataset of comparable procurement purchases

A key innovation of the 2005 law was the creation of a centralized official procurement website (http://
zakupki.gov.ru/), launched on January 1, 2011, which provides information to the public and suppliers
about all purchases. This website is our main source of data on procurement. As mentioned above, in
order to focus on purchases made under a consistent set of rules, we focus exclusively on electronic
auctions. We use data on the universe of electronic auction requests, review protocols, auction protocols,
and contracts from January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2016. In all, we have information on 6.5
million auction announcements for the purchase of 21 million items. In order to be able to compare
purchases made by different individuals and organizations, we must hold constant the item that is being
purchased. Purchases of services and works contacts are highly idiosyncratic, so we remove them from
our sample, resulting in a sample of 15 million purchased items.
       Table 1 shows summary statistics of our procurement data. Column (1) summarizes all items pur-
chased without the application of the bid preference regime. Our Analysis Sample—which, as explained
in Section 4.2, leaves out “isolated” bureaucrats, organizations, and goods—is summarized in Column
(2).20 While the organizations in our Analysis Sample are more likely to be federal or regional, and less
likely to fall under Internal Affairs or agriculture, the purchases they conduct are of very similar size and
quantity to those in the full sample, reassuring us that the sample we use for analysis is fairly represen-
tative. Column (3) summarizes our sample when purchases to which the bid preference regime applied,
and which were conducted by procurers in the Analysis Sample, are included. This sample shows sim-
ilar differences from the full sample in types of organizations represented—for example, fewer federal
organizations are included—but purchases in the Analysis Sample incl. Bid Preferences are very similar
in size and quantity to those in the Analysis Sample.
       In order to make comparisons of procurement performance across buyers, we must hold constant the
nature of the good being purchased. A great deal of previous research in economics has faced this chal-
lenge, but existing approaches typically achieve within-category homogeneity at the cost of losing gen-
erality.21 To avoid doing so, we use the text of the final contracts, in which the precise nature of the good
  20
     Since our empirical approach relies on measuring price changes associated with organizations switching bureaucrats and
vice versa, we focus on an analysis sample that removes bureaucrats, organizations, and goods that are not connected to
switchers, or which make fewer than five purchases. We also remove sets of organizations connected by bureaucrats switching
between them that contain fewer than three bureaucrats or organizations. Section 4.2 and Online Appendix OA.2 discuss the
implications of the connectedness of the bureaucrats and the organizations for our empirical approach.
  21
     Broadly, three approaches have been taken: using hedonic regressions to estimate consumers’ demand for and/or suppli-
ers’ costs of producing good attributes when rich attribute data is available(Griliches, 1971; Rosen, 1974; Epple, 1987); using
product codes provided by e.g. customs agencies to partition goods (Rauch, 1999; Schott, 2004); or restricting attention to
products that are by nature especially homogeneous (Syverson, 2004; Hortacsu & Syverson, 2007; Foster et al. , 2009).



                                                              9
being purchased is laid out, to classify purchases into narrow product categories within which quality
differences are likely to be negligible. The contracts contain detailed descriptions, but in unstructured
text fields, so we apply text analysis machine learning methods to assign purchases to homogeneous
categories (see also Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2010; Hansen et al. , 2018; Hoberg & Phillips, 2016).
       Our method proceeds in three steps. First, we transform the good descriptions in the contracts into
vectors of word tokens. Second, we develop a transfer learning procedure. The procedure uses good
descriptions and their corresponding 10-digit Harmonized System product codes in data on the universe
of Russian customs declarations to train a classification algorithm that assigns good codes to vectors of
word tokens. We then apply this algorithm to the good descriptions in our procurement data. Third,
for goods that are not reliably classified in the second step, either because the goods are non-traded,
or because their description is insufficiently specific, we develop a clustering algorithm to group good
descriptions into clusters of similar “width” to the categories created in the second step. Details are in
Online Appendix OA.3.22
       To complement this approach to achieving comparability between purchases without restricting the
sample to very specific goods, we collect additional data on purchases of pharmaceuticals, a type of good
that is homogeneous by nature (Bronnenberg et al. , 2015). Russia’s government regulates the pharma-
ceutical market to ensure that certain drugs are available and affordable, compelling suppliers to register
these drugs in a List of Vital and Essential Medicinal Drugs (LVEMD). This list includes information on
each drug’s International Nonproprietary Name (INN)23 ; the name and location of the manufacturer;
date of registration; and maximum price for sale on the Russian market. We use fuzzy string matching
to combine the contract data on procured medicines with corresponding entries in LVEMD using each
drug’s international brand (trademark) name, active ingredient (INN), dosage (mg, g, mkg), active units
(IU), concentration (mg/ml, mkg/ml), volume (ml), and units (tablets, packages). This allows us to
construct a barcode-level classification for pharmaceuticals purchases that we can use as an alternative
to our text classification categories, and to identify the manufacturer (and thus country of origin) for
each pharmaceutical procured.24 The pharmaceuticals subsamples are summarized in columns (4)–(6)
of Table 1, which are defined analogously to columns (1)–(3). The pharmaceuticals subsamples are quite
similar to the All Products samples (and to each other) in most dimensions, with a somewhat higher
average reservation price and somewhat lower average unit price than in the full sample.
       Finally, to study the firms that participate in any stage of the procurement process we use data from
the Bureau Van Dijk’s Ruslana database. Ruslana covers the vast majority of registered firms in Russia
that file financial information.25
  22
      Online Appendix OA.3 also analyzes the sensitivity of our main findings to the choices made when developing our text
analysis methodology. As Figure OA.1 and Tables OA.11 and OA.12 show, the findings are remarkably robust.
   23
      INN is a globally recognized term to denote the chemical substance of the medicine, see http://www.who.int/medicines/
services/inn/en/.
   24
      We restrict the Pharmaceuticals Subsample to purchases of drugs we can match to LVEMD. Cases in which we are unable
to match a drug to the LVEMD can arise both because the medicine is not classified by the Russian government as “essential”
(i.e., covered by the LVEMD) and because insufficient information on dosage and quantity is available in the procurement
contract.
   25
      All firms are by law required to submit accounting data on an active basis. All statistics are standardized by the Russian
Ministry of Finance and provided to agencies such as BVD for dissemination to end-clients.



                                                              10
2.5        Corruption

Both public procurement and Russia are associated with widespread corruption (Transparency Interna-
tional, 2016; Szakonyi, 2017). Corruption in procurement can take many forms. Most of these will result
in a higher purchase price, and as such be captured in the price-based measure of bureaucratic effective-
ness we develop in Section 4. If such forms of corruption—e.g., collusion—are associated with specific
procurers, then our empirical procedure will assign a lower effectiveness score to those procurers.26
         There are two forms of corruption or incompetence that could undermine our estimates of bureau-
cratic effectiveness. First, if our controls for the nature of the good being purchased are inaccurate, our
estimates will conflate true performance differences with differences in the quality of the goods being
purchased. We address this through the text-based good classification methodology and barcode-level
classification of pharmaceuticals described in the previous sub-section, and a battery of tests that relax
the within-category homogeneity assumption in Sub-section 4.4.
         Second, procurers who achieve low prices may in theory purchase items that are simply not deliv-
ered. Our contract execution dataset is unusual, however, in that it includes information on whether the
organization paying for the items signed for delivery. Non-delivery is very rare.27 Russian procurement
laws do not allow for any form of renegotiation of cost of delivery for the off-the-shelf goods we focus
on, as commonly occurs e.g. in works contracts (see e.g. Bajari et al. , 2014; Decarolis, 2014; Decarolis &
Palumbo, 2015).
         Given this, we believe that our price-based procurer effectiveness estimates capture what govern-
ments mandate procurers to target: the price paid for goods of specified quality that are satisfactorily
delivered. In the theoretical framework and empirical analysis below, we remain entirely agnostic about
the extent to which some procurers pay higher prices than others because they are prone to forms of
corruption that manifest themselves in the prices paid and the extent to which they do so because they
are of lower intrinsic ability.28


3        A Simple Model of Procurement with Heterogeneous State Effectiveness
In this section we present a stylized model of public procurement. We model state effectiveness as costs
imposed on potential sellers wishing to participate in public procurement and show how variation in
these costs leads to variation in output—the prices paid—motivating our empirical analysis in Section 4.
    26
     It is also possible that some procurers systematically see their auctions won by suppliers that subsequently do not sign
the contract, either because the winners choose not to do so or because they are deemed by the procuring commission to offer
sub-standard goods. In such cases the contract goes to the second-lowest bidder. Since we observe both the bids and the
contract signed, we also observe the instances in which the contract is not signed with the lowest bidder. Such instances are
rare, accounting for under one percent of purchases (see Figure 1). More importantly, the outcome we focus on when estimating
procurer effectiveness is the price ultimately paid for the item. As such, the consequences of auction winners not signing the
contract will be captured by our effectiveness measures.
  27
     Less than one percent of the auctions in our sample suffered from “bad execution”. The data also include information on
early and late delivery. These are correlated with estimated procurer effectiveness, but can only explain a tiny fraction of the
dispersion in price effectiveness we estimate. Results available from the authors upon request.
  28
     In Italy, Bandiera et al. (2009) find that 83 percent of waste in Italian public procurement purchases is due to low bureau-
cratic ability rather than corruption.



                                                               11
We also show how the introduction of bid preferences is expected to differentially affect procurement by
bureaucracies with different levels of state effectiveness. The model makes predictions for the patterns
of heterogeneity in the impact of the introduction of bid preferences that we test for in Section 5.2.


3.1      Procurement with heterogeneous state effectiveness in a constant policy environment

Consider a pair of a bureaucrat and an end-user organization—jointly, a bureaucracy—wishing to pur-
chase an item from a foreign or a local supplier through a second-price descending auction. Bureaucratic
effectiveness affects the prices the government is able to achieve in two ways: directly, by increasing the
cost to suppliers of fulfilling a government contract; and indirectly, by imposing participation costs on
sellers wishing to bid for contracts.
                                                                                                                                 0
       The production cost of the item to be procured for a firm with the lowest possible markdown is eX β ,
where X are observable attributes of the good being purchased. When writing tender documents, bu-
reaucrats add requirements αM and organizations add requirements ψM . These requirements change the
                                                                                            0
cost of complying with the contract from the production cost to M = eX β +αM +ψM . These requirements
may include the precise date and place of delivery, the size of the order, and any other requirements that
directly affect the cost to firms of fulfilling the contract. Similarly, bureaucrats and organizations can add
specifications αc and ψc that affect the cost to firms of participating in the procurement process. These
may include deposits required, the length of time allowed to prepare bids, the clarity of the tender docu-
ments, bribes to be paid to enter the auction, and any other specifications affecting the costs to suppliers
of bidding for the contract, though not directly of fulfilling the contract.
       In the first stage of the procurement process, two firms—one local and one foreign—observe the
specifications {X, αM , αc , ψM , ψc } and then decide whether to pay their participation cost ci to learn
the markdown they are able to offer mi and enter the auction.29 The foreign firm i = F and the local
firm i = L differ in both their expected markdowns and their participation costs. Markdowns mi ≥ 1
are independent and Pareto distributed with Pareto parameters δF and δL , making the firms’ costs of
fulfiling the contract M /mi . Foreign firms have higher expected markdowns (δF < δL ) but face higher
                                   M √
                             δi − 1+δL 1 − αc − ψc .
                           M                        30
participation costs: ci = 1+
       In the second stage of the procurement process, if only one supplier chose to enter the auction, she
is awarded the contract at a price M . If neither supplier chose to enter, the bureaucracy finds an outside
supplier and awards her the contract at a price of M .31 Finally, if both suppliers enter, a descending,
open-outcry auction takes place, which we approximate with a second-price sealed-bid auction (see e.g.
Milgrom, 2004; Krishna, 2010).
  29
     Note we assume that firms do not know their markdown when they decide whether to enter the auction, as in Samuelson
(1985). A more general approach would allow firms to have a signal of their markdown before deciding whether to enter as in
Gentry & Li (2014). This significantly complicates the analysis, but the qualitative conclusions are the same. Such a model is
available from the authors upon request.
  30
     This functional form makes the expressions for profits and prices tractable. In particular, the first term ensures that there is
no pure strategy equilibrium in which both suppliers enter with certainty, and the second term ensures that expected log prices
are linear in αc and ψj but the qualitative results only require the participation costs to be increasing in αc and ψc .
  31
     A more realistic assumption would be that auctions in which no firms enter have to be re-run at some cost. Our assumption
makes the model static, simplifying the exposition. The qualitative results are unlikely to depend on this choice.



                                                                 12
   The suppliers choose their entry and bidding strategies to maximize expected profits. We outline
the equilibrium here, relegating a detailed characterization and the proofs of propositions to Online
Appendix OA.1. Working backwards from the second stage, when both firms enter, it is a dominant
strategy for bidders to bid their fulfillment cost since bidder valuations are independent. Denoting the
bidding strategy of supplier i with markdown m by bi (m), we have bF (m) = bL (m) = M /m (see e.g.
Milgrom, 2004; Krishna, 2010). The winner is the bidder with the lowest fulfillment cost; she receives
the contract at the other bidder’s fulfillment cost. The expected profits from an auction in which bidder
i has fulfillment cost bi are then E [πi |bi ] = Ebj [bj − bi |bj > bi ] P (bj > bi ) making the expected profits
from the auction to bidder i, E [πi ] = Ebi [E [πi |bi ]].
   Working back to the entry decisions, the two firms enter with probabilities qF and qL . If firm i
pays the participation cost ci and enters, with probability qj firm j also enters and the auction takes
place, yielding firm i expected profits of E [πi ], while with probability 1 − qj , i is the only entrant and
receives the contract at price M yielding expected profits of M − E [M /mi ]. If instead firm i chooses
not to enter, her profits are zero but she does not have to pay the participation cost. The nature of the
equilibrium depends on the size of the participation costs ci . When participation costs are sufficiently
small, both firms enter with certainty and the auction always takes place. For larger participation costs
the equilibrium involves mixed strategies. In a mixed strategy equilibrium, the firms are indifferent
between entering and not entering, pinning down the entry probabilities

                    qj E [πi ] + (1 − qj ) (M − E [M /mi ]) − ci = 0
                                                                            M − E [M /mi ] − ci
                                                                ⇐⇒ qj =                             ,           (1)
                                                                           M − E [M /mi ] − E [πi ]

where i, j ∈ {F , L}, i 6= j. We can summarize the equilibrium of the auction game in the following
proposition:

Proposition 1. In the Nash equilibrium of the auction, the bidders, i ∈ {F , L} enter with probabilities
                                                         q
                                                qi =         κ (1 − αc − ψc ),                                  (2)
             n                                                 o
where κ = min [(1 + δF + δL ) / (1 + δL )]2 , 1/ (1 − αc − ψc ) . Expected log prices are


                  E [log (p)] = log (M ) −      qF qL
                                               δF + δL   = X0 β + αM + ψM +          κ
                                                                                  δF + δL   (αc + ψc − 1)
                                = X 0 β − δF +
                                             κ
                                               δL + α̃ + ψ̃,                                                    (3)

                     κ                             κ
where α̃ = αM +   δF +δL αc ,   and ψ̃ = ψM +   δF +δL ψc .    In equilibrium

   1. Bureaucracies that impose higher contract fulfillment costs αM , ψM pay higher prices for otherwise identical
      goods.

   2. Bureaucracies that impose higher participation costs αc , ψc pay higher prices for otherwise identical goods,
      and also attract fewer bidders to auctions they run.

                                                                13
Proof. See Online Appendix OA.1.1.

       Equation (3) shows how prices vary with with the fulfillment and participation costs imposed by
bureaucrats (α̃) and organizations (ψ̃ ) managing the procurement process, and forms the basis of our
empirical approach.


3.2      Policy change with heterogeneous state effectiveness: introducing bid preferences

We now study the impact of introducing bid preferences favoring the local bidder L in this simple
model.32 The winner of the auction is still the bidder with the lowest bid, but if that bidder is the foreign
bidder, the contract price will only be p = γbL , where γ < 1, while if the local firm submits the lowest
bid the contract price will be the undiscounted p = bF . Otherwise the auction protocol is unchanged.
       In this setting it is optimal for bidder F to shade so that her bid net of the bid penalty is equal to her
true fulfillment cost M /mF : bF = M /γmF . However, when her shaded bid would have no chance of
winning (mF < 1/γ ), she drops out and the contract is awarded to bidder L. This means that for any
given bid, the preference regime lowers expected profits for foreign bidders and increases them for local
bidders, as the policy intends. To see this, note that the expected profits of bids bF and bL are now

             E [πF |bF , γ ] = E [γ (bL − bF ) |bL > bF ] P (bL > bF )                                                     (4)
             E [πL |bL , γ ] = E [bF − bL |M ≥ bF > bL ] P (M ≥ bF > bL ) + P (mF < 1/γ ) (M − bL ) .                      (5)

For any particular bid, the profits to bidder F are shrunk by the penalty γ, forcing bidder F to bid
more aggressively and lowering expected profits. For bidder L the probability of winning with any
bid increases, and the bid penalty creates a discrete probability that bidder F drops out, both of which
increase L’s expected profits.
       The effect on the expected price in an auction depends on the strength of two offsetting effects. First,
the direct effect of the penalty lowers prices: when the foreign bidder wins, she is paid less. Second, the
preference regime affects prices indirectly through the fact that the foreign bidder is less likely to win, in
which case the government pays more to the local bidder. We assume that the latter effect dominates.33
That is, we make

Assumption 1. γ δF 1 − log γ δL > 1.
                              

       Effectively, Assumption 1 requires the bid penalty to be sufficiently small (γ sufficiently large). The
preference regime also changes the bidders’ participation decisions. Participation decisions depend on
the expected profitability of entering the auction. Bidder F has to bid more aggressively to have a chance
of winning, discouraging her from entering, while bidder L has a better chance of winning, encouraging
her to enter more often.The net effect on participation depends on which effect is stronger. A sufficient
condition for participation to increase in the mixed strategy equilibrium is the following:
  32
      In our empirical application the bid preferences favor locally manufactured goods not local bidders, but in the model we
will treat the identity of the firm as a shorthand for the origin of the products being offered.
   33
      Appendix OA.1.2 derives the impact of introducing preferences when Assumption 1 fails. The difference is only that in the
first case in Proposition 2 prices fall instead of rising.


                                                              14
                  h                                  i
Assumption 2. γ δF 1 +        δL
                            δF + δL   1 − γ 1 + δF        <1

    Assumption 2 effectively requires the bid penalty to be sufficiently strong (γ sufficiently small) to
increase overall participation. Assumptions 1 and 2 together require γ to be in a certain range. The
overall effect of the preference regime depends on the combination of participation and bidding effects.
We can summarize the overall effects in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. When assumptions 1 and 2 hold, the introduction of bid preferences γ has different effects on three
groups of bureaucracies differing in their effectiveness.

   1. For bureaucracies with αc + ψc ≤ c, prices rise, the expected number of bidders is unchanged, and the
      probability that bidder L wins the contract at auction increases;

   2. For bureaucracies with c < αc + ψc ≤ c̄, prices rise, the expected number of bidders falls, and the probability
      that bidder L wins the contract at auction decreases;

   3. For bureaucracies with c̄ < αc + ψc , prices fall, the expected number of bidders increases, and the probability
      that bidder L wins the contract at auction increases. The probability that bidder L wins the contract at
      auction increases by more than in case 1.

The thresholds c and c̄ are defined by
                                                                                                 2
                                 c = 1−             1 − γ 1 + δF
                                                1 + δL
                                                1 + δF                  +      1 + δL
                                                                            1 + δF + δ L γ
                                                                                           1 + δF
                                                                                                                  (6)
                                                          2
                                 c̄ = 1 − 1+1δ+Fδ+LδL γ δF                                                        (7)

Proof. See Online Appendix OA.1.2.

    When bureaucracies impose very low participation costs on potential bidders (αc + ψc ≤ c) the pref-
erence policy does not deter the firms from entering the auction, but it changes bidding behavior in the
auction. The local bidder is more likely to win, and because of Assumption 1, the direct effect of the pref-
erences lowering prices is smaller than the indirect effect through the higher probability that the local
bidder wins raising prices.
    The preference regime increases expected profits from the auction for the local bidder and lowers
them for the foreign bidder. For bureaucracies that impose intermediate participation costs on potential
bidders (c < αc + ψc ≤ c̄), expected profits from the auction net of participation costs are positive for
local bidders and negative for foreign bidders. As a result, the mixed strategy equilibrium of Proposition
1 breaks down; the local bidder always enters; and the foreign bidder does not find it profitable to also
enter. Since only the local bidder enters, the auction does not take place and the local firm gets the
contract at the maximum price M .
    Finally, when bureaucracies impose high participation costs (c̄ < αc + ψc ) neither bidder is willing to
enter with certainty and so the equilibrium still involves mixed strategies, as in Proposition 1. Assump-
tion 2 implies that the increase in bidder L’s willingness to enter is larger than the decrease in bidder
F ’s willingness to enter. This increase in the probability of both bidders entering and the auction taking

                                                               15
place lowers expected prices. Moreover, the entry effect is larger than the increase in prices caused by
the changes in the bidding behavior in the auction, resulting in an overall decrease in expected prices.
The entry effect is also strong enough that the increase in the probability that the local bidder wins the
contract at auction is larger in this case than in the case of buyers who impose very low participation
costs on potential bidders (αc + ψc ≤ c).
      Proposition 2 makes three predictions about heterogeneity in the impact of bid preferences we should
expect to see in our empirical analysis. First, we should see that bureaucracies that pay higher prices
when there are no bid preferences—a pattern that Proposition 1 shows is a proxy for higher participation
costs—experience price decreases, while bureaucracies that pay lower prices absent the bid preferences
experience price increases. Second, we should see that the average number of participants in procurement
processes increases for bureaucracies that pay higher prices when there are no bid preferences. Third, we
should see that the probability that an auction is won by a bidder offering to supply locally manufactured
goods increases by more for bureaucracies that pay higher prices when there are no bid preferences.
These are the patterns we test for in Section 5.2


4     How Important is a Good Bureaucracy?
In this section we estimate the share of the variation in procurement effectiveness that can be attributed
to the individuals and organizations in the bureaucracy. To do so, we extend the method pioneered
by Abowd et al. (1999). Our method exploits switchers—bureaucrats who make purchases with multiple
organizations, and organizations who make purchases with multiple bureaucrats—to identify the shares
of the sample-wide variation in performance that can be attributed to the specific agents who implement
procurement policy.


4.1     Identifying the effectiveness of individuals and organizations

We start by showing that bureaucrat-organization switches identify the causal impact of the individual
in charge and the organization he or she works with on the price paid in a procurement auction. To do so,
we use an event study analysis tracking organizations that switch bureaucrats. This happens frequently
in Russia. Column (1) of Table 2 displays the number of events we observe where an organization
switches bureaucrat by quartile of bureaucrat effectiveness. We observe, for example, 1,736 events in
which an organization switches from a bureaucrat of highest quartile effectiveness—as defined below—
to a bureaucrat of lowest quartile effectiveness, and 1,356 events in which an organization switches
from a lowest to a highest quartile bureaucrat. In total, we observe around 65,000 events in which
organizations switch bureaucrats. Column (2) of Table 2 shows that the average number of purchases
observed for each bureaucrat-organization involved in a switch is also large.
      To construct the event study, we define an employment spell as a sequence of at least two weeks
a bureaucrat-organization pair conducts purchases together, with the weeks less than 400 days apart.
Wherever possible, each employment spell (event time ≤ 0) is matched with the earliest future spell
(event time > 0) involving the same organization but a different bureaucrat. This change of bureaucrats


                                                     16
then constitutes an event. We classify the two bureaucrats involved in the event into effectiveness quar-
tiles using the average quality-adjusted price they achieve in purchases they make for other organizations
during the half-year that the spell ends (for the earlier spell) or starts (for the later spell), akin to Card
et al. (2013).34 In Appendix A.1 we show that the patterns we see in the resulting event studies are very
similar when we change a series of choices made in constructing the event studies.
       Figure 2 shows the time profile of prices achieved around the time that organizations switch be-
tween bureaucrats of different effectiveness. The horizontal axis displays event time, i.e. purchase
weeks. The vertical axis displays the average quality-adjusted prices paid by the relevant bureaucrat-
organization pair in a given week. Table 2 highlights that the number of switches used to construct each
quartile-to-quartile plot in Figure 2, and the average number of purchases observed for each bureaucrat-
organization involved in a given switch, are symmetric both around the events, and across quartile-to-
quartile plots.35
       Four key findings emerge from Figure 2. First, the figure shows that quality-adjusted prices paid
change sharply, and in the expected direction, at the point in time when an organization switches to a
less or more effective bureaucrat. The estimates suggest that an organization switching from a worst
quartile-bureaucrat to a best quartile-bureaucrat on average experiences an 18 percent decrease in prices
paid. Second, the figure shows no sign that performance is improving in organizations that subsequently
switch to a better bureaucrat, and vice versa. This suggests that drift in effectiveness and switches are
uncorrelated. Third, we do not see a systematic dip or spike in performance just before a bureaucrat
switch, indicating that switches are not driven by temporary improvements or deteriorations in per-
formance. Fourth, the price changes associated with switching bureaucrats appear symmetric: organi-
zations switching from a bureaucrat in the best quartile of average prices to a bureaucrat in the worst
quartile experience a price increase of similar magnitude to those switching in the other direction.
       We also construct analogous event study figures for organizations and bureaucrats switching from
purchasing one type of good to another. The results are presented in Online Appendix Figure OA.2. Each
event study shows the same general patterns as in Figure 2.
       Taken together, the evidence in this sub-section suggests that the thousands of quasi-experiments
that arise from organizations switching bureaucrats and vice versa in Russian public procurement can
be used to estimate specific procurers’ causal impact on procurement performance, and that this impact
is large.


4.2      Variance decomposition method

In this sub-section we first show how to aggregate causal effects of specific bureaucrats and organizations
estimated through switches into estimates of the share of sample-wide variation in procurement perfor-
mance bureaucrats as a whole and organizations as a whole explain. These estimates are the starting
point for our sampling error-corrected predictions of the impact of specific bureaucrats or organizations on
  34
     We quality-adjust prices by regressing them on log quantity, good fixed effects, month fixed effects, interactions between
2-digit HS product categories, years, regions, and lot size (as explained in more detail in the next sub-section).
  35
     The table also displays the average number of calendar weeks between each purchase week on the x-axis of Figure 2



                                                              17
prices paid. We use these predictions to examine the mechanisms through which procurers affect prices
in Section 4.5 and how bureaucratic effectiveness impacts the way policy rules map into public sector
output in Section 5.
       We adapt and extend the method to study wage dispersion in the private sector pioneered by Abowd
et al. (1999). We specify the price paid for an item i procured by an organization j and a bureaucrat b(i, j )
as a function of a vector of item attributes Xi , a price premium that is due to the bureaucrat α̃b(i,j ) , and
a price premium that is due to the organization ψ̃j . As the model in Section 3 shows, these price premia
can be thought of as a reduced form for the impact on prices of the participation costs that bureaucrats
and organizations of different levels of effectiveness impose on suppliers. The log unit price paid for an
item is
                                               pi = Xi β + α̃b(i,j ) + ψ̃j + εi                                              (8)

To control flexibly for the item being purchased, we include in Xi log quantity, good fixed effects, month
fixed effects, and interactions between 2-digit HS product categories, years, regions, and lot size.36
       As we showed in Sub-section 4.1, switches—bureaucrats making purchases on behalf of multiple
organizations and organizations using multiple bureaucrats to make purchases—provide a compelling
means of identifying the impact of procurers on prices. However, such switches do not connect all
bureaucrats and organizations that conduct procurement in Russia. As Abowd et al. (2002) show, indi-
vidual and organization effects are only identified within sets of organizations connected by individuals
moving between them.37
       To proceed, we normalize the bureaucrat and organization effects to have mean zero in each con-
nected set and augment (8) to include an intercept, γs(b,j ) , specific to each connected set:

                                          pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi                                          (9)

In Online Appendix OA.2, we show that while the α̃s and ψ̃s in equation (8) are not identified, the αs,
ψs and γs in equation (9) are. These are related to the underlying bureaucrat and organization effects as
follows: αb = α̃b − αs(b) , ψj = ψ̃j − ψ s(j ) , and γs(b,j ) = αs(b,j ) + ψ s(b,j ) , where αs(b) is the mean bureaucrat
effect in the connected set containing bureaucrat b, and similarly ψ s(j ) is the mean organization effect in
organization j’s connected set.38
  36
      By lot size we mean the maximum allowable price for all the items to be purchased in a given auction. We divide the
maximum allowable price into bins so as to allow our estimates of procurer effectiveness to capture the impact on prices of
the procurers’ choice of the exact maximum price posted. The interactions help address, for example, concerns that systematic
variation in the average prices of different types of goods across space, in combination with differences across procurers in the
items purchased, confound our estimates of bureaucrat and organization effectiveness. Russian regions are highly heteroge-
neous (Enikolopov & Zhuravskaya, 2007; Acemoglu et al. , 2011; Yakovlev & Zhuravskaya, 2014). Hereafter we refer to the
goods categories constructed using the method described in Sub-section 2.4 as “goods”.
   37
      More precisely, within each connected set s containing Nb,s bureaucrats and Nj,s organizations, we can identify at most
Nb,s + Nj,s − 1 linear combinations of bureaucrat and organization fixed effects. In fact, we estimate models with three sets of
high-dimensional fixed effects, for bureaucrats, organizations, and goods (the models also contain month dummies to control
for common time trends, but there are few enough of these month effects such that “month-connectedness” is not an issue).
To our knowledge, identification results for models with more than two sets of fixed effects are not yet available (Gaure, 2013),
however our focus is on the estimates of only two of the three dimensions–the bureaucrat and the organization effects.
   38
      Faced with this issue, previous work on private sector workers and firms has tended to restrict attention to the largest
connected set, normalizing an arbitrary firm effect to 0, and estimating unconditional variances. An exception is Card et al.


                                                               18
    We can use equation (9) to decompose the variance of prices into its constituent parts using

                Var(pi ) = Var αb(i,j ) + Var (ψj ) + Var γs(b,j ) + 2Cov αb(i,j ) , ψj + Var (Xi β )
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                     (10)

                         + 2Cov αb(i,j ) + ψj , γs(b,j ) + Xi β + 2Cov γs(b,j ) , Xi β + Var (εi )
                                                                                   



all of which can be identified. Since Var αb(i,j ) and Var (ψj ) are variances within connected sets, they
                                                 

are lower bounds on the true variances of bureaucrat and organization effects.39 However, we can com-
bine our estimates to capture the variance in prices that is attributable to the bureaucrats and the orga-
nizations jointly as follows:

   Var α̃b + ψ̃j ≡ E Var α̃b + ψ̃j |s(b, j ) + Var E α̃b + ψ̃j |s(b, j ) = Var (αb + ψj ) + Var γs(b,j )
                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                     (11)
    Our data contain 984 connected sets. This relatively large number comes about for several reasons.
First, focusing on bureaucrats performing a single task, rather than comparing many types of work-
ers through their wages—the approach taken in existing related work—limits connectedness. Second,
workers change employers less often in the public than in the private sector (Klepikova, 2017). Finally,
the decentralized nature of Russian procurement means that some geographically remote organizations
do not have bureaucrat links to other organizations.
    To form our Analysis Sample, we focus on connected sets containing at least three bureaucrats and
organizations after we make the following restrictions. We remove any bureaucrat-organization pair
that only ever occurs together (as in this case it is not possible to distinguish bureaucrat and organiza-
tion effects), and similarly for bureaucrat-good pairs and organization-good pairs. We also require that
all bureaucrats and organizations in the Analysis Sample make at least five purchases. In Appendix
Table OA.6 we show that our results are robust to using only the largest set of connected organizations.
Table 1 compares the full sample and the Analysis Sample, and Online Appendix Table OA.3 compares
the Analysis Sample to its largest connected set. The three samples are broadly similar on a host of
observable characteristics, as discussed in Section 2.
    We can obtain unbiased estimates of bureaucrat and organization effects using ordinary least squares
under the assumption that the residuals εi in equation (9) are uncorrelated with the identity of the bu-
reaucrat or organization making a purchase (conditional on Xi ). There are two principal reasons this
might not be the case. First, it could be that prices change around the time bureaucrats move across
organizations or vice versa, for reasons unrelated to the switch. However, as shown in Sub-section 4.1,
we do not see any evidence of such pre-trends.
    Second, equation (9) assumes that prices are log-linear in the bureaucrat and organization effects—an
assumption about the degree of complementarity between the bureaucrat and the organization working
on a purchase. If the model is misspecified, then the omitted complementary terms are a component of
the residuals in equation (9). Suppose that, in addition, the bureaucrat-organization matches that form
(2016) who study the largest male and female connected sets in Portuguese data.
  39
     Formally, Var (α̃b ) ≡ E[Var (α̃b |s(b))] + Var (E [α̃b |s(b)]) = Var (αb ) + Var (E [α̃b |s(b)]) ≥ Var (αb ). Similarly, Var ψ̃j =
                                                                                                                                         

Var (ψj ) + Var E ψ̃j |s(j ) ≥ Var (ψj ).


                                                                   19
are correlated with the omitted complementarities, for example because organizations seek to recruit
bureaucrats who specialize in particular goods they require. Under such sorting-on-match-effects, an
estimate of a bureaucrat effect from equation (9) will recover a mixture of the true effect and the average
complementarity of the bureaucrat with the organizations he/she is matched to.
       However, if sorting on match effects occurs, we would expect the event study in Figure 2 to show
that organizations switching from bureaucrats who on average pay high prices to bureaucrats with low
average prices enjoy larger price decreases than the price increases suffered by organizations switching
in the opposite direction. Under such a scenario we should see organizations hiring a low-price bureau-
crat benefit from both a lower average price and an improved match effect, and organizations hiring a
high-price bureaucrat lose from the lower average price but benefit from an offsetting improved match
effect. We see no evidence of such patterns in Figure 2.40 The striking symmetry of the event study
evidence indicates that omitted complementarities between bureaucrats and organizations are unlikely
to bias our estimates. In Section 4.4 we explore the possibility that the log-linear model is misspecified
further.
       We use a large sample of public procurers, but nevertheless, our estimates need not be consistently
estimated, even if they are unbiased. This is because we seek to estimate a large number of bureau-
crat and organization effects. Consistency of the estimated fixed effects requires that the number of
observations on each group tends to infinity (Neyman & Scott, 1948; Lancaster, 2000). Our data contains
284,710 bureaucrat-organization pairs and an average of 40 observations per pair, so we cannot a priori
be confident that the error in the bureaucrat and organization effect estimates has asymptoted to zero,
particularly for the less frequently observed pairs. Moreover, since we are estimating two sets of fixed
effects, the problem may be compounded if the network of bureaucrats and organizations features too
few switches. In finite samples, such limited mobility bias often results in a spurious negative correlation
between the two dimensions of estimated fixed effects (Andrews et al. , 2008). In our data, each con-
nected set is unusually densely connected—we observe bureaucrats working with 5.2 organizations on
average, and organizations with 4.8 bureaucrats.41 However, limited mobility bias cannot be ruled out a
priori.
       We address these sampling error issues in three ways. First, to estimate standard errors for our
variance decomposition, we bootstrap so that we can take into account the patterns of correlation in the
residuals.42
  40
     If anything, Figure 2 showed slightly smaller price decreases when organizations switch to lower average-price bureaucrats
than when organizations switch to higher average-price bureaucrats.
  41
     This is in part because switches in Russian public procurement arise not only through traditional labor market churn,
but also because some bureaucrats conduct purchases for multiple organizations at the same point in time, and vice versa, as
discussed in Sub-section 2.2.
  42
     Each bootstrap randomly samples from the residuals of equation (9) and reestimates the equation. The standard errors are
then computed as the standard deviation of the bootstrap estimates. Specifically, we construct partial residuals i = pi − Xi β̂
and randomly reassign bureaucrats and organizations to each observation, preserving the match structure of the observations.
We then re-estimate the bureaucrat and organization effects. We repeat this procedure 100 times, and use the distribution of
the estimates to compute standard errors. This approach drastically speeds up computation and makes bootstrapping feasible
with our large dataset, but has limitations. (In particular, the procedure imposes clustering at the bureaucrat-organization level
in the standard errors. Moreover, since we use the partial residuals i rather than reestimating the full model on each iteration,
we do not account for correlation between bureaucrat and organization assignment and X).



                                                               20
       Second, we take a non-parametric, split-sample approach to estimating the variance components in
(10), akin to Finkelstein et al. (2016) and Silver (2016). We randomly split our sample in half, stratifying
by bureaucrat-organization pair. We then estimate equation (9) separately on each sample, yielding two
estimates (k = 1, 2) for each bureaucrat (α̂bk ), organization (ψ̂jk ), and connected set (γ̂sk ) effect. Both
estimates are estimated with error, but the errors in the two estimates should be uncorrelated, so we can
create split-sample estimates of the variance decomposition terms as follows: Var    c SS (αb ) = Cov α̂1 , α̂2 ,
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                             b    b
Var                                                               c SS (αb + ψj ) = Cov α̂1 + ψ̂ 1 , α̂2 + ψ̂ 2 .
                               c SS (γs ) = Cov γ̂s1 , γ̂s2 , and Var
c SS (ψj ) = Cov ψ̂ 1 , ψ̂ 2 , Var
                                                                                                           
                     j    j                                                               b     j      b     j
       Third, we adopt two shrinkage approaches to create predictions of each bureaucrat’s and each orga-
nization’s effect that minimize the mean-squared prediction error. The variance in our estimated fixed
effects comes from two sources: the true, signal variance in bureaucrats’ and organizations’ effects, σα2
and σψ2 respectively, and sampling error with variances σµ2 and σω2 . Bootstrapping the estimation of equa-
tion (9) yields estimates of the variance of the sampling error for each bureaucrat and organization effect,
s2b and s2j . With these we estimate the signal variance of the bureaucrat effects as σ̂α2 = Var (α̂) − Eb s2b
                                                                                                           

and analogously for the organizations.
       Shrinking pulls each estimate toward zero (their mean), and more noisily estimated effects are shrunk
more. Our first approach shrinks the bureaucrat and organization estimates separately, as is common
in studies of teacher value-added (see e.g. Kane & Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al. , 2014a).43 To address
the limited mobility bias potentially arising from the finite number of switches available for identi-
fication, we extend the shrinkage approach used in existing work to explicitly account for the corre-
lation between the estimation errors induced by limited mobility bias. We exploit the fact that our
bootstrap also provides estimates of the covariance of all the estimation errors. Formally, we seek
the linear combination of the full vector of fixed effects that minimizes the expected mean-squared er-
ror of the predictions. Denoting the vector of estimated bureaucrat          and organization fixed effects by
                                                                   h         0        i
θ̂ and the matrix of weights by Λ, the objective is minΛ E θ − Λθ̂ θ − Λθ̂ , which has solution
         h i  h i−1
            0           0
Λ∗ = E θ θ̂     E θ̂ θ̂       . Replacing the expectations with their sample analogues yields the shrink-
                                                      −1
              ∗
age matrix Λ̂ = diag σ̂α2 , σ̂ψ2      diag σ̂α2 , σ̂ψ2 + Σ     , where Σ is the covariance matrix of the boot-
                                   
strap estimates and diag σ̂α2 , σ̂ψ2 is the diagonal matrix with σ̂α2 in entries corresponding to entries for
bureaucrats in θ and σ̂ψ2 in entries corresponding to organizations. We label this method “covariance
shrinkage”. It yields our preferred estimates of the price variance decomposition in equation (10).44


4.3      Results

Table 3 shows the results of implementing our variance decomposition method to estimate the share of
the variation in procurement performance attributable to the bureaucrats and organizations responsible
                                                                     
  43                                                    2    2
       Formally, we find λb = arg minλ̃ E αb − λ̃α̂b = σα      + σµ2 b , and analogously for λj . Our shrinkage estimators
                                                   
                                                          / σα
replace these terms with their sample analogues α̂bSh = λ̂b α̂b and ψ̂jSh = λ̂j ψ̂j .
  44
     We thus use “covariance shrunk” estimates in our analysis of the determinants of bureaucratic capacity in Sub-section 4.5
and the analysis of the effects of procurement policy changes in Section 5. For computational reasons, we perform covariance
shrinking separately in each connected set. Since the estimated fixed effects are all normalized to be mean zero within each
connected set and by definition the observations are unrelated across connected sets, this is without loss.


                                                             21
for administering purchases. The first column shows estimates of the standard deviations using the
raw fixed effects estimates from equation (9), while estimates from split-sample approach are in Column
(3). The corresponding standard errors are in columns (2) and (4). The results from the shrinkage and
covariance shrinkage methods are in columns (5) and (6). Rows 1–3 show standard deviations across
bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets, while rows 4–8 show the decomposition across items
purchased.
       Three key findings emerge. First, bureaucrats and organizations are each important determinants
of variation in policy performance. After controlling for the good being purchased and the month of
the purchase, the standard deviation of log unit prices is 1.283. Compared to this, the bureaucrat fixed
effects have a standard deviation of 0.747 and the organization fixed effects’ standard deviation is 0.827.
The split-sample estimates in Column (3) are similar. The shrinkage methods in columns (5) and (6)
deliver slightly smaller estimates of the bureaucrat and organization variances, but even the covariance
shrinkage estimates imply large effects of bureaucrats and organizations on policy performance.
       Second, the covariance shrinkage method shown in Column (6) appears to best deal with the finite-
sample inconsistency of our estimates. The fixed effects, split-sample, and shrunk estimates all yield a
negative estimate of the correlation between bureaucrat and organization effects. The same is found in
many studies applying the AKM method to private sector wages.45 However, our covariance shrinkage
approach yields an estimate of the correlation of 0.33, implying that more effective bureaucrats tend to
work with more effective organizations and vice versa.46 This more plausible estimate suggests that
covariance shrinking successfully addresses finite sample biases. As a result, the covariance shrunk
estimates of share of the variation in performance explained by bureaucrats and organizations—24 and
26 percent percent respectively—represent our preferred estimates of the importance of bureaucrats and
organizations for state effectiveness in procurement.
       Third, the combined importance of bureaucrats and organizations for policy performance is large.
As shown in Section 4.2, the estimates of the variation in bureaucrat and organization effects are to be
interpreted as estimates within-connected set variation, but these can be combined with the variation in
the connected set intercepts to yield an estimate of the variation in the combined impact of bureaucrats
and organizations on policy performance Russia-wide. These estimates are shown in row 8 of Table 3.
The estimates are remarkably consistent across the four methods, ranging from 0.63 for the raw fixed
effects estimates down to our preferred estimate of 0.512, or 40 percent of the standard deviation of
log unit prices, for the covariance-shrunk estimates. Overall, our estimates imply that bureaucrats and
organizations jointly explain a remarkably large share of the variation in procurement effectiveness in
Russia, of which about half in turn is due to bureaucrats and half to organizations.
       The large estimates in Table 3 have correspondingly large implications for the scope of potential
savings from improving the effectiveness of the bureaucracy. To illustrate the magnitude, we can con-
  45
     This led Andrews et al. (2008) to show that the AKM-estimated covariance term is downward biased (see Sub-section 4.2)
and to suggest a parametric correction. However, this parametric correction relies on homoskedasticity of the residuals, an
unappealing requirement in our setting (see also Card et al. (2013)).
  46
     Of course, such assortative matching does not violate the no-sorting-on-match-effects assumption discussed in sub-sections
4.1 and 4.4.



                                                              22
sider simple counterfactual bureaucracies in which bureaucrats and/or organizations are moved from
one percentile of the effectiveness distribution to another, for example because of changes in recruit-
ing, training of existing bureaucrats, or improved organizational management. As seen in Figure 3, our
estimates imply that moving all bureaucrats in the lowest quartile of effectiveness to 75th percentile-
effectiveness would save the Russian government 3.3 percent of its total, annual procurement expenses.
Figure 3 also shows that moving all bureaucrats and organizations below 25th percentile-effectiveness
to 75th percentile-effectiveness would save the government 10.7 percent of procurement expenditures.
Since annual procurement expenses average USD 86 billion, this implies savings of USD 13 billion each
year, or 0.9 percent of non-resource GDP (see Online Appendix Table OA.4)—roughly one fifth, for ex-
ample, of the total amount spent on health care by the Russian government at federal, regional, and
municipal level combined in both 2013 and 2014.


4.4      Robustness

We interpret the results in the previous sub-section as capturing the total, causal contribution of bureau-
crats and organizations to the Russian state’s effectiveness at minimizing the price paid for each specific
good it procures. There are two potential challenges to this interpretation. First, if our goods classi-
fication based on the contract texts is inaccurate, our estimates will conflate the true effects on prices
with differences across bureaucrats and organizations in the products that they are buying. Second, the
estimated procurer effects can only be interpreted causally if bureaucrats and organizations do not sort
based on unmodeled match effects.


Like-for-like comparison To probe these assumptions, we perform three robustness checks. First, we
show that our findings are remarkably similar in a sub-sample of goods that is by nature homogeneous—
pharmaceuticals (see also Syverson, 2004; Hortacsu & Syverson, 2007; Foster et al. , 2009; Bronnenberg
et al. , 2015). We extract the active ingredient, dosage, and packaging of each drug purchased, as de-
scribed in Sub-section 2.4, and use these characteristics to assign purchases to barcode-level bins. These
bins are used to define good categories and thus to determine which purchases to compare in the phar-
maceuticals sample. We then make the same connectivity restrictions as in the full sample to create an
analysis sample of pharmaceuticals purchases. As seen in columns (4) and (5) of Table 1, the pharma-
ceuticals analysis sample is in many ways similar to the full pharmaceuticals sample.
      Table 4 presents the results of re-estimating (9) on the pharmaceuticals sample. Naturally, since
the sample is more homogenous by construction and our barcode product categories are very precise,
the share of the variation in prices explained by the good fixed effects is larger than in the broader
sample. However, of the remaining variation in policy performance, 46 percent is attributable to the
combination of bureaucrats and organizations. This is strikingly similar to the 40 percent found in the
broader analysis sample. This is also what our theoretical framework suggests should happen, since
we model the fulfillment costs imposed by bureaucrats and organizations on suppliers as proportional
costs.
      Second, the results from our variance decomposition exercise are also essentially unaffected if we


                                                    23
restrict the sample to items the text-based classification method is confidently able to assign a 10-digit
Harmonized-System product code to.47 This result, seen in Column (6) of Table 5, is further evidence that
procurers our estimation procedure labels effective do not systematically purchase lower quality goods
than procurers the procedure labels ineffective.
       Third, we show that our results are robust to (i) gradually restricting the analysis sample to include
more and more homogeneous categories of goods, and—related—to (ii) restricting attention to the most
homogeneous types of goods in the sample. We split the sample into quintiles of good homogeneity
as defined by the commonly-used measure of the scope for quality differentiation developed by Sutton
(1998). We then reestimate (9) on successive subsamples. The first five columns of Table 5 show the
results. Column (5) includes all observations for which the Sutton (1998) measure is available.48 As we
move from right to left, we restrict the sample to more and more homogeneous goods. As expected,
the overall variance of average prices paid decreases with good homogeneity. However, the estimated
share of the variance explained by bureaucrats and organizations remains largely unchanged across the
columns. In Online Appendix Table OA.7 we repeat this exercise using an alternative measure of scope
for quality differentiation developed by Khandelwal (2010) and find the same result.49
       These results reassure us both that our text analysis procedure is accurately classifying purchases
into homogenous categories and that our broad sample of products is appropriate.


Misspecification       Three pieces of evidence suggest that match-based forms of endogenous mobility
that would violate the identifying assumptions underlying our interpretation of the results from our
empirical model rarely occur in Russian public procurement. First, the event studies in Sub-section
4.1 provide direct visual evidence that the price paid is approximately log-linear in the bureaucrat and
organization effects. We saw no evidence of sorting on match effects in Figure 2.
       Second, in Appendix A.2, we examine patterns in the size of residuals across the bivariate distribu-
tion of the estimated bureaucrat and organization effects. If match effects omitted from (9) are important,
we should see residuals that are systematically larger for large values of the estimated bureaucrat and/or
organization effects. We see no evidence of this in the top panel of Appendix Figure A.2. In the bottom
panel we repeat this exercise, but now we plot the residuals from a model that is analogous to (9) but
specified in levels rather than logs. The systematic patterns seen in the bottom panel provide clear evi-
dence that such a model is misspecified.
       Third, we re-estimate equation (9) with fixed effects for each bureaucrat-organization pair added in
Appendix A.2. The improvement in the model’s fit from adding pair effects is minuscule, indicating that
a log-linear model is a good approximation to the true, underlying production function (see also Card
  47
      The algorithm developed in Step 2 of the procedure outlined in Sub-section 2.4 and Online Appendix OA.3 assigns a 10-
digit code to 37 percent of the items in our analysis sample with high confidence. The remaining items in the analysis sample
are also clustered into homogeneous bins, but we cannot confidently assign a pre-existing 10-digit code to these items.
   48
      We are able to match 70 percent of the items assigned an 10-digit HS code in Step 2 of the text analysis method with the
Sutton (1998) measure. We thank Eric Verhoogen for sharing the Sutton measure data with us.
   49
      Another possibility is that organizations endogenously respond to the effectiveness of the bureaucrats available to them
by purchasing more/fewer, or different types of, goods. This would lead us to underestimate the true variance in procurer
effectiveness and its consequences.



                                                             24
et al. , 2013).
      In sum, the six tests of the good homogeneity and no-sorting-on-match-effects assumptions dis-
cussed in this sub-section provide strong evidence that our empirical model captures the causal impact
of bureaucrats and organizations on prices paid for each type of good.


4.5     What do Effective Bureaucrats do Differently?

Having established that the state’s effectiveness at procuring inputs is partly due to individual bureau-
crats and organizations, an important question naturally arises: what distinguishes effective from in-
effective procurers? That is, how does bureaucratic effectiveness manifest itself in the process through
which inputs are purchased, or attributes of the buyers? To address this question, we leverage the
richness of Russian procurement data. As discussed in Section 2, the data we use contain detailed in-
formation on the evolution of each of the 6.5 million procurement processes in the sample, from the
initial request document, through the auction itself, to the final contract signed with the supplier. We
complement these data with information about participating firms from the Bureau Van Dijk’s Ruslana
database, which covers firms filing financial information with the Ministry of Finance. We then use the
resulting dataset to investigate which features of the procurement process; the firms participating in it;
and the procurers themselves co-vary with the estimated effectiveness of the implementing bureaucracy.
      The dataset we start from contains 113 potential explanatory variables, listed in Online Appendix
Table OA.8. To avoid overfitting and for parsimony, we use standard regularization techniques to select
the variables to focus on. The regularization techniques we choose account for small firms not being
covered by the Ruslana data and the strong correlation between some of our variables.50
      Having selected which process indicators to focus on, we relate our covariance shrunk estimates of
the ultimate effectiveness of the procurers involved from Sub-section 4.2 to these indicators. Figures
4 and 5 show the results. The left panel of each figure shows regression coefficients from a series of
bivariate regressions of the bureaucrat effect (in Figure 4) and the organization effect (in Figure 5) on
each of the selected observables alone. The right panel shows the coefficients from the multivariate
regression of the procurer effects on all of the selected variables. To facilitate comparison, all variables are
standardized to have unit standard deviation. The coefficients can thus be interpreted as the association
between a one-standard deviation change in the measure of procurer behavior and the causal impact of
the procurer on prices. Of course, the relationships displayed in Figures 4 and 5 need not be causal, in
  50
     Firms with less than 100 workers and less than 25 percent ownership by a larger firm do not have to register with the
Russian statistical authorities, and are thus not covered by the Ruslana data. This includes microenterprises and individual
entrepreneurs who participate in procurement and will have missing data. The correlation between our variables can be seen
in Online Appendix Figure OA.3. To account for the missing data, we include dummy variables indicating missing data and
require the regularization procedure to include them in the final model. To account for correlation between the explanatory
variables without making arbitrary choices of which to include, we use an elastic net procedure for regularization. The elastic
net penalty function is a weighted average between a linear penalty (LASSO) and a quadratic penalty (Ridge regression).
Intuitively, multicollinearity causes the coefficients of correlated variables to have highly variable and negatively correlated
estimates. Ridge regression deals with this by shrinking large coefficients towards zero. Having stabilized the coefficients with
the ridge penalty, the elastic net mixing penalty can determine which variables to select (see, for example Friedman et al. (2013)
for discussion). Our regularization procedure puts a weight of 0.3 on the ridge penalty, but our results are not particularly
sensitive to using other weights. See Online Appendix Figures OA.4-OA.9.



                                                               25
part because we do not observe everything different procurers do differently.
      Four key findings emerge. First, Figure 4 shows that effective bureaucrats are more experienced than
their ineffective peers, making more purchases and buying a greater range of goods. Second, while ex-
perience is less important for organizations’ performance, Figure 5 reveals significant heterogeneity in
performance across organizations by the function they perform, possibly related to variation in manage-
ment. Third, more effective bureaucrats attract more applicants, and then go on to admit more, and more
diverse, bidders into their auctions. Fourth, organizations that set higher reservation prices and revise
contracts more often are less effective. These last two findings resonate with our theoretical framework
in Section 3, which predicts that some procurers pay higher prices than others because they impose high
costs of fulfilling government contracts and high participation costs on sellers bidding for such contracts
and consequently attract fewer participants. We conclude from these findings that a key part of what
makes procurers effective is their ability to reduce the barriers of entry to participate in procurement
auctions.


5     Policy Design with a Heterogeneous Bureaucracy
In our empirical analysis so far, we have held the policy environment constant. We showed that fully
40 percent of the variation in procurement performance in the baseline policy regime governing pro-
curement in Russia is attributable to differences in the effectiveness of the agents—individuals and
organizations—charged with implementing policy, and that the returns to increasing the capacity of
poorly performing policy implementers are correspondingly large. This raises two subsequent ques-
tions. First, how specific are these findings to this particular policy regime? Would these same policy
implementers affect procurement performance differently if they were implementing a different set of
policy rules? Second, if so, might policy outcomes be improved if different policies were used for bu-
reaucracies of different levels of effectiveness? These questions are important because states have two
(potential) ways to increase bureaucratic effectiveness—directly improving the productivity of the bu-
reaucracy, and optimizing the policies the bureaucracy is directed to implement—and in many settings
the former may be infeasible or costly.
      To investigate, we study the impact of a particular policy change that took place in Russia during our
data period—the introduction of bid preferences favoring locally manufactured goods. We estimate both
the average impact of the policy and, crucially, how variation in the impact of the policy depends on the
effectiveness of the implementing bureaucracy. By doing so we provide a cleanly identified example of
the policy design implications of micro level sources of state effectiveness, and evidence on the extent to
which context-specific policy design can potentially be used to offset low bureaucratic effectiveness.


5.1     Average impact of bid preferences for locally manufactured goods

We first estimate the overall impact of Russia’s bid preferences for locally manufactured goods. Many
governments use such “buy local” procurement policies—Russia’s version is described in Sub-section
2.3—to attempt to steer demand towards local firms. Evidence on the overall impact of bid preferences


                                                      26
is thus important in its own right. Moreover, how prices respond to preference programs of the form we
study is theoretically ambiguous.51
    Russia’s preferences policy came into effect only in May or June each year during 2011-2014, and
during our whole study period of 2011-2016, the policy covered only a subset of goods—a subset that
varied from year to year.52 We exploit this variation in a generalized difference-in-differences strategy.
We estimate regressions of the form:

                         pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet + εigt                                 (12)

where pigt is the price paid for purchase i of good g in month t. Preferencedgt is a dummy indicating
that g is on the preferences list in the year month t falls within, and PolicyActivet is a dummy indicating
that the year’s list of preferenced goods has been published and the policy activated. Xigt are the same
controls we use in Section 4, but for clarity we separate out the good and month fixed effects, µg and λt .
εigt is an error term we allow to be clustered by month and good. Because there must be a minimum
of one bidder in the auction offering a Russian-made good and a minimum of one bidder offering a
foreign-made good for preferences to apply, our estimates are Intent to Treat (ITT) effects, and hence
directly relevant for policy design.
    To estimate (12), we expand the Analysis Sample to also include purchases where bid preferences
apply, and which were managed by bureaucrats and organizations in the Analysis Sample. We run
the regression separately for the full sample of products and the pharmaceuticals subsample, where we
observe the country of origin of the goods being supplied. The samples are summarized in columns
(3) and (6) of Table 1. Since all pharmaceuticals are on the preference list, we cannot use variation
across products in whether the policy applies for identification in that sample. Instead, we exploit the
facts that the preference policy only applies when an auction features both foreign and domestically
manufactured goods and that not all pharmaceuticals are manufactured both domestically and abroad.
In the pharmaceuticals subsample, we thus redefine Preferencedgt as equal to one if the drug purchased
is made—by at least one supplier—both in Russia and abroad.
    Table 6 shows the results of estimating (12). In columns (1)–(4) we see that, in both samples, the
preferences policy on average decreases the log price achieved by about two percentage points, despite
decreasing the average number of bidders per auction slightly, though these estimates are statistically
insignificant in the pharmaceuticals sample and only marginally significant in the full sample. This sug-
gest that there is no adverse overall impact on prices or participation of distorting competition in the
auctions. The policy’s discouragement of foreign manufacturers is offset by a combination of encour-
agement of local manufacturers and the mechanical decrease in prices paid when the winning bidder
supplies foreign manufactured goods and is paid less than its bid.
    Our estimates capture the causal effect of the policy under the assumption that the trend in prices
   51
      See e.g. McAfee & McMillan (1989); Marion (2007); Krasnokutskaya & Seim (2011); Athey et al. (2013); Bhattacharya et al.
 (2014). Both the entry and bidding (conditional on entry) behavior of favored and non-favored firms are expected to respond
endogenously.
   52
      Preferenced goods spanned many categories, including automobiles, clocks, various food products, medical equipment,
pharmaceuticals, and textile and furs (see Online Appendix Table OA.5 for the full list).


                                                             27
paid for preferenced goods would have mirrored that for unpreferenced goods had the policy not been
implemented. This is a priori plausible in our setting since the policy switches on and off multiple times.
To investigate the parallel trends assumption directly, we estimate an event study version of (12) using
data in a window starting three months before and ending four months after each year’s preference list
is published:

                                                4
                pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt +      ∑     δs Preferencedgt × 1 {t − ListMontht = s} + εigt                    (13)
                                              s=−3


where terms are defined as above, and ListMontht is the month closest to month t in which a preference
list is published. Panel A of Figure 6 shows the event study coefficients δs from estimation of (13).
They are all close to zero and statistically indistinguishable from zero in the months leading up to the
publication of the preference list, reassuring us that our difference-in-differences approach captures the
causal effect of the preference policy.
      In the full sample we do not observe goods’ country of origin and so we cannot assess whether the
preferences policy achieves the government’s goal of channeling demand to domestic manufacturers.
However, in the pharmaceuticals sample, we do observe where goods are manufactured. As seen in
Column (5) of Table 6, we find that the preference policy increases the likelihood that auctions are won
by suppliers whose goods are domestically manufactured.53 The preferences policy thus achieves the
government’s goal of purchasing more Russian-made goods, at least in the pharmaceuticals sector.
      Shifting demand towards domestic manufacturers using preferences in procurement comes at no
direct cost to the government—in fact, bid preferences if anything lower prices paid in Russian procure-
ment, as we saw in columns (1) and (3) of Table 6. These findings contrasts with the results from studies
of similar preference policies in the U.S., which suggest that prices increase when the government intro-
duces bid preferences for a subset of firms (see e.g. Marion, 2007; Krasnokutskaya & Seim, 2011). In this
sense, our quasi-experimentally identified estimates of the average impact of Russia’s “buy local” pol-
icy point toward the possibility that industrial policies of this form are more successful in countries like
Russia, where bureaucrats and organizations are on average likely less effective than in richer countries.
This foreshadows our findings in the next sub-section, where we analyze how the impact of the policy
depends on the effectiveness of the policy implementers.


5.2     Bureaucracy-driven heterogeneity in the impact of policy change

In this section we turn to our analysis of how the tradeoffs between policies depend on the effectiveness
of those who implement policy—individuals and organizations in the bureaucratic apparatus. To do so,
we estimate differential impacts of the introduction of bid preferences when implemented by bureaucra-
cies of different levels of effectiveness.
  53
     In Column (5) we restrict the sample to purchases in which an auction takes place in order to be consistent with Column
(5) of Table 7, where we test the model’s prediction for how bureaucratic effectiveness affects the probability of a domestic
producer winning the contract when an auction takes place. We find an increase in the probability of a domestic producer
winning the auction of similar magnitude in the full pharmaceuticals sample (results available from the authors upon request).




                                                             28
       Proposition 2 in Section 3 summarizes how we expect the effect of bid preferences to vary with
the entry costs bureaucracies impose on suppliers. As Proposition 1 showed, these entry costs are key
expected drivers of the differences in the prices ultimately achieved by different bureaucracies—their
effectiveness. In Section 4 we calculated predictions of the price impacts of each bureaucrat and each
organization (under the policy regime without bid preferences). We thus look for heterogeneity in the
impact of the introduction of bid preferences when administered by bureaucracies of low versus high
effectiveness.
       To do so, we extend (12) to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects as follows:

          pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet + γPreferencedgt × α̂b                               (14)
                 + ζPreferencedgt × ψ̂j + ηPolicyActivet × α̂b + θPolicyActivet × ψ̂j
                 + πPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × α̂b + νPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × ψ̂j + εigt

The parameters of interest are π, the heterogeneity of the treatment effect by bureaucrat effectiveness,
and ν, the heterogeneity of the treatment effect by organization effectiveness.
       Table 7 shows the results.54 We see that the small negative average price effect found in Table 6
masks substantial heterogeneity in the impact of bid preferences across bureaucracies. Consistent with
the predictions of Proposition 2, prices drop significantly more for bureaucrats who paid higher prices
(had a higher α̂b ) when there were no bid preferences, both in the full sample and the pharmaceuticals
sample. Similarly, prices drop more for organizations who paid higher prices (had a higher ψ̂j ). How-
ever, this effect is more muted in the full sample, and not statistically significant in the pharmaceuticals
sample. This shows that heterogeneity in bureaucrats’ type is more important than heterogeneity across
organizations for the impact of policy changes, and conversely, suggests that while there are significant
differences across policies in how impactful policy changes are when implemented by different bureau-
crats, we may not see big differences in impact across implementing organizations.
       Figure 7 presents estimates from extending equation (14) to capture heterogeneity in treatment effects
less parametrically—separately by deciles of bureaucrat effectiveness α̂b and organization effectiveness
ψ̂j . On the horizontal axis we plot the average effectiveness within the relevant decile, and on the verti-
cal axis the corresponding treatment effect estimate. The figure reveals that the average treatment effect
combines a price increase when the preferences policy is administered by effective bureaucrats and a
larger price decrease among ineffective bureaucrats, consistent with our theoretical framework. The esti-
mated treatment effects decrease in magnitude throughout the observed range, and the decline appears
relatively linear. An important take-away from Figure 7 is that heterogeneity in how the preferences
policy affects procurement outcomes is not concentrated among especially effective or ineffective bu-
reaucracies, but seen throughout the distribution of effectiveness.
       The estimated heterogeneity in policy impact does not appear to be driven by potential confounds
like mean reversion or differences in seasonality across different types of bureaucrats and organizations.
Panels B and C of Figure 6 show event studies of the introduction of bid preferences separately for the
  54
    In Table 7 we use the covariance shrunk estimates of the bureaucrat and organization effects. Online Appendix Table OA.10
uses the raw fixed effect estimates and shows very similar results.


                                                             29
lowest and highest quartile bureaucrats (Panel B) and organizations (Panel C). The figure shows no dis-
cernible trend in prices before the introduction of the bid preferences. In particular, prices do not diverge
in the two groups before the policy is implemented. After bid preferences are introduced, the average
price achieved by effective bureaucrats begins to increase, while that achieved by ineffective bureaucrats
begins to decrease, with the difference increasing over time. These patterns provide compelling evidence
that the estimates in Table 7 capture the causal differential of interest.55
       Proposition 2 also predicts differential changes in the number of bidders participating in procurement
processes, mirroring the effects on prices. Columns (2) and (4) of Table 7 show that this is indeed what
we see. The average number of participants decreases in auctions administered by effective procurers
when bid preferences apply, but increase in auctions administered by ineffective procurers.56
       Finally, Proposition 2 predicts differential impacts of the policy on the likelihood that an auction is
won by a bidder offering locally manufactured goods. We can test this prediction in the pharmaceuticals
sample, where we observe the origin of the winning product. In columns (1) and (3) we saw significant
heterogeneity in the estimated impact on prices by bureaucrat effectiveness, but not by organizations’
effectiveness, and so we focus on bureaucrat heterogeneity in the impact on the origin of the goods.
Column (5) of Table 7 shows that we do indeed see strong heterogeneity in the impact on goods’ origin:
purchases administered by ineffective bureaucrats see a bigger increase in the probability that an auction
is won by a supplier selling locally manufactured goods when bid preferences apply.
       In combination with the differential change in price under bid preferences shown in columns (1) and
(3), these results suggests that, from the perspective of a government trying to minimize the prices it
pays for its goods while simultaneously steering government demand towards domestic manufacturers,
a “buy local” procurement policy of the form used in Russia is a more effective policy tool when the
bureaucrats administering the policy are less effective at their job, consistent with the logic of our model
outlined in Section 3. For organizational effectiveness, the policy design implications of our findings in
Table 7 are less pronounced.
       Two simple calculations help to illustrate the implications of these findings for policy design. First,
our estimates suggest that the Russian bid preference policy saved the government 17.5 percent when
it was implemented by the least effective quartile of bureaucrats, but only saved the government 0.7
percent when implemented by the most effective quartile of bureaucrats. Similarly, the pharmaceuticals
estimates suggest the probability that an auction was won by a local manufacturer increased by 15.9
percent when the policy was administered by the least effective quartile of bureaucrats, but only 10.3
percent when the policy was administered by the most effective quartile of bureaucrats.
       Second, our estimates show that the variation in performance attributable to a heterogeneous bu-
reaucracy will depend on the nature of the policy being implemented. When the policy regime does not
feature bid preferences, the standard deviation of the impact of bureaucrats and organizations on prices
is 0.525. However, when these same bureaucrats are asked to implement a policy featuring bid prefer-
  55
     In Panel C of Figure 6, which studies organizations, the change in the relative performance of effective and ineffective
organizations after preferences turn on is less visually clear, consistent with the weaker effect for organizations in Table 7.
  56
     In the full sample the difference in the change in the number of bidders for effective and ineffective organizations is not
statistically significant.



                                                              30
ences, our estimates suggest that this goes down to 0.461, a reduction of 12 percent. This illustrates that
the degree to which bureaucracies deviate from the Weberian ideal of mechanistic, uniform performance
depends not just on heterogeneity in the participants in the bureaucracy (Weber, 1921), but also on the
task that the bureaucracy is asked to perform.


6   Conclusion
In this paper we have presented evidence that, contrary to the mechanistic view of the bureaucracy in
much of the existing literature, the individuals and organizations tasked with implementing policy are
important sources of variation in state enterprise productivity. Bureaucrats and public sector organiza-
tions together account for a full 40 percent of the variation in quality-adjusted prices paid by the Russian
government for its inputs. Consistent with a simple endogenous entry model of procurement, effective
public procurers engage in practices that lower entry costs for potential suppliers and attract a larger and
more diverse pool of participants, permitting them to achieve lower prices. However, in many contexts,
the performance of individuals and organizations cannot be directly improved. Studying the impact of
a “buy local” policy that provides bid preferences for locally manufactured goods, we find that partici-
pation increases and prices decrease when the policy is implemented by less effective bureaucrats, while
performance deteriorates when the policy is implemented by more effective bureaucrats, consistent with
our model.
    These findings have important implications. First, they suggest that there are huge returns to the
state from employing more bureaucrats at the high end of the observed performance range, training
bureaucrats better, or improving organization-wide characteristics such as management quality. For
example, our estimates imply that if the least effective quartile of bureaucrats and organizations had
75th percentile effectiveness, the Russian government would save around USD 13 billion each year. The
large magnitude of the procurer effects we estimate suggests that the middle, bureaucratic tier of the
state is a hugely important, though often overlooked, determinant of state effectiveness.
    Second, our findings imply that the nature of the policy regime in place determines the extent to
which differences in the effectiveness of procurers manifest themselves in differences in public sector
output. In turn, this suggests that there are likely large gains from tailoring the design of policy to the
effectiveness of the bureaucracy tasked with implementing it. In particular, policies that are suboptimal
when state effectiveness is high may become second-best optimal when state effectiveness is low. For
example, our estimates imply that the Russian bid preference policy saved the government 17.5 percent
of annual procurement expenses when it was implemented by the least effective quartile of procurers,
but only 0.7 percent when it was implemented by the most effective quartile of procurers. Such depen-
dence of policies’ impact on state effectiveness may be part of the reason why many policies work well
in some countries or regions and poorly in others.
    A final implication is methodological. This paper shows that in order to extrapolate an average treat-
ment effect of a public policy estimated in one setting to another setting, knowledge of differences in
policy implementer effectiveness across the two settings is essential. We demonstrate how bureaucratic


                                                     31
effectiveness can be estimated in baseline data and then used in the estimation of heterogeneous treat-
ment effects to guide such extrapolation.
   Achieving the best policy outcomes likely requires both improving the effectiveness of the bureau-
cratic apparatus and choosing policies that are tailored to the effectiveness of their implementers. Natu-
rally, doing so will involve tradeoffs between these two approaches. We see studying these tradeoffs as
a promising direction for future research.




                                                   32
References
A BOWD , J OHN M., K RAMARZ , F RANCIS , & M ARGOLIS , D AVID. 1999. High Wage Workers and High
   Wage Firms. Econometrica, 67, 251–333.
A BOWD , J OHN M., C REECY, R OBERT H., & K RAMARZ , F RANCIS. 2002. Computing Person and Firm Effects
   Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data. Census Bureau Technical Paper TP-2002-06.
A CEMOGLU , D ARON , H ASSAN , TAREK A., & R OBINSON , J AMES A. 2011. Social structure and develop-
   ment: a legacy of the holocaust in Russia. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
A CEMOGLU , D ARON , G ARCIA -J IMENO , C AMILO , & R OBINSON , J AMES A. 2015. State Capacity and
   Economic Development: A Network Approach. American Economic Review.
A LLCOTT, H UNT. 2015. Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130,
   1117–1165.
A LVAREZ , J ORGE , E NGBOM , N IKLAS , & M OSER , C HRISTIAN. 2018. Firms and the Decline of Earnings
   Inequality in Brazil. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1), 149–189.
A NDREWS , M ARTYN J., G ILL , L EONARD , S CHANK , T HORSTEN , & U PWARD , R ICHARD. 2008. High
   Wage Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias. Journal
   of the Royal Statistical Society, 171(3), 673–697.
A NGRIST, J OSHUA D. 2004. Treatment effect heterogeneity in theory and practice. The Economic Journal,
   C52–C83.
A SHRAF, N AVA , B ANDIERA , O RIANA , & L EE , S COTT S. 2014a. Do-gooders and Go-getters: Career Incen-
   tives, Selection, and Performance in Public Service Delivery. mimeo, Harvard.
A SHRAF, N AVA , B ANDIERA , O RIANA , & J ACK , K ELSEY. 2014b. No Margin, No Mission? A Field Exper-
   iment on Incentives for Public Services Delivery. Journal of Public Economics.
ATHEY, S USAN , C OEY, D OMINIC , & L EVIN , J ONATHAN. 2013. Set-Asides and Subsidies in Auctions.
   American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
B AI , Y ING , & J IA , R UIXUE. 2016. Elite Recruitment and Political Stability: The Impact of the Abolition
   of China’s Civil Service Exam. Econometrica.
B AJARI , PATRICK , H OUGHTON , S TEPHANIE , & TADELIS , S TEVE. 2014. Bidding for Incomplete Contracts:
   An Empirical Analysis of Adaptation Costs. American Economic Review.
B ANDIERA , O RIANA , P RAT, A NDREA , & VALLETTI , T OMMASO. 2009. Active and Passive Waste in
   Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment. American Economic Review, 99(4), 1278–
   1308.
B ARABASHEV, A LEXEI , & S TRAUSSMAN , J EFFREY D. 2007. Public service reform in Russia, 1991–2006.
   Public Administration Review, 67(3), 373–382.
B ERTRAND , M ARIANNE , & S CHOAR , A NTOINETTE. 2003. Managing with style: The effect of managers
   on firm policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
B ERTRAND , M ARIANNE , B URGESS , R OBIN , C HAWLA , A RUNISH , & X U , G UO. 2016. The Costs of Bureau-
   cratic Rigidity: Evidence from the Indian Administrative Service. Working Paper.
B ESLEY, T., & P ERSSON , T. 2010. State capacity, conflict and development. Econometrica, 78, 1–34.
B ESLEY, T IMOTHY, & P ERSSON , T ORSTEN. 2009. The origins of state capacity: Property rights, taxation,
   and politics. American Economic Review, 99, 1218–44.
B EST, M ICHAEL C ARLOS , B ROCKMEYER , A NNE , K LEVEN , H ENRIK , S PINNEWIJN , J OHANNES , &
   WASEEM , M AZHAR. 2015. Production vs Revenue Efficiency With Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and
   Evidence From Pakistan. Journal of Political Economy, 123, 1311–1355.
B HATTACHARYA , V IVEK , R OBERTS , J AMES W., & S WEETING , A NDREW. 2014. Regulating bidder partic-


                                                     33
   ipation in auctions. RAND Journal of Economics.
B IRD , R ICHARD , & G ENDRON , P IERRE -PASCAL. 2007. The VAT in developing and transitional countries.
   Cambridge University Press.
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , P ROPPER , C AROL , S EILER , S TEPHAN , & R EENEN , J OHN VAN. 2015. The Impact of
   Competition on Management Practices in Public Hospitals. The Review of Economic Studies.
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , B ENDER , S TEFAN , C ARD , D AVID , R EENEN , J OHN VAN , & W OLTER , S TEPHANIE.
   2018. Management practices, workforce selection and productivity. Journal of Labor Economics.
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , S ONG , J AE , P RICE , D AVID , G UVENEN , FATIH , & VON WACHTER , T ILL. forthcom-
   ing. Firming up inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
B OLD , T ESSA , K IMENYI , M WANGI , M WABU , G ERMANO , N G ’ ANG ’ A , A LICE , & S ANDEFUR , J USTIN.
   forthcoming. Scaling Up What Works: Experimental Evidence on External Validity in Kenyan Educa-
   tion. Journal of Public Economics.
B RONNENBERG , B ART, D UBÉ , J EAN -P IERRE , G ENTZKOW, M ATTHEW, & S HAPIRO , J ESSE M. 2015. Do
   Pharmacists Buy Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
B URGESS , R OBIN , H ANSEN , M ATTHEW, O LKEN , B ENJAMIN , P OTAPOV, P ETER , & S IEBER , S TEFANIE.
   2012. The political economy of deforestation in the tropics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1707–
   1754.
C ALLEN , M ICHAEL , G ULZAR , S AAD , H ASANAIN , A LI , K HAN , YASIR , & R EZAEE , A RMAN. 2016a. Per-
   sonalities and Public Employee Performance: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan. mimeo UCSD.
C ALLEN , M ICHAEL , G ULZAR , S AAD , H ASANAIN , A LI , & K HAN , YASIR. 2016b. The Political Economy of
   Public Employee Absence: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan. mimeo UCSD.
C ARD , D AVID , H EINING , J ÖRG , & K LINE , PATRICK. 2013. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
   West German Wage Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 967–1015.
C ARD , D AVID , C ARDOSO , A NA R UTE , & K LINE , PATRICK. 2016. Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gen-
   der Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics.
C ARDOSO , A NA R UTE , G UIMARÃES , PAULO , & P ORTUGAL , P EDRO. 2016. What Drives the Gender
   Wage Gap? A Look at the Role of Firm and Job-Title Heterogeneity. Oxford Economic Papers, 68, 506–
   524.
C ARNEIRO , A NABELA , G UIMARÃES , PAULO , & P ORTUGAL , P EDRO. 2012. Real Wages and the Business
   Cycle: Accounting for Worker, Firm and Job Title Heterogeneity. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
   nomics, 4, 133–152.
C HEREMUKHIN , A NTON , G OLOSOV, M IKHAIL , G URIEV, S ERGEI , & T SYVINSKI , A LEH. 2016. The Indus-
   trialization and Economic Development of Russia through the Lens of a Neoclassical Growth Model.
   The Review of Economic Studies.
C HETTY, R AJ , F RIEDMAN , J OHN N., & R OCKOFF , J ONAH E. 2014a. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
   I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates. American Economic Review, 104, 2593–2632.
C HETTY, R AJ , F RIEDMAN , J OHN N., & R OCKOFF , J ONAH E. 2014b. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
   II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. American Economic Review, 104, 2533–
   2679.
C HONG , A LBERTO , L A P ORTA , R AFAEL , DE S ILANES , F LORENCIO L OPEZ , & S HLEIFER , A NDREI. 2014.
   Letter Grading Government Efficiency. Journal of the European Economic Association.
C OVIELLO , D ECIO , & G AGLIARDUCCI , S TEFANO. 2017. Tenure in Office and Public Procurement. Amer-
   ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
C OVIELLO , D ECIO , M ORETTI , L UIGI , S PAGNOLO , G IANCARLO , & VALBONESI , PAOLA. 2017. Court


                                                   34
   Efficiency and Procurement Performance. Scandinavian Journal of Economics.
C OVIELLO , D ECIO , G UGLIELMO , A NDREA , & S PAGNOLO , G IANCARLO. 2018. The Effect of Discretion
   on Procurement Performance. Management Science.
D AL B O , E RNESTO , F INAN , F RED , & R OSSI , M ARTIN. 2013. Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role
   of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
D EATON , A NGUS. 2010. Instruments, Randomization and Learning about Development. Journal of Eco-
   nomic Literature, 424–455.
D ECAROLIS , F RANCESCO. 2014. Awarding Price, Contract Performance and Bids Screening: Evidence
   from Procurement Auctions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
D ECAROLIS , F RANCESCO , & PALUMBO , G IULIANA. 2015. Renegotiation of Public Contracts: An Empir-
   ical Analysis. Economic Letters.
D ECAROLIS , F RANCESCO , S PAGNOLO , G IANCARLO , & PACINI , R ICCARDO. 2016. Past Performance and
   Procurement Outcomes. NBER Working Paper no. 22814.
D ECAROLIS , F RANCESCO , G IUFFRIDA , L EONARDO M., I OSSA , E LISABETTA , M OLLISI , V INCENZO , &
   S PAGNOLO , G IANCARLO. 2018. Bureaucratic Competence and Procurement Outcomes. Mimeo Universita
   Bocconi.
D EHEJIA , R AJEEV, P OP -E LECHES , C RISTIAN , & S AMII , C YRUS. 2016. From Local to Global: External Valid-
   ity in a Fertility Natural Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 21459.
D ESERRANNO , E RIKA. forthcoming. Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from the
   Recruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
D UFLO , E STHER , G REENSTONE , M ICHAEL , PANDE , R OHINI , & RYAN , N ICHOLAS. 2013. Truth-telling by
   third-party auditors and the response of polluting firms: Experimental evidence from India. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 128, 1499–1545.
D UFLO , E STHER , G REENSTONE , M ICHAEL , PANDE , R OHINI , & RYAN , N ICHOLAS. forthcoming. The
   Value of Discretion in the Enforcement of Regulation: Experimental Evidence and Structural Estimates
   from Environmental Inspections in India. Econometrica.
E ASTERLY, W ILLIAM , & P ENNINGS , S TEVEN. 2017. Shrinking dictators: how much economic growth can we
   attribute to national leaders? mimeo, NYU.
E ECKHOUT, J AN , & K IRCHER , P HILIPP. 2011. Identifying Sorting–In Theory. The Review of Economic
   Studies.
E NIKOLOPOV, R UBEN , & Z HURAVSKAYA , E KATERINA. 2007. Decentralization and political institutions.
   Journal of Public Economics.
E PPLE , D ENNIS. 1987. Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Supply Functions
   for Differentiated Products. Journal of Political Economy, 95, 59–80.
F ERRAZ , C LAUDIO , F INAN , F REDERICO , & S ZERMAN , D IMITRI. 2015. Procuring Firm Growth: The Effects
   of Government Purchases on Firm Dynamics. mimeo, UC Berkeley.
F INAN , F REDERICO , O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A., & PANDE , R OHINI. 2017. The Personnel Economics of the
   Developing State. In: B ANERJEE , A BHIJIT, & D UFLO , E STHER (eds), Handbook of Field Experiments,
   Volume II. North Holland.
F INKELSTEIN , A MY, G ENTZKOW, M ATTHEW, & W ILLIAMS , H EIDI. 2016. Sources of Geographic Varia-
   tion in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
F OSTER , L UCIA , H ALTIWANGER , J OHN , & S YVERSON , C HAD. 2009. Reallocation, Firm Turnover and
   Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability. American Economic Review, 98.
F RIEDMAN , J EROME , H ASTIE , T REVOR , & T IBSHIRANI , R OBERT. 2013. The Elements of Statistical Learning.
   Berlin: Springer Series in Statistics.


                                                      35
G AURE , S IMEN. 2013. OLS with multiple high dimensional category variables. Computational Statistics
   and Data Analysis, 66, 8–18.
G ENTRY, M ATTHEW, & L I , T ONG. 2014. Identification in auctions with selective entry. Econometrica,
   82(1), 315–344.
G ENTZKOW, M ATTHEW, & S HAPIRO , J ESSE. 2010. What Drives Media Slant? Evidence From US Daily
   Newspapers. Econometrica, 78, 35–71.
G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K OUJIANOU , & D E L OECKER , J AN. 2014. Firm Performance in a Global Market.
   Annual Review of Economics.
G OLDSCHMIDT, D EBORAH , & S CHMIEDER , J OHANNES. 2017. The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and the
   Evolution of the German Wage Structure. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
G RILICHES , Z VI (ed). 1971. Price Indexes and Quality Change. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
G ULZAR , S AAD , & PASQUALE , B ENJAMIN. 2017. Politicians, Bureaucrats, and Development: Evidence
   from India. American Political Science Review, 111, 162–183.
H ANNA , R EMA , & WANG , S HING -Y I. 2017. Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service: Evidence from
   India. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
H ANSEN , S TEPHEN , M C M AHON , M ICHAEL , & P RAT, A NDREA. 2018. Transparency and Deliberation
   Within the FOMC: A Computational Linguistics Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
H ANSMAN , C HRISTOPHER , H JORT, J ONAS , & L EÓN , G IANMARCO. 2017. Interlinked Firms and the
   Consequences of Piecemeal Regulation. Journal of the European Economic Association.
H ECKMAN , J AMES , & S MITH , J EFFREY. 1997. Making the Most out of Programme Evaluations and Social
   Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Programme Impacts. Review of Economic Studies, 487–
   535.
H ECKMAN , J AMES J. 2010. Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches to
   Evaluating Policy. Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 356–98.
H OBERG , G ERARD , & P HILLIPS , G ORDON. 2016. Text-Based Network Industries and Endogenous Prod-
   uct Differentiation. Journal of Political Economy, 124(5), 1423–1465.
H ORTACSU , A LI , & S YVERSON , C HAD. 2007. Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration, Foreclosure,
   Productivity, and Prices. Journal of Political Economy.
J ANKE , K ATHARINA , P ROPPER , C AROL , & S ADUN , R AFFAELLA. 2018. The Impact of CEOs in the Public
   Sector: Evidence from the English NHS. HBS Working Paper no. 18-075.
J ONES , B ENJAMIN F., & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2005. Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth
   since World War II. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
K ANE , T HOMAS J., & S TAIGER , D OUGLAS O. 2008. Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
   experimental evaluation. NBER working Paper.
K HAN , A DNAN , K HWAJA , A SIM , & O LKEN , B EN. 2016. Tax Farming Redux: Experimental Evidence on
   Performance Pay for Tax Collectors. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
K HAN , A DNAN , K HWAJA , A SIM , & O LKEN , B EN. 2018. Making Moves Matter: Experimental Evidence
   on Incentivizing Bureaucrats through Performance-Based Postings. American Economic Review.
K HANDELWAL , A MIT. 2010. The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders. The Review of Economic Studies,
   77(4), 1450–1476.
K LEPIKOVA , E. A. 2017. Job Mobility of Public and Private Sector Workers. Sociological Research.
K RASNOKUTSKAYA , E LENA , & S EIM , K ATJA. 2011. Bid Preference Programs and Participation in High-
   way Procurement Auctions. American Economic Review, 2653–2686.
K RISHNA , V IJAY. 2010. Auction Theory (second edition). Elsevier.


                                                   36
K RYLOVA , D INA V., & S ETTLES , A LEXANDER. 2011. Procurement Reform in Russia: Implications for the
   Fight Against Corruption. Economic Reform Feature Service.
L ACETERA , N ICOLA , L ARSEN , B RADLEY, P OPE , D EVING G., & S YDNOR , J USTIN. 2016. Bid Takers or
   Market Makers? The Effect of Auctioneers on Auction Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Microe-
   conomics, 8, 195–229.
L AFFONT, J EAN -J AQUES. 2005. Regulation and Development. Cambridge University Press.
L ANCASTER , T ONY. 2000. The Incidental Parameter Problem since 1948. Journal of Econometrics, 95,
   391–413.
L EWIS -FAUPEL , S EAN , N EGGERS , Y USUF, O LKEN , B ENJAMIN , & PANDE , R OHINI. 2016. Can Electronic
   Procurement Improve Infrastructure Provision? Evidence from Public Works in India and Indonesia. American
   Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
M ARION , J USTIN. 2007. Are Bid Preferences Benign? The Effect of Small Business Subsidies in Highway
   Procurement Auctions. Journal of Public Economics, 1591–1624.
M AS , A LEXANDRE , & M ORETTI , E NRICO. 2009. Peers at Work. American Economic Review.
M C A FEE , P RESTON R., & M C M ILLAN , J OHN. 1989. Government procurement and international trade.
   Journal of International Economics, 26(3), 291–308.
M ENDES , R UTE , VAN DEN B ERG , G ERARD J., & L INDEBOOM , M AARTEN. 2010. An Empirical Assess-
   ment of Assortative Matching in the Labor Market. Labour Economics, 17, 919–29.
M ILGROM , PAUL. 2004. Putting Auction Theory to Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
N EYMAN , J ERZY, & S COTT, E LIZABETH L. 1948. Consistent Estimates Based on Partially Consistent
   Observations. Econometrica, 16, 1–32.
PAGE , L UCY, & PANDE , R OHINI. 2018. Ending Global Poverty: Why Money Isn’t Enough. Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 32, 173–200.
PANG , S INNO J IALIN , & YANG , Q IANG. 2010. A Survey on Transfer Learning. IEEE Transactions on
   Knowledge and Data Engineering, 22, 1345–1359.
R ASUL , I MRAN , & R OGGER , D ANIEL. 2018. Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service Delivery:
   Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. Economic Journal.
R AUCH , J AMES E. 1999. Networks Versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of International Eco-
   nomics, 7–35.
R IFKIN , RYAN , & K LAUTAU , A LDEBARO. 2004. In Defense of One-Vs-All Classification. Journal of Ma-
   chine Learning Research, 5, 101–141.
R ODRIK , D ANI. 2009. Diagnostics before Prescription. Journal of Economic Perspectives.
R OSEN , S HERWIN. 1974. Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Compe-
   tition. Journal of Political Economy, 82, 34–55.
S AMUELSON , W ILLIAM F. 1985. Competitive bidding with entry costs. Economics Letters, 17(1), 53–57.
S CHAPPER , PAUL R., M ALTA , J OAO N UNO V EIGA , & G ILBERT, D IANE L. 2009. Analytical Framework
   for the Management and Reform of Public Procurement. In: T HAI , K HI V. (ed), International Handbook
   of Public Procurement. CRC Press.
S CHOTT, P ETER K. 2004. Across-Product Versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 647–678.
S CULLEY, D. 2010. Web-Scale K-Means Clustering. Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World
   Wide Web.
S HELEF, O RIE , & N UGYEN -C HYUNG , A MY. 2015. Competing for Labor through Contracts: Selection, Match-
   ing, Firm Organization and Investments. mimeo, Stanford.


                                                    37
S ILVER , D AVID. 2016. Haste or Waste? Peer Pressure and the Distribution of Marginal Returns to Health Care.
   Mimeo: UC Berkeley.
S UTTON , J OHN. 1998. Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History. Cambridge: MIT Press.
S YVERSON , C HAD. 2004. Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example. Journal of Political
   Economy.
S ZAKONYI , D AVID. 2017. Businesspeople in Elected Office: Identifying Private Benefits from Firm-Level
   Returns. American Political Science Review.
T ORREY, L ISA , & S HAVLIK , J UDE. 2009. Transfer Learning. In: Handbook of Research on Machine Learning
   Applications. IGI Global.
T RANSPARENCY I NTERNATIONAL. 2016. Corruption Perceptions Index. 2016 version.
V IVALT, E VA. 2017. How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluations? Mimeo: Australian National
   University.
W EBER , M AX. 1921. Economy and Society.
X U , G UO. forthcoming. The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire. American Economic
   Review.
YAKOVLEV, A NDREI , D EMIDOVA , O LGA , & B ALAEVA , O LGA. 2010. The System of Public Procurements
   in Russia: On the Road of Reform. HSE Policy Paper, 1–23.
YAKOVLEV, E VGENY, & Z HURAVSKAYA , E KATERINA. 2014. The Unequal Enforcement of Liberalization:
   Evidence from Russia’s Reform of Business Regulation. Journal of the European Economic Association.
YAO , YANG , & Z HANG , M UYANG J. 2015. Subnational leaders and economic growth: evidence from
   Chinese cities. J Econ Growth.




                                                     38
                                                      F IGURE 1: P ROCUREMENT P ROCESS F LOW-C HART


                 Stage 1: Announcement              Stage 2: Qualifying Suppliers           Stage 3: Auction                   Stage 4: Contracting


                                                     No Applicants
                                                     745,646 purchases (11.6%)
                                                     1,475,258 items (6.93%)

                                                     All applicants disqualified
                                                     71,601 purchases (1.11%)
                                                     262,863 items (1.24%)                                                  Qualified bidder contracted
                                                                                                                            1,269,706 purchases (19.7%)
                  Auction Announcement               1 qualified bidder                                                     2,310,122 items (10.9%)
                  6, 454, 323 purchases              1,399,125 purchases (21.7%)
                                                     2,540,527 items (11.9%)                                                No contract
                  21, 277, 937 items
                                                                                                                            129,419 purchases (2.01%)
                                                                                                                            230,405 items (1.08%)

                                                                                                                            Winning bidder contracted
                                                                                                                            1,540,325 purchases (23.9%)
                                                                                                                            6,383,458 items (30.0%)
39




                                                                                      2 bidders                             Losing bidder contracted
                                                                                      1,829,560 purchases (28.3%)           189,290 purchases (2.93%)
                                                                                      7,602,840 items (35.7%)               781,395 items (3.67%)

                                                                                                                            No contract
                                                                                                                            99,945 purchases (1.55%)
                                                     >1 qualified bidder                                                    437,987 items (2.06%)
                                                     4,237,951 purchases (65.7%)
                                                     16,999,289 items (79.9%)                                               Winning bidder contracted
                                                                                                                            1,572,081 purchases (24.4%)
                                                                                                                            6,465,068 items (30.4%)

                                                                                      >2 bidders                            Losing bidder contracted
                                                                                      1,881,339 purchases (29.1%)           212,014 tenders (3.28%)
                                                                                      7,732,520 items (36.3%)               846,971 items (3.98%)

                                                                                                                            No contract
                                                                                                                            97,244 purchases (1.51%)
                                                                                                                            420,481 items (1.98%)


     This figure lays out the stages of the process public procurement purchases of off-the-shelf goods through electronic auctions follow in Russia. Numbers are based
     on all purchases made under laws 94 and 44 in 2011-2016. The stages are described in detail in Sub-section 2.1.
                F IGURE 2: E VENT S TUDY OF P ROCUREMENT P RICES A ROUND T IMES O RGANIZATIONS S WITCH B UREAUCRATS



                                                              0.6
                       Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price


                                                              0.3




                                                              0.0
40




                                                             −0.3




                                                             −0.6
                                                                Week −1        Week 0                Week 1              Week 2

                                                                          Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)

     The figure shows time trends in prices around the time that organizations switch which bureaucrat makes purchases on their behalf. The horizontal axis measures
     fortnight on which bureaucrat-organization pairs work together, with time 0 being the last fortnight on which the organization works with the old bureaucrat just
     before switch, and time 1 being the first fortnight the organization works with the new bureaucrat after the switch. The y axis measures average residualized prices
     paid by the bureaucrat-organization pair where prices are residualized by regressing log unit prices on good and month fixed effects. We create a balanced panel in
     which we require each bureaucrat-organization pair to work together on two separate fortnights and each bureaucrat to work with at least one other organization in
     the quarter containing time 0 (for the “old” bureaucrat the organization works with before the switch) or time 1 (for the “new” bureaucrat the organization works
     with after the switch). Bureaucrats are classified into quartiles according to the average (residualized) prices they achieve with the other organizations they work
     with in the quarter containing time 0 (for the old bureaucrat) or the quarter containing time 1 (for the new bureaucrat).
                                                              F IGURE 3: C RUDE C OUNTERFACTUALS


             Panel A: Moving Least Effective 25% of Bureaucrats to 75th Percentile Effectiveness
                                                     2
                    Standardized Effect on Prices



                                                     1

                                                                                        Savings: 3.3%


                                                     0




                                                    −1




                                                    −2

                                                         0   10   20       30     40      50    60      70       80   90   100
                                                                                Bureaucrat Percentile
 Panel B: Moving Least Effective 25% of Bureaucrats and Organizations to 75th Percentile Effectiveness
                                                     2




                                                     1
                    Standardized Effect




                                                                                  Savings: 10.7%
                                                     0




                                                    −1




                                                    −2

                                                         0   10   20       30     40      50    60      70       80   90   100
                                                                       Bureaucrat−Organization Pair Percentile


The figure shows the impact of two counterfactual scenarios on the distribution of our estimated price effects. Panel A consid-
ers moving all bureaucrats above the 75th percentile of their connected set’s distribution of covariance shrunken price effects
down to their connected set’s 25th percentile. The dashed line shows the distribution of our covariance shrunken estimates
of the bureaucrat effects, while the solid line shows the distribution that would result from implementing the counterfactual.
Panel B considers moving both all bureaucrats and all organizations above the 75th percentile of their connected set’s distribu-
tion of covariance shrunken price effects down to their connected set’s 25th percentile. The dashed line shows the distribution
of bureaucrat-organization pair effects we estimate, while the solid line shows the distribution that would occur in the coun-
terfactual scenario. Overlaid on both panels are the implied aggregate savings.

                                                                                   41
                                                   F IGURE 4: C ORRELATES OF B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS


                                                                          Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                  Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes

                                      Number of Applicants

                                           1[Early Delivery]

                                      In−house Bureaucrat

                  Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)

                1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]

                     Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)



                        Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)

                    Value of Auctions Run (Auction Month)

                                 Autonomous Organization

                                      Federal Organization
42




                                     Regional Organization
     Variable




                                   Customer Success Rate

                              1[Customer works in Culture]



                               1[Customer works in Health]

                             1[Customer works in Housing]

                       1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]

                        1[Customer works in Social Policy]

                       1[Customer works in Transportation]

                   1[Customer works in Veterninary Affairs]

                            Distance from Regional Capital



                          Share of Foreign−owned Bidders

                              Share of Wholesaler Bidders

                       Share of Bidders from Same Region

                     Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)

                                                               −0.050   −0.025   0.000     0.025   0.050 −0.050   −0.025   0.000   0.025   0.050
                                                                                            Standardized Coefficient
                                                             F IGURE 5: C ORRELATES OF O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS


                                                                                      Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                                                        Reservation Price

                                 Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes

                                                          Number of Items

                                            Number of Contract Revisions

                                                     Number of Applicants

                                                  Deposit / Reserve Price

                                       Bureaucrat Volume of Auctions Run



                                                     In−house Bureaucrat

                               1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]

                                   Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)

                                                     Federal Organization

                                                   Municipal Organization
43




                    Variable




                                               Organization Success Rate

                                             1[Customer works in Culture]



                                              1[Customer works in Health]

                                            1[Customer works in Housing]

                                      1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]

                                        1[Customer works in Social Policy]

                                               1[Customer works in Sport]

                                           1[Customer works in Transport]

                                           Distance from Regional Capital



                                      Share of Bidders from Same Region

                               Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)

                                                      1[Exporter Supplier]

                                                  1[Federal Gov. Supplier]

                                                                              −0.06   −0.03   0.00    0.03   0.06     −0.06   −0.03   0.00      0.03     0.06
                                                                                                        Standardized Coefficient

     The figure shows the results of regressions of estimated organization effects ψ̂j from estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi on observable
                        F IGURE 6: E FFECT OF B ID P REFERENCES FOR D OMESTIC M ANUFACTURERS : G RAPHICAL E VIDENCE


                                                                                             PANEL A: E VENT S TUDY OF AVERAGE P OLICY I MPACT




                                                                                                                                                                              Preference Law Changed
                                                                                                                                                      0.5




                                                                                                                         Price Effect Coefficients
                                                                                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                     −0.5




                                                                                                                                                            −3   −2     −1      0      1      2     3                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                  Months Since Preference Law Changed



                               PANEL B: B UREAUCRAT H ETEROGENEITY                                                                                                                                     PANEL C: O RGANIZATION H ETEROGENEITY
44




                                                                                                Preference Law Changed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Preference Law Changed
                                                                0.5                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                   Price Effect Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Price Effect Coefficients
                                                                0.0                                                                                                                                                                    0.0




                                                               −0.5                                                                                                                                                                   −0.5




                                                                      −3       −2     −1      0      1      2     3                                         4                                                                                −3       −2     −1      0      1      2     3      4
                                                                                Months Since Preference Law Changed                                                                                                                                    Months Since Preference Law Changed


                                                                           (3) Good Bureaucrat (Quartile 1)                                                                                                                                       (3) Good Organization (Quartile 1)
                                                                           (5) Bad Bureaucrat (Quartile 4)                                                                                                                                        (5) Bad Organization (Quartile 4)



     The figure shows a graphical analysis of the preferences policy over the period of study. The x-axis is measured in the number of months preceding or following the
     activation of the annual preferences laws in 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. The dotted vertical lines indicates when the policy was became active. The y-axis in each
     plot shows the month-specific coefficients from estimation of equation (13): pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + ∑4s=−3 δs Preferencedgt × 1 {t − ListMontht = s} + εigt , where
     pigt is the price paid for purchase i of good g in month t. Preferencedgt is a dummy indicating that g is on the preferences list in the year month t falls within, and
     ListMontht is the month closest to month t in which a preference list is published. Xigt are the same controls we use in Section 4, but for clarity we separate out
     the good and month fixed effects, µg and λt . εigt is an error term we allow to be clustered by month and good. The top panel shows the average policy impact for
     the full sample. The bottom panels shows the event studies separately for the highest and lowest quartiles of bureaucrat effectiveness (Panel B) and organization
     effectiveness (Panel C).
F IGURE 7: N ON -PARAMETRIC H ETEROGENEITY OF E FFECT OF B ID P REFERENCES                                FOR   D OMESTIC
P RODUCERS BY B UREAUCRAT AND O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS


           PANEL A: H ETEROGENEITY IN E FFECT ON P RICE BY B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS
                                  0.2
              Treatment Effect




                                  0.0


                                 −0.2


                                 −0.4


                                        −1            0                                 1
                                                          Bureaucrat Effectiveness



         PANEL B: H ETEROGENEITY IN E FFECT ON P RICE BY O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS
                                  0.2
              Treatment Effect




                                  0.0


                                 −0.2


                                 −0.4


                                        −1            0                                 1
                                                          Organization Effectiveness


The figure shows results from a non-parametric extension of the triple-differences equation (14):

yigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet + γPreferencedgt × α̂b + ζPreferencedgt × ψ̂j + ηPolicyActivet × α̂b
      + θPolicyActivet × ψ̂j + πPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × α̂b + ζPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × ψ̂j + εigt

Bureaucrat and Organization effects are in this figure binned into deciles and the decile dummies interacted with the treatment
indicators PolicyActivet and Preferencedgt and their interaction. On the horizontal axis we plot the average effectiveness
within the relevant decile. On the vertical axis we show the corresponding treatment effect estimate.




                                                                 45
                                                                     TABLE 1: S UMMARY S TATISTICS


                                                                          All Products                                         Pharmaceuticals Subsample

                                                          (1)              (2)                     (3)               (4)              (6)                    (6)
                                                      All No Bid     Analysis Sample       Analysis Sample       All No Bid     Analysis Sample      Analysis Sample
                                                      Preferences                        incl. Bid Preferences   Preferences                       incl. Bid Preferences
          (1) # of Bureaucrats                            115,859             54,771                   54,771          5,561              2,505                   2,505
          (2) # of Organizations                           88,326             59,574                   59,574          3,662              1,884                   1,884
          (3) # of Connected Sets                          26,239                984                      984              0                129                     129
          (4) # of Bureaucrats with >1 Org.                14,093             12,538                   12,888            965                929                   1,101
          (5) # of Organizations with >1 Bur.              54,580             42,438                   42,995          2,076              1,454                   1,604
          (6) # of Federal Organizations                   12,890              2,022                    2,022            496                 26                      26
          (7) # of Regional Organizations                  25,164             19,014                   19,014          2,786              1,613                   1,613
          (8) # of Municipal Organizations                 50,272             38,538                   38,538            380                245                     245
          (9) # of Health Organizations                    10,167              7,896                    7,896          3,172              1,719                   1,719
          (10) # of Education Organizations                42,062             33,223                   33,223            109                 63                      63
          (11) # of Internal Affairs Organizations          3,126                867                      867            105                  3                       3
          (12) # of Agr/Environ Organizations               1,032                339                      339             26                  1                       1
          (13) # of Other Organizations                    31,939             17,249                   17,249            250                 98                      98
46




          (14) # of Goods                                   16,376             15,727                  16,223          4,220              3,863                   4,354
          (15) # of Regions                                     86                 86                      86             85                 79                      79
          (16) # of Auction Requests                     1,733,449          1,249,770               1,930,936         62,755             42,929                 115,318
          (17) Mean # of Applicants                            3.6                3.6                    3.46           2.98               3.03                    3.02
          (18) Mean # of Bidders                             2.83               2.14                     2.78           1.95               1.98                    2.01
          (19) Mean Reservation Price                      23,460             25,004                   25,762         40,708             44,425                  38,684
          (20) Quantity Mean                                1,134              1,117                    1,164         1,201               1,718                     972
                    Median                                     20                 25                       26            40                   45                     50
                    SD                                     80,831             91,806                  174,315       136,260             172,099                 108,426
          (21) Total Price Mean (bil. USD)                   93.2               84.4                     84.3           128                91.2                     100
                    Median                                   4.67               4.35                     4.77          6.23                  6.7                   7.06
                    SD                                        577                535                      513         5,745                 493                     524
          (22) Unit Price Mean (bil. USD)                    72.1               66.5                     58.4          20.2                25.4                    28.8
                    Median                                   0.21               0.17                    0.182         0.175                0.18                    0.18
                    SD                                     21,248             23,341                   19,038           226                 265                     281
          (23) # of Observations                       15,096,663         11,516,088               16,575,168       290,483             182,060                 461,989
          (24) Total Procurement Volume (bil. USD)            516                399                      635          14.5                9.38                    19.9

     The table reports summary statistics for six samples. The All Products columns show statistics for purchases of all off-the-shelf goods, while the Pharmaceuticals
     Subsample columns restrict attention to purchases of medicines. Full Sample denotes all unpreferenced auctions. Analysis Sample denotes all unpreferenced auc-
     tions in connected sets that fulfill three restrictions: singleton bureaucrat-organization, bureaucrat-good, and organization-good pairs are removed; each procurer
     (bureaucrats and organizations) implements a minimum of five purchases; and connected sets have at least three bureaucrats and organizations. With Bid Preferences
     denotes all preferenced auctions that fulfill the same three restrictions. Organizations working in Education include schools, universities, pre-schools, and youth or-
     ganizations. Organizations working in Internal Affairs include police, emergency services, local administration, taxes, and transportation. Organizations working
     in Agriculture or the Environment include environmental protection funds, agricultural departments and nature promotion agencies. The Other category includes
     funds, monitoring agencies, and land cadasters, among many others. All sums are measured in billions of US dollars at an exchange rate of 43 rubles to 1 US dollar.
                                                            TABLE 2: E VENT S TUDIES S UMMARY S TATISTICS


                                                                                 Mean Log Residuals of Bureaucrat Movers                     Mean Weeks Betw. Cols:

                                           Number of         Number of           Week -1       Week 0       Week 1          Week 2           (3)-(4)    (4)-(5)     (5)-(6)
              Origin/destination            Moves           Observations
                   Quartile*                 (1)                (2)                  (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)             (7)         (8)         (9)

                       1 to 1                  5,605            240,974            -0.274       -0.359       -0.351          -0.254          12.518     28.253      12.119
                       1 to 2                  5,442            224,305            -0.187       -0.224       -0.092          -0.048          12.431     23.619      12.538
                       1 to 3                  3,393            136,756            -0.144       -0.192        0.061           0.012          13.780     28.949      13.366
                       1 to 4                  1,736             70,098            -0.144       -0.139        0.245           0.209          14.171     35.299      16.808

                       2 to 1                  5,604            229,646            -0.043       -0.094       -0.211          -0.168          13.056     27.703      13.575
                       2 to 2                  9,659            484,044            -0.034       -0.050       -0.010          -0.033          12.200     25.723      11.923
                       2 to 3                  6,122            277,266            -0.035       -0.043        0.087           0.047          12.789     28.965      14.853
                       2 to 4                  2,243             87,754            0.066         0.010        0.246           0.186          11.985     35.071      15.127
47




                       3 to 1                  3,173            132,081            0.015        0.003        -0.115          -0.159          15.436     26.144      12.123
                       3 to 2                  5,822            262,335            0.001        0.043         0.017           0.008          13.601     24.306      12.060
                       3 to 3                  5,608            239,169            0.030        0.089         0.117           0.112          15.337     27.186      14.642
                       3 to 4                  2,649            112,986            0.183        0.166         0.292           0.267          13.623     31.675      16.031

                       4 to 1                  1,356             55,993            0.094        0.125        -0.131          -0.093          15.422     30.282      12.537
                       4 to 2                  1,728             73,812            0.101        0.163         0.013           0.103          15.639     29.743      12.104
                       4 to 3                  2,159             90,069            0.168        0.287         0.212           0.176          15.145     29.638      12.552
                       4 to 4                  2,490            110,435            0.348        0.385         0.390           0.342          14.998     28.177      14.932

                       Totals                 64,789           2,827,723


     The table shows information on events in which organizations switch bureaucrats. The sample used is the All Products-Analysis Sample summarized in Table 1.
     Events are defined using the procedure described in detail in Sub-section 4.1. We define an employment spell as a sequence of at least two weeks a bureaucrat-
     organization pair conducts purchases together, with the weeks less than 400 days apart. Wherever possible, we then match an employment spell (event time ≤ 0)
     with the earliest future spell (event time > 0) involving the same organization but a different bureaucrat. This change of bureaucrats then constitutes an event (event
     time = 0). We classify the two bureaucrats involved in the event using the average quality-adjusted price they achieve in purchases they make for other organizations
     during the half-year that the spell ends (for the earlier spell) or starts (for the later spell). We run equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . This regression
     regresses the price achieved in an auction on log quantity, good fixed effects, month fixed effects, interactions between 2-digit HS product categories, years, regions,
     and lot size, as explained in detail in Sub-section 4.2. Using the price residuals, we then classify bureaucrats by the average they achieve in purchases they make for
     other organizations. We assign this bureaucrat-average quality-adjusted price to the relevant quartile of the distribution of the average quality-adjusted prices of all
     bureaucrats that themselves are part of an event in the same half-year as the bureaucrat in question.
                TABLE 3: S HARE OF VARIATION IN P OLICY P ERFORMANCE E XPLAINED BY B UREAUCRATS AND O RGANIZATIONS


                                                                                     Fixed                         Split                                    Covariance
                                                                                    Effects         (s.e.)       Sample           (s.e.)    Shrinkage        Shrinkage
                                                                                        (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)              (6)
               (1) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across burs)                           1.385      (0.033)            1.483     (0.0328)            0.860             0.626
               (2) s.d. of Organization Effects (across orgs)                         1.209     (0.0277)            1.317     (0.0214)            0.743             0.519
               (3) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across CS)                          0.843     (0.0341)            0.511     (0.0337)            0.318             0.318
               (4) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across items)                          0.747     (0.0396)            0.775     (0.0202)            0.589             0.311
               (5) s.d. of Organization Effects (across items)                        0.827     (0.0445)            0.867     (0.0288)            0.644             0.336
               (6) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across items)                       0.402     (0.0563)            0.401     (0.0274)            0.136             0.136
               (7) Bur-Org Effect Correlation (across items)                         -0.665     (0.0166)           -0.432     (0.0315)           -0.602             0.331
               (8) s.d. of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items)                     0.630     (0.0425)            0.652     (0.0234)            0.525             0.512
               (9) s.d. of log unit price                                             2.197                         2.197                         2.197             2.197
               (10) s.d. of log unit price | good, month                              1.283                         1.283                         1.283             1.283
48




               (11) Adjusted R-squared                                               0.964                         0.964                         0.964             0.964
               (12) Number of Bureaucrats                                           54,771                        54,771                        54,771            54,771
               (13) Number of Organizations                                         59,574                        59,574                        59,574            59,574
               (14) Number of Bureaucrat-Organization Pairs                        284,710                       284,710                       284,710           284,710
               (15) Number of Connected Sets                                           984                           984                           984               984
               (16) Number of Observations                                      11,516,088                    11,516,088                    11,516,088        11,516,088


     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in
     equation (10). The sample used is the All Products-Analysis Sample summarized in Table 1. Rows 1–3 show the s.d. of the bureaucrat, organization and connected set
     effects. Rows 4–8 show the components of the variance of prices across purchases, effectively weighting the estimates in rows 1–3 by the number of purchases they
     conduct. Column 1 uses the fixed effect estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Each observation is an item procured by an organization j
     and a bureaucrat indexed by b(i, j ). Column 3 shows estimates from randomly splitting the sample in half, stratifying by bureaucrat-organization pair and calculating
     the covariance across the two noisy estimates. Columns 2 and 4 show standard errors of the estimates in columns 1 and 3, respectively, estimated by bootstrapping
     100 times. Column 5 uses the bootstraps to estimate the sampling error in each bureaucrat effect s2b and each organization effect s2j , and the signal variances of the
                                              2        2                                                                                                     2     2
     bureaucrat and organization effects (σα     and σψ  respectively). The minimum-mean-squared error predictor for each bureaucrat effect is then [σ̂α       /(σ̂α  + s2b )] · α̂b ,
     where α̂b is the bureaucrat’s fixed effect from the decomposition in Column 1, and analogously for the organization effects. Column 6 shows our preferred estimates,
     which form predictions of the bureaucrat and organization effects that minimize the expected sum of the mean-squared errors of the predictionshand take into accounti
                                                                                                                                                                   0
     the covariance of the estimation errors, estimated from the bootstrapped estimates. Formally, the covariance shrinkage predictors solve minΛ E θ − Λθ̂ θ − Λθ̂
                                                                                                                                                                                  

     where θ̂ is the vector of estimated bureaucrat and organization fixed effects. All methods are described fully in Section 4.2.
                  TABLE 4: R OBUSTNESS TO R ESTRICTING TO P HARMACEUTICALS S UBSAMPLE WITH B ARCODE I NFORMATION


                                                                                    Fixed                       Split                                     Covariance
                                                                                   Effects          (s.e.)    Sample            (s.e.)    Shrinkage        Shrinkage
                                                                                       (1)             (2)        (3)              (4)           (5)              (6)
                 (1) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across burs)                        0.209      (0.0074)         0.216     (0.00728)            0.103            0.0632
                 (2) s.d. of Organization Effects (across orgs)                      0.165     (0.00627)         0.173     (0.00634)            0.078            0.0481
                 (3) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across CS)                       0.228      (0.0116)         0.152      (0.0123)            0.191             0.191
                 (4) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across items)                       0.124      (0.0122)         0.132      (0.0105)           0.0885            0.0515
                 (5) s.d. of Organization Effects (across items)                     0.129      (0.0131)         0.137      (0.0108)           0.0815            0.0416
                 (6) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across items)                    0.152     (0.00841)         0.129     (0.00794)            0.137             0.137
                 (7) Bur-Org Effect Correlation (across items)                      -0.333      (0.0783)        -0.164      (0.0439)           -0.264           -0.0886
                 (8) s.d. of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items)                  0.190     (0.00779)         0.179     (0.00679)            0.163             0.147
                 (9) s.d. of log unit price                                          1.915                       1.915                          1.915             1.915
                 (10) s.d. of log unit price | good, month                           0.319                       0.319                          0.319             0.319
                 (11) Adjusted R-squared                                            0.997                       0.997                          0.997             0.997
49




                 (12) Number of Bureaucrats                                         2,501                       2,501                          2,501             2,501
                 (13) Number of Organizations                                       1,880                       1,880                          1,880             1,880
                 (14) Number of Bureaucrat-Organization Pairs                       8,112                       8,112                          8,112             8,112
                 (15) Number of Connected Sets                                        129                         129                            129               129
                 (16) Number of Observations                                      181,493                     181,493                        181,493           181,493


     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in
     equation (10). The sample used is the Pharmaceuticals-Analysis Sample summarized in Table 1. Rows 1–3 show the s.d. of the bureaucrat, organization and connected
     set effects. Rows 4–8 show the components of the variance of prices across items, effectively weighting the estimates in rows 1–3 by the number of purchases they
     conduct. Column 1 uses the fixed effect estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Each observation is an item procured by an organization j
     and a bureaucrat indexed by b(i, j ). Column 3 shows estimates from randomly splitting the sample in half, stratifying by bureaucrat-organization pair and calculating
     the covariance across the two noisy estimates. Columns 2 and 4 show standard errors of the estimates in columns 1 and 3, respectively, estimated by bootstrapping
     100 times. Column 5 uses the bootstraps to estimate the sampling error in each bureaucrat effect s2b and each organization effect s2j , and the signal variances of the
                                              2        2                                                                                                     2     2
     bureaucrat and organization effects (σα     and σψ  respectively). The minimum-mean-squared error predictor for each bureaucrat effect is then [σ̂α       /(σ̂α  + s2b )] · α̂b ,
     where α̂b is the bureaucrat’s fixed effect from the decomposition in Column 1, and analogously for the organization effects. Column 6 shows our preferred estimates,
     which form predictions of the bureaucrat and organization effects that minimize the expected sum of the mean-squared errors of the predictionshand take into accounti
                                                                                                                                                                   0
     the covariance of the estimation errors, estimated from the bootstrapped estimates. Formally, the covariance shrinkage predictors solve minΛ E θ − Λθ̂ θ − Λθ̂
                                                                                                                                                                                  

     where θ̂ is the vector of estimated bureaucrat and organization fixed effects. All methods are described fully in Section 4.2.
                             TABLE 5: R OBUSTNESS TO U SING S UBSAMPLES OF I NCREASINGLY H ETEROGENEOUS G OODS


                                                                        Quintile 1   Quintiles 1–2    Quintiles 1–3   Quintiles 1–4    Quintiles 1–5    10-Digit Codes
      (1) s.d.   of Bur + Org Effects Within CS (across items)            0.466          0.487            0.581            0.660           0.674             0.573
      (2) s.d.   of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items)                0.488          0.561            0.614            0.644           0.735             0.629
      (3) s.d.   of log P                                                 1.092          1.592            1.801            1.960           2.084             2.043
      (4) s.d.   of log P | good, month                                   0.745          0.921            1.053            1.151           1.198             1.114
      (5) s.d. of Bur+Org Within Efs / s.d. of log P | good, month        0.626          0.529            0.551            0.573           0.563             0.515
50




      (6) s.d. of Bur+Org Total Efs / s.d. of log P | good, month         0.655          0.608            0.583            0.559           0.613             0.565
      (7) Sample Size                                                    713,366       1,244,778        1,860,274       2,461,987        2,960,786         4,227,349



     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in
     equation (10) (see notes to Table 3 for details). Column (6) uses the sub-sample consisting of all auctions for goods that our text analysis classification method is
     able to assign a 10-digit product code to. Column (5) uses the sub-set of the sample in Column (6) that we can match to the scope-for-quality-differentiation ladder
     developed by Sutton (1998). Column (4) removes the quintile with the highest scope-for-quality-differentiation according to the Sutton (1998) ladder, Column (3) the
     highest two quintiles, and so on.
     TABLE 6: B ID P REFERENCES FOR L OCALS I NCREASE D OMESTIC W INNERS W ITH L IMITED I MPACT ON P RICES OR PARTICIPATION


                                                                      All Products                                     Pharmaceuticals

                                                            Log Price          No. Bidders           Log Price         No. Bidders        Domestic Winner
                                                                (1)                  (2)                (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                log Standardized Quantity                     −0.308∗∗∗              0.043∗∗∗          −0.030∗∗∗             0.012∗∗∗              0.003∗∗∗
                                                               (0.016)               (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.004)               (0.001)

                Preferenced * Policy Active                   −0.019∗              −0.059∗             −0.026              −0.025                  0.049∗∗∗
                                                              (0.012)              (0.035)             (0.017)             (0.027)                (0.011)

                Constituent Terms                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
51




                Month, Good FEs                                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
                Year×Product×Size×Region FEs                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
                Outcome Mean                                   5.57                2.11                 6.22                1.89                  0.36
                Observations                                16,575,168          16,575,168            461,989             461,989               293,538
                R2                                            0.658               0.287                0.948               0.286                 0.735


     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 This table estimates the Intent to Treat (ITT) from equation (12): pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet + εigt . The
     With Bid Preferences samples summarized in columns (3) and (6) of Table 1 are used, i.e. the the combination of each Analysis Sample and the treated auctions that
     procurers therein carried out. Columns (1) and (3) estimate the ITT on the log price paid (P); columns (2) and (4) the ITT on the number of bidders participating in the
     auction (N); and Column (5) the ITT on an indicator for the winner supplying domestically made goods. In the All Products sample an item has Preferenced = 1 if
     the type of good appears on the list of goods covered by the preferences policy for that year. In the Pharmaceuticals sample, Preferenced = 1 if the drug purchased is
     made—by at least one supplier—both in Russia and abroad. Policy Active = 1 during the part of the relevant year that the preferences policy was in effect. Month and
     good fixed effects are included in all columns, as are interactions between 2-digit HS Product categories, years, region, and lot size. (We use “product” to distinguish
     the categories used in these interactions from the much more disaggregate goods categories used for the good fixed effects). Standard errors are clustered on month
     and good.
                  TABLE 7: B ID P REFERENCES ARE M ORE E FFECTIVE W HEN I MPLEMENTED BY L ESS E FFECTIVE B UREAUCRATS


                                                                              All Products                                    Pharmaceuticals

                                                                    Log Price          No. Bidders          Log Price          No. Bidders        Domestic Winner
                                                                        (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                   (5)
          log Standardized Quantity                                   −0.310∗∗∗              0.042∗∗∗          −0.027∗∗∗             0.008∗∗               0.003∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.016)               (0.003)           (0.003)              (0.003)               (0.001)

          Bureaucrat FE * Preferenced * Policy Active                 −0.120∗∗∗               0.070∗∗          −0.351∗∗∗             1.004∗∗∗              0.162∗∗
                                                                      (0.025)                (0.034)           (0.102)              (0.225)               (0.066)

          Organization FE * Preferenced * Policy Active               −0.083∗∗∗               0.014             0.029                0.476∗              −0.119∗∗
                                                                      (0.030)                (0.028)           (0.116)              (0.249)              (0.057)
52




          Constituent Terms                                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
          Month, Good FEs                                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
          Year×Product×Size×Region FEs                                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
          Outcome Mean                                                 5.57                2.11                 6.22               1.89                   0.36
          Observations                                              16,575,168          16,575,168            461,989             461,989               293,538
          R2                                                          0.664                0.293               0.950               0.302                 0.736




     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 This table estimates the triple-difference from equation (14): pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt + δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet +
     γPreferencedgt × α̂b + ζPreferencedgt × ψ̂j + ηPolicyActivet × α̂b + θPolicyActivet × ψ̂j + πPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × α̂b + νPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet ×
     ψ̂j + εigt . The With Bid Preferences samples summarized in columns (3) and (6) of Table 1 are used, i.e. the combination of each Analysis Sample and the treated
     auctions that procurers therein carried out. Columns (1) and (3) estimate the ITT on the log price paid (P); columns (2) and (4) the ITT on the number of bidders
     participating in the auction (N); and Column (5) the ITT on an indicator for the winner supplying domestically made goods. In the All Products sample an item has
     Preferenced = 1 if the type of good appears on the list of goods covered by the preferences policy for that year. In the Pharmaceuticals sample, Preferenced = 1 if the
     drug purchased is made—by at least one supplier—both in Russia and abroad. Policy Active = 1 during the part of the relevant year that the preferences policy was
     in effect. Bureaucrat and Organization FEs are the covariance-shrunk, estimated bureaucrat and organization effects from Section 4. Month and good fixed effects are
     included in all columns, as are interactions between 2-digit HS Product categories, years, region, and lot size. (We use “product” to distinguish the categories used in
     these interactions from the much more disaggregate goods categories used for the good fixed effects). Standard errors are clustered on month and good.
A     Appendix
A.1   Robustness of Event Study Design

In Appendix Figure A.1, we change a series of choices made in constructing the event studies discussed
in Sub-section 4.1: the length of time bureaucrats and organizations are required to work together to
be part of an event (the top four panels require, rather than two active weeks working together as in
Figure 2, two active days, two active fortnights, two active months, and three active weeks, respectively);
how coarsely we define effectiveness categories (Panel E categorizes bureaucrats by tercile rather than
quartile); and the sample based on which the cut-offs between the different categories are defined (Panel
F construct quartiles based on the entire sample period rather than each quarter separately). In each of
the panels, the patterns observed when an organization switches bureaucrats are very similar to those in
Figure 2.


A.2   Probing the log-linearity assumption

The model we have estimated assumes that the price achieved is approximately log-linear in the bureau-
crat and organization effects. A direct piece of evidence in support of the log-linearity assumption comes
from studying the distribution of the residuals across bureaucrat and organization effect deciles. If the
log-linear specification was substantially incorrect, we would expect to see systematic patterns in the
residuals. For example, positive match effects would lead the residuals to be large when the bureaucrat
and organization are both in the top deciles of effectiveness. Appendix Figure A.2 shows a heat map of
residuals for the analysis sample. The map reveals no clear patterns in the residuals. Appendix Figure
shows an analogous heat map of residuals from running (9) in levels rather than logs. The figure sug-
gests that such a model is mis-specified, leading to systematically large residuals especially in the top
right of the figure, where both the bureaucrat and organization are in the top deciles of effectiveness.
    As a further test of our log-linear model of prices, we reestimate equation (9) but include fixed ef-
fects for each bureaucrat-organization pair, allowing for arbitrary patterns of complementarity between
bureaucrats and organizations (see also Card et al. , 2013). If there are indeed strong or moderate match
effects that our model omits, then we expect this pair effect model to fit significantly better. The pair
effect model does not fit the data much better than our baseline model: adding pair effects decreases the
RMSE of the residuals from 1.139 to 1.112 and increases the R2 from 0.964 to 0.965, and the pair effects
have a much smaller variance than the procurer effects from the log-linear model (results available from
the authors upon request).
    Overall, we do not find evidence supporting a rejection of our log-linearity assumption.


A.3   Comparison to existing estimates of individuals’ and organizations’ effects on output

How do our results compare to existing estimates of the extent to which individuals and organizations
affect output in other settings? While we are not aware of comparable estimates of the causal effects of
workers and organizations on output in a low or middle-income country government context, several


                                                    53
studies are indirectly comparable. First, studying front-line service providers in rich countries, Chetty
et al. (2014b) find that increasing the performance of 5th percentile American grade 3-8 teachers to 50th
percentile would increase the present value of their students’ lifetime incomes by 2.76 percent, and Silver
(2016) finds that improving the performance of American emergency room doctors by one standard
deviation would decrease time-of-care by 11 percent. We find that the same (relative) improvement in
performance among Russian procurement officers would lower prices paid by 29.0 and 44.0 percent
respectively.57 However, teachers and doctors may differ from procurement officers in the complexity of
the job performed, motivations, and many other dimensions.
      Second, in studies of workers in the private sector performing a simpler task, Mas & Moretti (2009)
and Lacetera et al. (2016) find, respectively, that increasing performance by one standard deviation
would decrease cashier processing times in a U.S. supermarket chain and increase the probability of
cars being sold in U.S. used-car auctions by 11 and 4.3 percent, while in our case the improvement is
55.1 percent. Of course, in the public sector, output is less easily measured and monitored, and so we
expect greater scope for differences between bureaucrats. Bertrand & Schoar (2003) find that CEOs in
the top quartile of performance achieve a return-on-assets that is about 200 percent higher than CEOs in
the bottom quartile. In our context, bureaucrats in the bottom quartile save 72.1 percent relative to the
top quartile due solely to the bureaucrat effects.




 57
      We perform these calculations separately in each connected set and report the average, weighting by the number of items.


                                                              54
                                                          F IGURE A.1: R OBUSTNESS OF E VENT S TUDIES TO D ESIGN C HOICES

                                                PANEL A: D AYS AS E VENT T IME                                                                          PANEL B: F ORTNIGHTS AS E VENT T IME
                                        0.6                                                                                                              0.6
 Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                  Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price
                                        0.3                                                                                                              0.3




                                        0.0                                                                                                              0.0




                                       −0.3                                                                                                             −0.3




                                       −0.6                                                                                                             −0.6
                                              Day −1         Day 0                 Day 1           Day 2                                                       Ftn. −1             Ftn. 0                 Ftn. 1            Ftn. 2

                                                        Time (0 = last day with old bureaucrat)                                                                            Time (0 = last fortnight with old bureaucrat)

                                          PANEL C: M ONTHS AS E VENT T IME                                                                              PANEL D: B ALANCED PANEL ± 3 W EEKS
                                        0.6                                                                                                              0.6
 Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                  Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price
                                        0.3                                                                                                              0.3




                                        0.0                                                                                                              0.0




                                       −0.3                                                                                                             −0.3




                                       −0.6                                                                                                             −0.6
                                          Month −1          Month 0               Month 1          Month 2                                                     Week −2   Week −1      Week 0        Week 1         Week 2   Week 3

                                                       Time (0 = last month with old bureaucrat)                                                                            Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)

                                        PANEL E: C LASSIFYING B UREAUCRATS                                                                                        PANEL F: G LOBAL R ANKING OF
                                                   INTO T ERCILES                                                                                                        B UREAUCRATS
                                        0.6                                                                                                              0.6
 Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                  Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                        0.3                                                                                                              0.3




                                        0.0                                                                                                              0.0




                                       −0.3                                                                                                             −0.3




                                       −0.6                                                                                                             −0.6
                                          Week −1           Week 0                Week 1           Week 2                                                  Week −1                 Week 0                Week 1             Week 2

                                                       Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)                                                                              Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)

Each panel in the figure is analogous to Figure 2 (see notes to that figure for details of construction), with the following
changes. In Panel A, rather than requiring the bureaucrat-organization pair to work together in two separate weeks, we require
the pair to work together on two separate days. In Panel B, two separate fortnights; and in Panel C, two separate months.
In Panel D we require bureaucrat-organization pairs to work together in three separate weeks. In Panel E we categorize
bureaucrats by terciles rather than quartiles, and in Panel F we construct quartiles by ranking bureaucrats based on the entire
sample period rather than each semester separately.



                                                                                                             55
F IGURE A.2: C ORRELATION                                       OF   R ESIDUALS     WITH     E STIMATED B UREAUCRAT             AND   O RGANIZATION
E FFECTS

                                                         PANEL A: P RICES IN L OGS (M AIN S PECIFICATION )
                                                          20
                                                          19
                                                          18
                                                          17
                                                          16
                            Bureaucrat Effect Vingtile
                                                          15
                                                          14
                                                          13                                                        Mean
                                                          12                                                        Residuals
                                                          11                                                         0.2
                                                          10                                                         0.1
                                                           9                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                     −0.1
                                                           8                                                         −0.2
                                                           7
                                                           6
                                                           5
                                                           4
                                                           3
                                                           2
                                                           1
                                                               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

                                                                         Organization Effect Vingtile
                      PANEL B: P RICES IN L EVELS (I LLUSTRATING M ISSPECIFICATION )
                                                          20
                                                          19
                                                          18
                                                          17
                                                          16
                            Bureaucrat Effect Vingtile




                                                          15
                                                          14
                                                          13                                                        Mean
                                                          12                                                        Residuals
                                                          11                                                         20000
                                                          10                                                         10000
                                                           9                                                         0
                                                                                                                     −10000
                                                           8                                                         −20000
                                                           7
                                                           6
                                                           5
                                                           4
                                                           3
                                                           2
                                                           1
                                                               1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

                                                                         Organization Effect Vingtile


The figure presents heatmaps of averages of the residuals from the estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj +
γs(b,j ) + εi — in logs (Panel A) and in levels (Panel B). The residuals are binned by vingtiles of the estimated bureaucrat effect
α̂b and organization effect ψ̂j within each connected set. The sample used is the Analysis Sample (All Products) summarized
in Table 1.


                                                                                        56
OA       Online Appendix (For Web Publication Only)
OA.1     Proofs of Propositions

OA.1.1    Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. We begin by demonstrating that the entry probabilities are as given by (2). For the firms to be
indifferent between entering and not entering, equation (1) must hold. Solving the equation requires us
to derive expressions for E [bi ] and E [πi ]. The distribution of the bids is given by the bidding functions
bi = M /mi and the Pareto distributions of the markdowns mi : Gi (mi ) = 1 − m−δ
                                                                              i .
                                                                                 i



                                                                δi
                                                            M    b
                               Hi (b) ≡ P (bi ≤ b) = P mi ≥    =                                                          (OA.1)
                                                            b    M
                                                    RM
The expected bids are then simply E [bi ] =          0
                                                         bdHi (b) =          δi
                                                                           1 + δi M .
   To derive expected profits from the auction E [πi ] we begin by considering expected profits con-
ditional on a bidders fulfillment cost. Since the optimal bidding strategies are to bid the firm’s true
valuation, expected profits for a firm with valuation bi are
                                                                                 Z M
                    E [πi |bi ] = Ebj [bj − bi |bj > bi ] P (bj > bi ) =                  (bj − bi ) dHj (bj )
                                                                                     bi

                                                                            1
                                                                   δj
                                  δj                          bi
                              =        M − bi + bi                               ,                                        (OA.2)
                                1 + δj                        M           1 + δj

where the final equality follows by inserting (OA.1) and integrating. Now we can derive unconditional
expected profits by the law of iterated expectations:

                                                                                       1         1
                                              Z M                                                               
              E [πi ] = Ebi [E [πi |bi ]] =         E [πi |bi ] dHi (bi ) =                −                         M.   (OA.3)
                                              0                                      1 + δi 1 + δF + δL

Inserting these and the definition of the entry costs ci into (1) and rearranging yields (2).
   Turning to the expected prices, whenever neither or only one firm enters, the price is M . When both
enter, the price is the higher of the two bids.
                                                                                                 x  δF + δL
                    P (p ≤ x) = P (max{bF , bL } ≤ x) = HF (x) HL (x) =                                                   (OA.4)
                                                                                                 M

As a result, the distribution and expectation of the log price when both firms enter is

                                                          ex δF +δL
                                                              
                      P (log (p) ≤ x) = P (p ≤ ex ) =
                                                          M
                                                                                         1
                                         Z log(M )
                                                    δ F + δL
              E [log (p) | both enter] =           x δ +δ e(δF +δL )x dx = log (M ) −                                     (OA.5)
                                          −∞        M F L                             δF + δL

The expected log price is then simply E [log (p)] = qF qL E [log (p) | both enter] + (1 − qF qL ) log (M ). In-
serting (OA.5) and the entry probabilities qF and qL yields expression (3) in the proposition.

                                                              57
   The comparative statics on prices follow straightforwardly from equation (3). The comparative static
on the number of bidders follows straightforwardly from noting that the expected number of entrants is
qF + qL .


OA.1.2      Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. Consider the three cases in proposition 2 in turn.


Buyers with αc + ψc ≤ c. In this case, both bidders enter the auction with certainty. Entering the
auction is a best response to the other bidder entering whenever E [πi |γ ] − ci > 0. Expected profits are
lower for bidder F and participation costs cF are higher, so bidder F is the pivotal bidder for this case.
Integrating bidder F ’s expected profits conditional on her bid (4) over all bids,

                                                                                              1           1
                       Z M                                                                                        
    E [πF |γ < 1] =          E [πF |bF , γ < 1] dHF (bF |γ < 1) = γ 1+δF M                        −                    (OA.6)
                        0                                                                  1 + δF   1 + δ F + δL

Setting (OA.6) equal to cF and rearranging yields the definition of c in the proposition. Since c <
              2
1 − 1+1δ+Fδ+LδL , both bidders enter the auction with or without the preferences and so participation
is unchanged.
   Since bidding behavior has changed, the expected price in the auction has changed. There are three
possibilities:                                  
                                                bF
                                                
                                                              if bL < bF < M ,
                                                
                                           p=     M            if bL < M ≤ bF ,
                                                
                                                               if bF ≤ bL .
                                                
                                                
                                                γb
                                                         L

Combining these the distribution of prices is given by
                       
                                                           hL (bL ) dbL hF (bF ) dbF if 0 ≤ x ≤ γM ,
                                               R x/γ R x/γ
                       
                       
                        HF (x) HL (x/γ ) + x         bF
                       
            P (p ≤ x) = HF (x) + x b hL (bL ) dbL hF (bF ) dbF                       if γM < x < M ,
                                    RM RM
                                          F
                       1
                       
                                                                                     if x = M
                       
                                                  
                            δL
                                 γ −δF −δL + δFδ+FδL HF (x) HL (x) if 0 ≤ x ≤ γM ,
                        δF + δL
                       
                       
                      = δ δ+Lδ γ δF + δ δ+Fδ HF (x) HL (x)
                         F   L         F   L
                                                                         if γM < x < M ,
                       1
                       
                       
                                                                         if x = M

In turn, the distribution of log prices is given by
                                                                             
                                                                                 e x δF + δL
                                          δL
                                                γ −δL +           δF      δF                   if − ∞ < x ≤ log (γM ) ,
                                                                                    
                                                                δF + δL γ
                                      
                                       δF + δL                                  M
                                      
                                      
  P (log (p) ≤ x) = P (p ≤ ex ) =         δL        δF         δF      δF   e x δF + δL
                                                                                               if log (γM ) < x < log (M ) ,
                                                                               
                                       δF + δL γ        +   δF + δL γ      M
                                      1                                                       if x = log (M )
                                      
                                      




                                                                58
making the expected log price in the auction
                                     Z log(γM )                                            Z log(M )
         E [log (p) |both enter] =                δL γ −δL +δF γ δF
                                                      M δF + δL
                                                                      xe(δF +δL )x dx +              M
                                                                                                      δF γ δF
                                                                                                       δF +δL xe
                                                                                                                 ( δF + δL ) x
                                                                                                                               dx
                                      −∞                                                    log(γM )

                                     + [1 − HF (M )] log (M )
                                                γ δF 1 − log γ δL
                                                                           
                                   = log (M ) −                                 .                                               (OA.7)
                                                      δF + δL

Comparing (OA.7) to the expected price without preferences (OA.5), prices rise as long as assumption 1
holds.
   Finally, the probability that the local bidder wins the auction when there are no preferences is
                                             Z M
                                                                                                            δL
           P (L wins) = P (bL < bF ) =                HL (bF |γ = 1) dHF (bF |γ = 1) = 1 −                        ,             (OA.8)
                                              0                                                          δF + δ L

while when there are preferences this increases to
                                              Z M
                                                                                                                   δL
    P (L wins) = P (bL < bF |γ < 1) =                   HL (bF |γ < 1) dHF (bF |γ < 1) = 1 − γ δF                       .       (OA.9)
                                                  0                                                            δ F + δL

Buyers with c < αc + ψc ≤ c̄.         This case occurs when bidder L finds it worthwhile to enter the auction
with certainty and bidder F ’s best response is to remain out of the auction with certainty. That is, when
E [πF |γ ] − cF < 0 and E [πL |γ ] − cL > 0. In this case, since only L enters, the price is M with certainty,
which is higher than in the absence of preferences since in the absence of preferences the auction always
takes place with positive probability. Participation is therefore also lower, and since bidder L now wins
with certainty, the probability that bidder L wins has increased.
   The threshold c is defined in the previous case as the solution to E [πL |γ ] − cL = 0. To find the upper
threshold c̄, we require an expression for E [πL |γ ]:

                                                                                           1       γ δF
                           Z M                                                                                   
         E [πL |γ < 1] =         E [πL |bL , γ < 1] dHL (bL |γ < 1) = M                       −                       .        (OA.10)
                           0                                                            1 + δL 1 + δ F + δ L

Setting (OA.10) equal to cL and rearranging yields the definition of c in the proposition.


Buyers with c̄ < αc + ψc . This case occurs when neither bidder finds it optimal to enter with certainty:
E [πi |γ ] − ci < 0 ∀i and so the equilibrium is in mixed strategies. As in proposition 1, the entry probabil-
ities are given by
                                                       M − E [M /mj ] − cj
                                           qi =                                   .
                                                      M − E [bj ] − E [πj |γ < 1]
In this case the expected price is given by

                       E [log (p)] = log (M ) − qF qL (log (M ) − E [log (p) |both enter])




                                                                59
Inserting the entry probabilities and the price equation (OA.7) and rearranging, the expected price when
there are preferences is lower whenever

                    qF (γ < 1) qL (γ < 1) (log (M ) − E [log (p) |both enter, γ < 1])
                   −qF (γ = 1)qL (γ = 1) (log (M ) − E [log (p) |both enter, γ = 1]) ≥ 0
                                                                δL               
                                          ⇐⇒ − log γ δL −               1 − γ 1 + δF ≥ 0                 (OA.11)
                                                               1 + δF

Noting that (OA.11) holds with equality when γ = 1 and that the left hand side of (OA.11) has slope
−δL γ −1 − γ δF < 0 ∀γ < 1 shows that (OA.11) holds for all γ < 1. Participation in the auction is
               

E [N ] = qF + qL . When there are no preferences

                                                                        1 + δF + δL p
                  E [N |γ = 1] = qF (γ = 1) + qL (γ = 1) = 2                          1 − αc − ψc ,      (OA.12)
                                                                           1 + δL

while with preferences participation is

       E [N |γ < 1] = qF (γ < 1) + qL (γ < 1)
                            1                 1                            1 + δF + δL p
                                                                       !
                    =            +                                                       1 − αc − ψc .   (OA.13)
                           γ δ F
                                   γ F + (1 − γ 1+δF ) 1+1δ+Fδ+FδL
                                    1 + δ                                     1 + δL

Comparing (OA.12) to (OA.13) shows that participation increases whenever

                                        1                    1
                                            +                                   >2                       (OA.14)
                                       γ δF   1+     δL
                                                   δF + δL   ( 1 − γ 1 + δF )

Equation (OA.14) is implied by assumption 2. Finally, to see that the probability that bidder L wins
the contract at auction increases by more than in case 1 note that the probability that bidder L wins
the contract is given by qF qL P (bF < bL ). The probability that bidder L wins will increase by more if
qF (γ = 1) qL (γ = 1) < qF (γ < 1) qL (γ < 1). Computing the components of this

                qF ( γ   = 1)   M − E [M /mL ] − E [πL |γ < 1]
                              =                                = γ δF
                qF ( γ   < 1)   M − E [M /mL ] − E [πL |γ = 1]
                qL ( γ   = 1)   M − E [M /mF ] − E [πF |γ < 1]          δL               
                              =                                = 1+          1 − γ 1 + δF
                qL ( γ   < 1)   M − E [M /mF ] − E [πF |γ = 1]        1 + δF

Combining these two components shows that the statement is correct as long as assumption 2 holds.


OA.2    Identification of Bureaucrat and Organization Effects with Multiple Connected Sets

As shown in Abowd et al. (2002), it isn’t possible to identify all the bureaucrat and organization effects.
In particular, they show that (a) the effects are identified only within connected sets of bureaucrats and
organizations; and (b) within each connected set s containing Nb,s bureaucrats and No,s organizations,
only the group mean of the lhs variable, and Nb,s − 1 + No,s − 1 of the bureaucrat and organization


                                                        60
effects are identified. More generally, within each connected set, we can identify Nb,s + No,s − 1 linear
combinations of the bureaucrat and organization effects.
   To see this explicitly, write the model as

                                                   p = Xβ + Bα + Fψ                                     (OA.15)

   where p is the N × 1 vector of item prices; X is an N × k matrix of control variables, B is the N × Nb
design matrix indicating the bureaucrat responsible for each purchase; α is the Nb × 1 vector of bureau-
crat effects; F is the N × No design matrix indicating the organization responsible for each purchase; and
ψ is the No × 1 vector of organization effects.
   Suppressing Xβ for simplicity, the OLS normal equations for this model are
                                 "         #                 "            #       "        #
                                      B0       h         i       α̂OLS                B0
                                                   B F                        =                 p       (OA.16)
                                      F0                         ψ̂ OLS               F0

As Abowd et al. (2002) show, these equations do not have a unique solution because [B F]0 [B F] only
has rank Nb + No − Ns , where Ns is the number of connected sets. As a result, to identify a particular
solution to the normal equations, we need Ns additional restrictions on the αs and ψs.
   Abowd et al. (2002) add Ns restrictions setting the mean of the person effects to 0 in each connected
set. They also set the grand mean of the firm effects to 0. However, this makes it difficult to compare
across connected sets since all the firm effects are interpreted as deviations from the grand mean, which
is a mean across connected sets. Instead, we will add 2Ns restrictions setting the mean of the bureaucrat
and organization effects to 0 within each connected set. These Ns additional constraints also allow us
to identify S connected set means γs = ᾱs + ψ̄s which facilitate comparison across connected sets and
allow us to interpret the variances of the estimated bureaucrat and organization effects as lower bounds
on the true variances of the bureaucrat and organization effects.
   Specifically, we augment the model to be

                                           p = Xβ + Bα̃ + Fψ̃ + Sγ                                      (OA.17)

where S is the N × Ns design matrix indicating which connected set each item belongs to; γ is the Ns × 1
vector of connected set effects; and we add the restriction that α̃ and ψ̃ have mean zero in each connected
set. Our fixed effects estimates thus solve the normal equations of this augmented model, plus 2Ns zero-
mean restrictions:
                                 B0                                                        B0
                                                                                             
                                     h      i 
                             0                      0 
                             F  B F S  α̂             F p
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                               
                                 0                          S0
                               S               ψ̂  =                                                (OA.18)
                                                                                                 
                              "          #                                                         
                                   Sb 0 0     γ̂            0
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
                                   0 So 0                    0
where Sb is the Ns × Nb design matrix indicating which connected set each bureaucrat belongs to, and
So is the Ns × No design matrix indicating which connected set each organization belongs to.

                                                                 61
   The following proposition describes the relationship between these estimators and the bureaucrat
and organization effects.

Proposition 3 (Identification). If the true model is given by (OA.15), then α̂, ψ̂, and γ̂, the estimators of α̃,
ψ̃ and γ in the augmented model (OA.17) that solve the augmented normal equations (OA.18) (i) are uniquely
identified, and (ii) are related to the true bureaucrat and organization effects α and ψ by

                                                             α − Sb 0 α
                                                                       
                                                α̂
                                             ψ̂  =  ψ − So 0 ψ                                       (OA.19)
                                                               

                                              γ̂        α+ψ

where α is the Ns × 1 vector of connected-set bureaucrat effect means, and ψ is the Ns × 1 vector of connected-set
organization effect means.

Proof. We will prove each part of the result separately. To see uniqueness, first note that the standard
normal equations for (OA.17) only has rank Nb + No − Ns . To see this, we note that BSb 0 = FSo 0 = S and
so 2Ns columns of the N × (Nb + No + Ns ) matrix [B F S] are collinear. However, the 2Ns restrictions
Sb α̂ = 0 and So ψ̂ = 0 are independent of the standard normal equations, so the first matrix in (OA.18)
has rank Nb + No + Ns and hence the solution to (OA.18) is unique.
   To see the second part, it suffices to show that (OA.19) solves (OA.18). First, substitute the estimators
out of (OA.18) using (OA.19) and substitute in the true model using (OA.15) to rewrite (OA.18) as

                 B0                                                                     B0
                                                                                              

             F  B (α − S b 0 α) + F ψ − S o 0 ψ + S α + ψ
             0                                                            0 
                                                                                 F  [Bα + Fψ ]
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  
           
              S0                                                             =
                                                                                  S0               
                                                                                                     
                               S b (α − S b 0 α)                                         0
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                              So ψ − So 0 ψ
                                               
                                                                                         0

From here, noting again that BSb 0 = FSo 0 = S; that Sb α is an Ns × 1 vector in which each entry is the
sum of the bureaucrat effects; and that So ψ is an Ns × 1 vector in which each entry is the sum of the
organization effects, shows that the two sides are equal, yielding the result.


OA.3     Details on Text Analysis

This appendix provides some of the details of the procedure we use to categorize procurement purchases
into groups of homogeneous products. We proceed in three steps. First, we transform the raw product
descriptions in our data into vectors of word tokens to be used as input data in the subsequent steps.
Second, we develop a transfer learning procedure to use product descriptions and their corresponding
Harmonized System product codes in data on the universe of Russian imports and exports to train a
classification algorithm to assign product codes to product descriptions. We then apply this algorithm
to the product descriptions in our procurement data. Third, for product descriptions that are not suc-
cessfully classified in the second step, either because the goods are non-traded, or because the product


                                                         62
description is insufficiently specific, we develop a clustering algorithm to group product descriptions
into clusters of similar descriptions.
       Once our data is grouped into products, we create our main outcome of interest–unit prices—in three
steps. First, we standardize all units to be in SI units (e.g. convert all lengths to meters). Second, for each
good, we keep only the most frequent standardized units i.e. if a good is usually purchased by weight
and sometimes by volume, we keep only purchases by weight. Third, we drop the top and bottom 5%
of the unit prices for each good since in some cases the number of units purchased is off by an order
of magnitude spuriously creating very large or very small unit prices due to measurement error in the
quantity purchased.


OA.3.1      Preparing Text Data

The first step of our procedure ‘tokenizes’ the sentences that we will use as inputs for the rest of the pro-
cedure. We use two datasets of product descriptions. First, we use the universe of customs declarations
on imports and exports to & from Russia in 2011–2013. Second, we use the product descriptions in our
procurement data described in Subsection 2.4. Each product description is parsed in the following way,
using the Russian libraries for Python’s Natural Language Toolkit58

   1. Stop words are removed that are not core to the meaning of the sentence, such as “the”, “and”, and
         “a”.

   2. The remaining words are lemmatized, converting all cases of the same word into the same ‘lemma’
         or stem. For example, ‘potatoes’ become ‘potato’.

   3. Lemmas two letters or shorter are removed.

We refer to the result as the tokenized sentence. For example the product description “NV-Print Cartridge
for the Canon LBP 2010B Printer” would be broken into the following tokens: [cartridge, NV-Print,
printer, Canon, LBP, 3010B].      59   Similarly, the product description “sodium bicarbonate - solution for
infusion 5%,200ml” would result in the following tokens: [sodium, bicarbonate, solution, infusion, 5%,
200ml].60


OA.3.2      Classification

In the second step of our procedure we train a classification algorithm to label each of the sentences in
the customs data with one of the HC labels in the set of labels in the customs dataset, HC . To prepare
our input data, each of the NC tokenized sentences ti in the customs dataset is transformed into a vector
  58
     Documentation on the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) can be found at http://www.nltk.org/
 59
     The original Russian text reads as “картридж NV-Print для принтера Canon LBP 3010B” with the following set of
Russian tokens: [картридж, NV-Print, принтер, Canon, LBP, 3010B].
  60
     The original Russian text reads as “натрия гидрокарбонат - раствор для инфузий 5%,200мл” with the set of Russian
tokens as: [натрия, гидрокарбонат, раствор, инфузия, 5%, 200мл].




                                                         63
of token indicators and indicators for each possible bi-gram (word-pair), denoted by xi ∈ XC .61 Each
sentence also has a corresponding good classification gi ∈ GC , so we can represent our customs data as
the pair {XC , gC } and we seek to find a classifier ĝC (x) : XC → HC that assigns every text vector x to a
product code.
       As is common in the literature, rather than solving this multiclass classification problem in a single
step, we pursue a “one-versus-all” approach and reduce the problem of choosing among G possible
good classifications to GC binary choices between a single good and all other goods, and then combine
them (Rifkin & Klautau, 2004). We do this separately for each 2-digit product category. Each of the GC
binary classification algorithms generates a prediction pg (xi ), for whether sentence i should be classified
as good g. We then classify each sentence as the good with the highest predicted value:

                                                    ĝC (xi ) = arg max pg (xi )                                         (OA.20)
                                                                       g∈GC


       Each binary classifier is a logistic regression solving

                                                  1   NC
                                                           1                                
                                        min           ∑        ln   1 + e−ygi ·(wg ·xi +ag )
                                                                                                                         (OA.21)
                                                 NC   i=1 ln 2
                                        wg ,ag


where                                                       
                                                            1         if gi = g
                                                    ygi =
                                                            −1 otherwise

The minimands ŵg and âg are then used to compute pg (xi ) = ŵg · xi + âg with which the final classifi-
cation is formed using equation (OA.20). We implement this procedure using the Vowpal Wabbit library
for Python.62 This simple procedure is remarkably effective; when trained on a randomly selected half
of the customs data and then implemented on the reamining data for validation, the classifications are
correct 95% of the time. Given this high success rate without regularization, we decided not to try and
impose a regularization penalty to improve out of sample fit. We also experimented with two additional
types of classifiers. First, we trained a linear support vector machine with a hinge loss function.63 That
is, a classifier that solves

                                                1   NC
                                       min          ∑ max {0, 1 − ygi · (wg · xi + ag )}                                 (OA.22)
                                      wg ,ag   NC   i=1

       Second, we trained a set of hierarchical classifiers exploiting the hierarchical structure of the HS
product classification. Each classifier is a sequence of sub-classifiers. The first sub-classifier predicts
which 4-digit HS code corresponds to the text. Then, within each 4-digit code, the next classifier predicts
  61
     The customs entry “Electric Table Lamps Made of Glass" is transformed into the set of tokens: [electric, table, lamp, glass].
The original Russian reads as “лампы электрические настольные из стекла” and the tokens as: [электрический, настоль-
ный, ламп, стекло].
  62
     See http://hunch.net/~vw/.
  63
     A description of the support vector loss function (hinge loss), which estimates the mode of the posterior class probabilities,
can be found in Friedman et al. (2013, 427)



                                                                  64
                           TABLE OA.1: E XAMPLE C LASSIFICATION - E NGLISH

     Contract ID    Law      Product Description              HS10       Example Import Entries
                                                              Code
     5070512        94FZ     folder, file, Erich, Krause,     3926100000 product, office, made of,
                             Standard, 3098, green                       plastic
     15548204       44FZ     cover, plastic, clear            3926100000 office, supply, made of,
                                                                         plastic, kids, school, age,
                                                                         quantity
     16067065       44FZ     folder, plastic                  3926100000 supply, office, cover, plastic,
                                                                         book
     18267299       44FZ     folder, plastic, Brauberg        3926100000 collection, office, desk, indi-
                                                                         vidual, plastic, packaging,
                                                                         retail, sale


the corresponding 6-digit code, etc, until the last classifier that predicts the full 10-digit code within each
8-digit category. Our main analysis of section 4.3 presented in figure 2 and table 3 is repeated using these
alternative classifiers in figure OA.1 panels C and D and in table OA.11. As they show, the results are
remarkably robust to these alternative classification methods.
   Having trained the algorithm on the customs dataset, we now want to apply it to the procurement
dataset wherever possible. This is known as transfer learning (see, for example Torrey & Shavlik (2009)).
Following the terminology of Pang & Yang (2010), our algorithm ĝC performs the task TC = {HC , gC (·)}
learning the function gC (·) that maps from observed sentence data X to the set of possible customs
labels GC . The algorithm was trained in the domain DC = {XC , F (X )} where F (X) is the probability
distribution of X. We now seek to transfer the algorithm to the domain of the procurement dataset,
DB = {XB , F (X)} so that it can perform the task TB = {HB , gB (·)}. Examples of the classification
outcomes can be found in Tables OA.1 (translated into English) and OA.2 (in the original Russian). The
three columns on the left present the tokens from the descriptions of goods in the procurement data,
along with an identifying contract number and the federal law under which they were concluded. The
columns on the right indicate the 10-digit HS code (‘13926100000 - Office or school supplies made of
plastics’) that was assigned to all four of the goods using the machine learning algorithm. In addition,
we present the tokenized customs entries that correspond to this 10 digit HS code.
   The function to be learned and the set of possible words used are unlikely to differ between the
two domains—A sentence that is used to describe a ball bearing in the customs data will also describe
a ball bearing in the procurement data—so XC = XB , and hC (·) = hB (·). The two key issues that
we face are first, that the likelihoods that sentences are used are different in the two samples so that
F (X)C 6= F (X)B . This could be because, for example, the ways that importers and exporters describe
a given good differs from the way public procurement officials and their suppliers describe that same
good. In particular, the procurement sentences are sometimes not as precise as those used in the trade
data. The second issue is that the set of goods that appear in the customs data differs from the goods in
the procurement data so that HC 6= HB . This comes about because non-traded goods will not appear in
the customs data, but may still appear in the procurement data.


                                                      65
                               TABLE OA.2: E XAMPLE C LASSIFICATION - R USSIAN

        Contract ID     Law        Product Description                        HS10       Example Import Entries
                                                                              Code
        5070512         94FZ       Папка,   файл,    Erich,                   3926100000 изделие, канцелярский, из-
                                   Krause, Standard, 3098,                               готовленный, пластик
                                   зелёная
        15548204        44FZ       Обложка,   пластиковый,                    3926100000 канцелярский,      принад-
                                   прозрачный                                            лежность, изготовленный,
                                                                                         пластик, дети, школьный,
                                                                                         возрасть, количество
        16067065        44FZ       Скоросшиватель, пласти-                    3926100000 принадлежность,       кан-
                                   ковый                                                 целярский,       закладка,
                                                                                         пластиковый, книга
        18267299        44FZ       Скоросшиватель, пласти-                    3926100000 набор,      канцелярский,
                                   ковый, Brauberg                                       настольный,     индивиду-
                                                                                         альный, пластмассовый,
                                                                                         упаковка,      розничный,
                                                                                         продажа


       To deal with these issues, we identify the sentences in the procurement data that are unlikely to
have been correctly classified by ĥC and instead group them into goods using the clustering procedure
described in section OA.3.3 below. We construct 2 measures of the likelihood that a sentence is correctly
classified. First, the predicted value of the sentence’s classification ĝC (xi ) as defined in (OA.20). Second,
the similarity between the sentence and the average sentence with the sentence’s assigned classification
in the customs data used to train the classifier.
       To identify outlier sentences, we take the tokenized sentences that have been labeled as good g,
tg = {ti : ĝC (xi ) = g} and transform them into vectors of indicators for the tokens vgi .64 For each good,
we then calculate the mean sentence vector in the customs data as vC   g = ∑vgi ,xi ∈XC vgi / |tg |. Then,
to identify outlier sentences in the procurement data, we calculate each sentence’s normalized cosine
similarity with the good’s mean vector,

                                                               s̄g − s (vgi , vg )
                                                     θgi =                                                                (OA.23)
                                                                       s̄g
                                                                      Kg
                                                                     ∑k=1 tgik tgk
where s (vgi , vg ) ≡ cos (vgi , vg ) =
                                               vgi vg
                                             kvgi kkvg k   =   q
                                                                    Kg 2
                                                                            q
                                                                                Kg
                                                                                         is the cosine similarity of the sentence
                                                                   ∑k=1 tgik ∑k=1 t2gk
vector vgi with its good mean vg ,65 Kg is the number of tokens used in descriptions of good g, and
s̄g = ∑i=g 1 s (vgi , vg ) is the mean of good g’s sentence cosine similarities. We deemed sentences to be
           |t |

correctly classified if their predicted value ĝC (xi ) was above the median and their normalized cosine
  64
     Note that these vectors differ from the inputs xi to the classifier in two ways. First, they are specific to a certain good, and
second, they omit bigrams of the tokens
  65
     Note that the cosine similarity ranges from 0 to 1, with 0 being orthogonal vectors and 1 indicating vectors pointing in the
same direction.



                                                                     66
similarity θgi was above the median. Figure OA.1 panels A and B and Table OA.12 show the robustness
of our results to using the 45th or 55th percentile as thresholds.


OA.3.3    Clustering

The third step of our procedure takes the misclassified sentences from the classification step and groups
them into clusters of similar sentences. We will then use these clusters as our good classification for
this group of purchases. To perform this clustering we use the popular K-means method. This method
groups the tokenized sentences into k clusters by finding a centroid ck for each cluster to minimize the
sum of squared distances between the sentences and their group’s centroid. That is, it solves

                                                   N
                                            min ∑ kf (c, ti ) − ti k2                                   (OA.24)
                                              c
                                                   i=1

where f (c, ti ) returns the closest centroid to ti . To speed up the clustering on our large dataset we im-
plemented the algorithm by mini-batch k-means. Mini-batch k means iterates over random subsamples
(in our case of size 500) to minimize computation time. In each iteration, each sentence is assigned to
it’s closest centroid, and then the centroids are updated by taking a convex combination of the sentence
and its centroid, with a weight on the sentence that converges to zero as the algorithm progresses (see
Sculley (2010) for details).
   The key parameter choice for the clustering exercise is k, the number of clusters to group the sen-
tences into. As is common in the literature, we make this choice using the silhouette coefficient. For each
sentence, its silhouette coefficient is given by

                                                         b (i) − a (i)
                                           η (i) =                                                      (OA.25)
                                                       max {b (i) , a (i)}

where a (i) is the average distance between sentence i and the other sentences in the same cluster, and
b (i) is the average distance between sentence i and the sentences in the nearest cluster to sentence i’s
cluster. A high value of the silhouette coefficient indicates that the sentence is well clustered: it is close to
the sentences in its cluster and far from the sentences in the nearest cluster. We start by using a k of 300
for each 2-digit product categories. For 2-digit product categories with an average silhouette coefficient
larger than the overall average silhouette coefficient, we tried k ∈ {250, 200, 150, 100, 50, 25, 10, 7} while
for product categories with a lower than average silhouette coefficient we tried k ∈ {350, 400, 450, 500, 550,
600, 650, 700, 750, 800, 850, 900, 950, 1000} until the average silhouette score was equalized across 2-digit
product codes.




                                                          67
OA.4      Additional Figures and Tables

F IGURE OA.1: R OBUSTNESS OF E VENT S TUDIES TO A LTERNATIVE T EXT C LASSIFIERS , C LASSIFICA -
TION A CCURACY T HRESHOLDS , AND O UTLIER T RIMMING



                PANEL A: C LASSIFIER A CCURACY                                                                                   PANEL B: C LASSIFIER A CCURACY
                 T HRESHOLD 45 TH P ERCENTILE                                                                                     T HRESHOLD 55 TH P ERCENTILE
                                                   0.6                                                                                                         0.6
            Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                        Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price
                                                   0.3                                                                                                         0.3




                                                   0.0                                                                                                         0.0




                                                  −0.3                                                                                                        −0.3




                                                  −0.6                                                                                                        −0.6
                                                     Week −1        Week 0                Week 1          Week 2                                                 Week −1        Week 0                Week 1          Week 2

                                                               Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)                                                                    Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)


                                                         PANEL C: S UPPORT V ECTOR                                      PANEL D: H IERARCHICAL M ODEL
                                                           M ACHINE C LASSIFIER                                                   C LASSIFIER
                                                   0.6                                                                                                         0.6
            Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                        Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                   0.3                                                                                                         0.3




                                                   0.0                                                                                                         0.0




                                                  −0.3                                                                                                        −0.3




                                                  −0.6                                                                                                        −0.6
                                                     Week −1        Week 0                Week 1          Week 2                                                 Week −1        Week 0                Week 1          Week 2

                                                               Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)                                                                    Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)


                                                    PANEL E: D ROPPING T OP
                                                   AND B OTTOM 2.5% O UTLIERS
                                                   0.6
            Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                   0.3




                                                   0.0




                                                  −0.3




                                                  −0.6
                                                     Week −1        Week 0                Week 1          Week 2

                                                               Time (0 = last week with old bureaucrat)




Each panel in the figure is analogous to Figure 2 (see notes to that figure for details of construction), with the following changes.
In Panel A, rather than requiring the bureaucrat-organization pair to work together in two separate weeks, we require the pair
to work together on two separate days. In Panel B, two separate fortnights; and in Panel C, two separate months. In Panel D
we require bureaucrat-organization pairs to work together in three separate weeks. In Panel E we categorize bureaucrats by
terciles rather than quartiles, and in Panel F we construct quartiles by ranking bureaucrats based on the entire sample period
rather than each semester separately.



                                                                                                                   68
     F IGURE OA.2: E VENT S TUDY OF P ROCUREMENT P RICES A ROUND T IMES B UREAUCRATS AND O RGANIZATIONS S WITCH G OODS


                                                           PANEL A: B UREAUCRATS S WITCHING G OODS                                                    PANEL B: O RGANIZATIONS S WITCHING G OODS
                    Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price




                                                                                                                    Average Quality−Adjusted Unit Price
                                                           1                                                                                               1




                                                           0                                                                                               0
69




                                                          −1
                                                                                                                                                          −1


                                                           Week −1     Week 0                 Week 1       Week 2                                          Week −1    Week 0                 Week 1       Week 2

                                                                      Time (0 = last week with old good)                                                             Time (0 = last week with old good)




     Each panel in the figure is analogous to Figure 2 that studies price changes around the time that organizations switch the bureaucrat making their purchases (see
     notes to that figure for details of construction). Panel A shows price changes around the time that bureaucrats switch the good they are purchasing. Panel B shows
     price changes around the time that organizations switch the good they are purchasing.
            F IGURE OA.3: C ORRELATION M ATRIX FOR VARIABLES P REDICTING E FFECTIVE B UREAUCRATS AND O RGANIZATIONS




                                                                                                                                 (M ula e)
                                                                                                                           un m ) lativ

                                                                                                                                          th e)
                                                                            Bu mb on Apsing f Auons Ru un tive e)
                                                                                                                                            cts




                                                                                                                                     on tiv
                                                                                                                        R la tiv




                                                                                                                                      m s)
                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                            1[Pder se on M in atio rt] ion ion cy]




                                                                                                                                         e)
                                                                                                                                    m )
                                                                            C sto ucraf Bid ] nts s / ns (C onthmu
                                                                            1[Cmis er − r w Re preidde ial ata ] ] tra




                                                                                                                                 olu on
                                                                                                                                 lu ns
                                                                                                                                    es ]




                                                                                                                                  u ula




                                                                                                                                       e)
                                                                                                                                         ]
                                                                                    pli er Or s ts e R rvic es




                                                                                                                                        ]
                                                                            1[Amb e o ng mb of Aucti ctio ] Cumum )
                                                                                        Ex m e on in ] ts ncy




                                                                                                                                       s




                                                                                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                       ]




                                                                            Sh up er A is novin Rts ( plo (Vo tio e) )]




                                                                                                                                   ata
                                                                            N era n L t N lue of Af A str n ( (C onth
                                                                            Su us ce is idu Finntr ms n DOE acts
                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                            n ion or ge ]




                                                                            C rea r o eld lic Bid ctio Ru (M(Cu




                                                                            Bu oner o f Dary] g Inte r] (Vo ctio




                                                                            N ur of r wodu 2−Tra on] n (Vucti
                                                                                    pli g Re e u log ye lu ns ]
                                                                            1[Sppli lie Tu ers sse Em en (Au olu ons
                                                                            1[Eare er − Un sin in tio vis p t A ces
                                                                            Fe o a A rk iz po e e nty e




                                                                                                                                   ic




                                                                            1[S re e e g r ( sla ) e m )]
                                                                            Ad ppli m om ntr l B an ct D ataata Co




                                                                            Av ctioucrat V lue er oFor s R Ru (M th)




                                                                                                                                od
                                                                            Su ur. Bo ought P in s De ts ta]
                                                                                                                                rts




                                                                                                                           (lo ]
                                                                              −h iz t o an S R R u g




                                                                                                                               g)




                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                               ati




                                                                                                                        R u
                                                                                                                        Se rv




                                                                                                                        s e)
                                                                                                                               m




                                                                                                                               e
                                                                            G us er − is ork on Vete rge xpo ]
                                                                            In ganucra r w rg in me me Co nt A




                                                                                                                                ]
                                                                                                                           Bid




                                                                            1[Bare mf Pr iqu in n cati ation (A
                                                                                                                  e n u
                                                                            1[Ctan lie div sin C sto ati m S ontr




                                                                            Aureaucr t V mb in tionons Ru Mon
                                                                            Su up er − idd l A r o t O en n (Vucti]
                                                                                                                              s




                                                                            1[Cse P es que ingBid ure ct C
                                                                            1[Bur. . Boug ork er] der ort du Da




                                                                                                                           ata
                                                                                                                              r




                                                                            R e / Re is r ult odu on]
                                                                            1[Sppli of To mb duct O ften (A es




                                                                            Supplier Vrofi t Prer] der Proe] nu
                                                                            1[S us nm r wrc. Cral Natu ry Se




                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                               pli tio (A
                                                                                                                             n
                                                                            Shpplier − Misork niz Tele m enou
                                                                            1[Cppli lie r w iza in Em n m Eice




                                                                                                                        fits




                                                                              um ly e o n t S n ti ]
                                                                                                                          ts




                                                                                                                    s tio
                                                                                                       t ate ent]




                                                                                                                        sti
                                                                                                                           ]




                                                                                                                        ip
                                                                                                                        e]
                                                                                                                        ic




                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                         e
                                                                            1[Cus sio Pe ork gionneurs Data]




                                                                                                                         c




                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                            e u n




                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                   g g
                                                                                                                         ]
                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                            p o n
                                                                                                            o m s




                                                                                                                        g




                                                                                                                  r ti
                                                                                                                        c




                                                                                                                        s
                                                                            D up of Missin C gis from C




                                                                                                                      uc




                                                                                                           up tra on




                                                                            Sh user o Unork atio du entratio
                                                                            Su up m ganork in ctio fro erv




                                                                                                                        ]
                                                                                                                   a y




                                                                            Supplier P Neppli Bidpor enu ev




                                                                            Bureaucrat N ork Aucuctions n (




                                                                            1[E us m anizner t Conce rsh




                                                                                 up m r w oc e n a
                                                                            Suare er − Nu Produc ct fte erv




                                                                                                              s] re
                                                                            Suppli rte p iqu rge La ts] ro




                                                                            1[Asto erlog) Fo ow Hou ar
                                                                            Su pli e w g in fr rn e




                                                                            Timpo er o rat les in it P rta
                                                                            O rea m us ork Sa Saamenm




                                                                            1[Bup . B r wppli Bid Ex Pr tio




                                                                                                                    nin




                                                                            1[Cus OrgWinduct Co wne er
                                                                                                               rin nc




                                                                            N uc r o f Lo er o uctionsns
                                                                            1[S us t O r work A nu ial Sal




                                                                                                                    on




                                                                                                   D ic io ntr
                                                                            Sump of Un LawithPro ge y]
                                                                                                                    m




                                                                                                                  Im




                                                                                                             s d
                                                                                                            a D




                                                                                                            v R




                                                                            1[C er on Produc n O Bid ]




                                                                                                            w ltu
                                                                                                                    P




                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                    o




                                                                                                                    d
                                                                            Shppli lie idd Lawith om ]




                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                    om er Fr fr m ov rs




                                                                                                            u y




                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                   r f t a




                                                                                              on Ea alu al]
                                                                                                                   it




                                                                            1[I are er − ha ers rge La pan




                                                                            N ar m r w atioNo ncentra




                                                                            1[Cmb er o r waniz in oncentr



                                                                            D mb auc ho orkcts Dig spo
                                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                            d ]
                                                                            Sh pplier − ght Prorod ct S




                                                                                                                 in
                                                                            Le elalemrgaeau Esma iron




                                                                            1[Sare lie Missin R nu fro




                                                                            N us ipal r woduct C ion
                                                                            Bu s o w om om S er




                                                                            1[Cea cra Ca tr rly ati
                                                                            1[S us rte p b Ex c g]




                                                                            Burea cra r w of f Aucti R




                                                                            1[Cusve epaervest RCo ers
                                                                            Su up m nt ork os Gov ral




                                                                            1[S us m ric re Pr evis ce
                                                                            1[C ge m w to v oc p




                                                                            1[Sup m r Su rte r o por ntr




                                                                            O uc er Pro reig ed sin




                                                                                            is ork in nts
                                                                            Sh up of is (log te g) na




                                                                            Supplier − Su rte Im Re ge
                                                                            1[Cton m is ers Fro l G de




                                                                            C sto ty ( ha ign in n lth




                                                                                                      ] e u
                                                                            Sh up lie Missin evenue r]




                                                                                                            Fir




                                                                            C an lie ore ork atio Heare
                                                                                                             W




                                                                                                        Ev rn
                                                                                    to er te e S a
                                                                            Bu us m Rarc. R in al Cr]




                                                                                                         u th




                                                                                                   O N ric
                                                                                                         u O
                                                                                                            O




                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                    g u tr
                                                                                                        e o




                                                                                                             fi
                                                                                                             n




                                                                                                              ]




                                                                                                            n
                                                                            Burea m alu ber of Ationr
                                                                                                            c




                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                           te




                                                                                                            ft
                                                                                                        f ft




                                                                                                        ] is
                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                    g e e




                                                                                                    s u e
                                                                            1[Spplier − r w y y] tion




                                                                                                            r

                                                                                                            r




                                                                            Sh us al r w lua s R ate




                                                                            N b m rg rk t C nc
                                                                            Au us lie idders nat Bid




                                                                                       er w rks me
                                                                                                           o
                                                                            Bu us er V umber Auc rke
                                                                                                            t
                                                                            1[Dro l OBu KMEsti Env




                                                                            1[Sup lie Misrc. Rev Lab




                                                                            Suppli Bo gh ht Prod You
                                                                            1[Cxp of Nuiqu C Min
                                                                            1[C gthyed wit iza ra tim




                                                                            1[Sare m rg orktion ate




                                                                            1[Cnic m t P oduled ev
                                                                            1[Sare lie idd riv ) ed




                                                                                                  G in g
                                                                            Q up of r w niz in Sc




                                                                              um to O o c o




                                                                                   sit f M ale C
                                                                                                    is lo




                                                                                               N s A
                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                        C




                                                                                    n e a s R
                                                                                                    s a




                                                                                                         n




                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                    g o




                                                                                                        e
                                                                            Suppli m Delalive ecu




                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                        r
                                                                            Su us of Deh E tion




                                                                            1[Cpplier Num of r W
                                                                            1[Cup of Bidd eg en




                                                                            1[Sup lie Perc. R in




                                                                            1[Cver m Pe ed in




                                                                            1[Cmb er o live iss in
                                                                            Supplier Nalu t pe fit
                                                                            Su up of B ha ers te




                                                                            1[C io m v e s




                                                                            M us ucr t P nce ct
                                                                                                    io




                                                                                                     o




                                                                              eg to r E cc es




                                                                                                   in
                                                                            R usme Su cc s
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                    g




                                                                                                    e




                                                                                                    g




                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                    s
                                                                                        B R m




                                                                                         e O s




                                                                                               u s




                                                                                                    s
                                                                                    u ti K s


                                                                                                   c




                                                                                                   s




                                                                                                   s




                                                                                               F s




                                                                                                   s




                                                                                                   a




                                                                                         e a s




                                                                                                   s




                                                                                                   s

                                                                                                   s


                                                                                                   s

                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                   x




                                                                                                   e




                                                                                               o e




                                                                                        B ta e
                                                                                                   ti




                                                                                                s −
                                                                                                   a




                                                                                         r o e
                                                                                    to fr E a




                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                   r




                                                                                                   r




                                                                                        r u r
                                                                            1[Sup er − Pe ork




                                                                            N b De r M r k
                                                                            1[Cstome t S de
                                                                            1[Sare of is rn




                                                                            Bureatracf C ys
                                                                                                 p




                                                                                    pli er o
                                                                                               th
                                                                                                A




                                                                                    p B P




                                                                                               e


                                                                                               e




                                                                              u g e u
                                                                                               n




                                                                                                s

                                                                                                s
                                                                                         r e




                                                                                        a a
                                                                                               a




                                                                                              e
                                                                                               r




                                                                              u to a r
                                                                                         e r
                                                                                         u t
                                                                                              r
                                                                            Share lie ov




                                                                                        Im




                                                                                          H




                                                                                    to O




                                                                              e to R
                                                                              u e W
                                                                                         e




                                                                                         e
                                                                                         e




                                                                                         e




                                                                                    p e


                                                                                         e




                                                                                    p e




                                                                                    to e




                                                                                         e




                                                                                         e
                                                                                         e
                                                                              is p In
                                                                                    p G




                                                                                         u




                                                                              u ti f




                                                                              u p F




                                                                                          f
                                                                                    to e




                                                                                   r r
                                                                                         t




                                                                                    to P
                                                                                    to r
                                                                                    to n
                                                                                         r




                                                                                    p r
                                                                                    p r
                                                                                    p r
                                                                                         r




                                                                                         r
                                                                                         r




                                                                                         r




                                                                                         r

                                                                                         r

                                                                                         r

                                                                                         r




                                                                              u ti r
                                                                            Sh up of




                                                                                    to




                                                                                    to
                                                                                    to




                                                                                    to




                                                                              o to




                                                                                    to




                                                                              u m
                                                                                    m


                                                                                    to




                                                                                    to




                                                                                    to
                                                                                    u




                                                                                    e




                                                                                    u
                                                                                    p




                                                                                    p




                                                                                    p




                                                                                    p




                                                                                    p
                                                                                    a




                                                                                    e
                                                                                    o




                                                                                    o




                                                                              th ti
                                                                                   b
                                                                            1[Sare




                                                                                 u




                                                                                d




                                                                                a
                                                                                p
                                                                                n




                                                                                r




                                                                              e
                                                                              u
                                                                              u




                                                                              u




                                                                              u
                                                                            Sh




                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                             Share of Government Bidders ● ● ● ● ●        ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●  ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                 1[Supplier is Regional Government Agency] ●      ● ●   ● ●    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ● ● ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                          Share of Bidders From Same County ● ● ●         ●
                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                              ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                               Share of Bidders from Same Region ● ●       ●




                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ● ● ●

                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●           ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●    ●        ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                    1[Supplier is From Same Region] ●      ●



                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●

                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●      ●      ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●       ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●       ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                             1[Customer works in Sport] ●      ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                 Autonomous Organization ●         ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                           1[Customer works in Environment] ●          ●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                           ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                      Bureaucrat AKM Estimate ● ●          ●   ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●




                                                                       Organization AKM Estimate ● ● ●                 ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                               In−house Bureaucrat ● ●                 ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ●         ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●




                                                                                  Federal Organization ●               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●  ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   0.8
                                                                                1[Problem with Execution] ●                ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●




                                                                                          1[Delayed Delivery] ● ●                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                 Length of Delay ●                 ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                       1[Customer works in Labor] ●                    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                           Supplier − Perc. Revenue from Contracts ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                     ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●  ●●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●               ●               ●   ●   ●           ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                         Supplier − Perc. Revenue from SOE Contracts ●                         ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●




                                                                                      1[Supplier Missing Registration Data] ●● ● ● ● ●                                 ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●   ●                                               ●                       ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                           1[Supplier Missing Customs Data] ● ● ● ● ●                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●   ●                                               ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                               1[Supplier Missing Contract Data] ●● ● ●                                ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                 1[Supplier Missing Financial Data] ● ● ●                              ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                           Share of Individual Bidders ● ●                             ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ● ●●● ●●●● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●                                               ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                              1[Supplier is Entrepreneur] ●                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ● ● ● ●●●● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●                                               ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                             Distance from Regional Capital ● ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ● ● ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ● ● ●●  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●      ●●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●       ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                        1[Customer works in Social Services] ●                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                          Supplier − Perc. Revenue from Exports ●                                  ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                          Admission Rate to Auction ●                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●       ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                            1[Customer works in Emergency Services] ●                                      ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                1[Customer works in Veterinary Services] ●                                     ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                        Budget Organization ●                                      ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                      1[Customer works in Natural Resources] ●                                         ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                       1[Supplier is Federal Government Agency] ●                                          ● ● ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                Supplier − Perc. Costs from Imports ●                                        ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●           ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                       1[Customer works in Television] ●                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                Government Organization ●                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                1[Customer works in Mining] ●                                              ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                        1[Supplier Missing Concentration Data] ● ● ● ● ●                                                   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●     ● ●               ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                               Supplier − Unique Export Products ● ● ● ●                     ●  ●    ●                     ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●         ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                           Supplier − Number of Export Destinations ● ● ●                    ● ●     ●                     ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●      ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                             Share of Exporter Bidders ● ●                   ● ●     ●                     ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●    ● ●                                ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                      1[Exporter Supplier] ●                 ● ●     ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●       ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●    ● ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                        1[Customer works in Youth Services] ●                                                      ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                      1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Auctions)] ● ● ● ●                                                             ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                          1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)] ● ● ●                                                             ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                             1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Auctions)] ● ●                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)] ●                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                    Supplier − Number of Employees (log) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                                  ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                Supplier − Total Assets (log) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                             ● ●      ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                   Share of Bidders in Ruslana ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●              ●  ● ●  ●  ●                                                     ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
70




                                                                                                                                                                                         Supplier − Turnover (log) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                              ●                                ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                      1[Supplier is Registered Firm] ● ● ● ● ● ● ●            ●  ● ● ● ●                                                       ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Supplier Age (log) ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●               ●                                                                        ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                           1[Supplier is Private Company] ● ● ● ● ●           ●  ● ● ● ●                                                       ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                          Share of Bidders with Large Profits ● ● ● ●         ● ● ● ● ●                                                        ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1[Supplier has Large Profits] ● ● ●        ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●● ●                                                        ●                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                             Share of Bidders with Large Revenue ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1[Supplier has Large Revenue] ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                                            ●         ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Supplier − Unique Import Products ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                        ● ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Share of Importer Bidders ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                     ● ●                                ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1[Importer Supplier] ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                    ● ●                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Supplier − Net Profit ● ● ● ● ● ●                                                                                     ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Supplier Profit per Worker ● ● ● ● ●                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Month) ● ● ● ●            ●                                               ●   ●                     ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●       ●   ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●       ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Month) ● ● ●                                                             ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative) ● ●                                                             ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative) ●                                                          ●                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1[Customer works in Forestry] ●                                                                                     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative) ● ● ● ●                       ●                                                      ● ●              ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Month) ● ● ●                                          ●                                   ●             ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative) ● ●                              ●                                                    ●        ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Month) ●                              ●                                                 ●  ●        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Auction Length ●           ●                                                                               ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid ● ● ● ●                                                                                                  ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of Applicants ● ● ●                            ●         ●                                                          ●●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1[Auction Held] ● ●                                    ●                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of Bidders ●                                     ●                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bureaucrat Success Rate ● ●           ●                                            ●       ●                                    ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Customer Success Rate ●                                                                ●                                    ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Customer Evaluation Score ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1[Customer works in Health Care] ● ● ●                           ● ●                    ● ● ●                                                   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Regional Organization ● ●                          ●  ●                   ●●                                                      ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1[Customer works in Housing] ●                                                     ● ●                                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Share of Foreign−owned Bidders ● ●                                                                                                              ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1[Supplier has Foreign Ownership] ●                                                                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Quantity (log) ●                                                                    ●                                     ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Customer Product Concentration (Auctions) ● ●                                              ●                                                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Customer Product Concentration (Volume) ●                                                                                                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1[Auction Winner Not Supplier] ●                                                                                                                 ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Other Organization ●                                                                                                                  ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1[Customer works in Internal] ● ●                        ●                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1[Customer Missing Evaluation Data] ●                            ●                                                                                        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1[Early Delivery] ● ●                                                                                                                     ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number of Days Early ●                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of Contract Revisions ●                                                ●                                                                        ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1[Contract Canceled] ●                                                                                                                      ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bureaucrat Product Concentration (Auctions) ● ●                                                                                                                             ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bureaucrat Product Concentration (Volume) ●                                                                                                                              ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1[Customer works in Education] ● ●               ●                                                                                                              ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Municipal Organization ●                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1[Customer works in Transportation] ●                                                                                                                              ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes ● ●                            ●                                                                                                        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●       ●   ●   ●



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of Products ●                   ●  ●                                                                                                         ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●           ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1[Customer works in Culture] ●                                                                                                                                ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Share of Wholesaler Bidders ●                                                                                                                                 ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1[Bureaucrat Missing Concentration Data] ●                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Number of Request Revisions ●                                                                                                                                      ●   ●   ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Deposit / Reserve Price ●       ●                                                                                                                            ●       ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Time to Prepare Documents ● ●                                                                                                                                          ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reserve Price ●                                                                                                                                        ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1[Customer works in Agriculture] ●                                                                                                                                        ●   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1[Customer works in News] ●                                                                                                                                            ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1[Supplier is NGO] ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −1




     This figure shows correlations between each of the 113 potential explanatory variables for bureaucrat and organization effectiveness. Squares in blue denote positive
     correlations while negative correlations are shown in red. Larger circles and darker colors denote larger correlation coefficients.
     F IGURE OA.4: C ORRELATES OF B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS : L AMBDA R ETURNING C ROSS -VALIDATION E RROR W ITHIN O NE
     S TANDARD E RROR OF THE M INIMUM


                                                                                                      Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                                              Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes

                                                                  Number of Applicants

                                                                       1[Early Delivery]

                                                                  In−house Bureaucrat

                                              Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)

                                            1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]

                                                 Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)



                                                    Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)

                                                Value of Auctions Run (Auction Month)

                                                             Autonomous Organization

                                                                  Federal Organization

                                                                 Regional Organization
                                 Variable




                                                               Customer Success Rate

                                                          1[Customer works in Culture]
71




                                                           1[Customer works in Health]

                                                         1[Customer works in Housing]

                                                   1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]

                                                    1[Customer works in Social Policy]

                                                   1[Customer works in Transportation]

                                               1[Customer works in Veterninary Affairs]

                                                        Distance from Regional Capital



                                                  Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid

                                                      Share of Foreign−owned Bidders

                                                          Share of Wholesaler Bidders

                                                   Share of Bidders from Same Region

                                                            Supplier Product HHI Index

                                                                                           −0.050   −0.025   0.000     0.025   0.050 −0.050   −0.025   0.000   0.025   0.050
                                                                                                                        Standardized Coefficient


     The figure shows the results of regressions of estimated bureaucrat effects α̂b from estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi on observable
     characteristics of the purchase procedure followed. The left column shows standardized bivariate regressions for each correlate individually. The circles in right
     column show the coefficients from a multivariate regression of the estimated bureaucrat effects on all the correlates that are selected by an elastic net regularization
     procedure, where the values of the regularization penalty lambda λ are chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the minimum. The
     elastic net mixing parameter used is 0.3. The coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure are shown as crosses.
     F IGURE OA.5: C ORRELATES OF O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS : L AMBDA R ETURNING C ROSS -VALIDATION E RROR W ITHIN O NE
     S TANDARD E RROR OF THE M INIMUM


                                                                                                     Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                                                                    Reservation Price
                                               Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes
                                                                     Number of Items
                                                         Number of Contract Revisions
                                                         Number of Request Revisions
                                                                 Number of Applicants
                                                               Deposit / Reserve Price
                                                                   In−house Bureaucrat
                                             1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]
                                                  1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)]
                                                                      SuccessRate_Bur
                                                Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)
                                                     Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run
                                                     Bureaucrat Volume of Auctions Run
                                                 Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)
                                                                  Federal Organization
                                                              Government Organization
                                                                Municipal Organization
                                                            Organization Success Rate
                                                       1[Customer works in Agriculture]
                                                          1[Customer works in Culture]
                                                       1[Customer works in Environment]
                                                             1[Customer works in Health]
                                                           1[Customer works in Housing]
                                                     1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]
                                  Variable




                                                              1[Customer works in Labor]
                                                       1[Customer works in Social Policy]
                                                              1[Customer works in Sport]
72




                                                         1[Customer works in Television]
                                                         1[Customer works in Transport]
                                                         Distance from Regional Capital
                                                             Customer Evaluation Score
                                                            Auction Winner Not Supplier
                                                                        Auction Length
                                                                       1[Early Delivery]
                                                       Share of Foreign−owned Bidders
                                                               Share of Importer Bidders
                                                    Share of Bidders from Same County
                                                               Share of Exporter Bidders
                                                             Share of Wholesale Bidders
                                                    Share of Bidders from Same Region
                                                    Supplier Product HHI Index (Volume)
                                                   Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)
                                                1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)]
                                             Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)
                                                               1[Foreign Owned Supplier]
                                                                      1[Exporter Supplier]
                                                                 1[Federal Gov. Supplier]
                                                                  Supplier Import Volume
                                                   Supplier Turnover from SOE Contracts
                                                                    Supplier Assets (log)
                                                     Supplier Unique Exported Products
                                                           1[Supplier from Same Region]
                                                                                             −0.06   −0.03   0.00    0.03   0.06     −0.06   −0.03   0.00    0.03    0.06
                                                                                                                       Standardized Coefficient


     The figure shows the results of regressions of estimated organization effects ψ̂j from estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi on observable
     characteristics of the purchase procedure followed. The left column shows standardized bivariate regressions for each correlate individually. The circles in right
     column show the coefficients from a multivariate regression of the estimated bureaucrat effects on all the correlates that are selected by an elastic net regularization
     procedure, where the values of the regularization penalty lambda λ are chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the minimum. The
     elastic net mixing parameter used is 0.3. The coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure are shown as crosses.
     F IGURE OA.6: C ORRELATES OF B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS : L AMBDA R ETURNING C ROSS -VALIDATION E RROR W ITHIN O NE
     S TANDARD E RROR OF THE M INIMUM
     I NCREASING M IXING PARAMETER TO 0.7


                                                                                                      Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                                              Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes

                                                                  Number of Applicants

                                                                       1[Early Delivery]

                                                                  In−house Bureaucrat

                                              Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)

                                            1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]

                                                 Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)



                                                    Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)

                                                Value of Auctions Run (Auction Month)

                                                             Autonomous Organization

                                                                  Federal Organization

                                                                 Regional Organization
                                 Variable




                                                               Customer Success Rate
73




                                                          1[Customer works in Culture]



                                                           1[Customer works in Health]

                                                         1[Customer works in Housing]

                                                   1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]

                                                    1[Customer works in Social Policy]

                                                   1[Customer works in Transportation]

                                               1[Customer works in Veterninary Affairs]

                                                        Distance from Regional Capital



                                                  Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid

                                                      Share of Foreign−owned Bidders

                                                          Share of Wholesaler Bidders

                                                   Share of Bidders from Same Region

                                                            Supplier Product HHI Index

                                                                                           −0.050   −0.025   0.000     0.025   0.050 −0.050   −0.025   0.000   0.025   0.050
                                                                                                                        Standardized Coefficient


     The figure shows the results of regressions of estimated bureaucrat effects α̂b from estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi on observable
     characteristics of the purchase procedure followed. The left column shows standardized bivariate regressions for each correlate individually. The circles in right
     column show the coefficients from a multivariate regression of the estimated bureaucrat effects on all the correlates that are selected by an elastic net regularization
     procedure, where the values of the regularization penalty lambda λ are chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the minimum. The
     elastic net mixing parameter used is 0.7. The coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure are shown as crosses.
     F IGURE OA.7: C ORRELATES OF O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS : L AMBDA R ETURNING C ROSS -VALIDATION E RROR W ITHIN O NE
     S TANDARD E RROR OF THE M INIMUM
     I NCREASING M IXING PARAMETER TO 0.7


                                                                                                     Pairwise Regressions                    Post−LASSO Regression
                                                                    Reservation Price
                                               Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes
                                                                     Number of Items
                                                         Number of Contract Revisions
                                                         Number of Request Revisions
                                                                 Number of Applicants
                                                               Deposit / Reserve Price
                                                                   In−house Bureaucrat
                                             1[Bur. Bought Product Often (No. Auctions)]
                                                  1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)]
                                                                      SuccessRate_Bur
                                                Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)
                                                     Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run
                                                     Bureaucrat Volume of Auctions Run
                                                 Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)
                                                                  Federal Organization
                                                              Government Organization
                                                                Municipal Organization
                                                            Organization Success Rate
                                                       1[Customer works in Agriculture]
                                                          1[Customer works in Culture]
                                                       1[Customer works in Environment]
                                                             1[Customer works in Health]
                                                           1[Customer works in Housing]
                                                     1[Customer works in Internal Affairs]
                                  Variable




                                                              1[Customer works in Labor]
74




                                                       1[Customer works in Social Policy]
                                                              1[Customer works in Sport]
                                                         1[Customer works in Television]
                                                         1[Customer works in Transport]
                                                         Distance from Regional Capital
                                                             Customer Evaluation Score
                                                            Auction Winner Not Supplier
                                                                        Auction Length
                                                                       1[Early Delivery]
                                                       Share of Foreign−owned Bidders
                                                               Share of Importer Bidders
                                                    Share of Bidders from Same County
                                                               Share of Exporter Bidders
                                                             Share of Wholesale Bidders
                                                    Share of Bidders from Same Region
                                                    Supplier Product HHI Index (Volume)
                                                   Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)
                                                1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)]
                                             Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)
                                                               1[Foreign Owned Supplier]
                                                                      1[Exporter Supplier]
                                                                 1[Federal Gov. Supplier]
                                                                  Supplier Import Volume
                                                   Supplier Turnover from SOE Contracts
                                                                    Supplier Assets (log)
                                                     Supplier Unique Exported Products
                                                           1[Supplier from Same Region]
                                                                                             −0.06   −0.03   0.00    0.03   0.06     −0.06   −0.03   0.00    0.03    0.06
                                                                                                                       Standardized Coefficient


     The figure shows the results of regressions of estimated organization effects ψ̂j from estimation of equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi on observable
     characteristics of the purchase procedure followed. The left column shows standardized bivariate regressions for each correlate individually. The circles in right
     column show the coefficients from a multivariate regression of the estimated bureaucrat effects on all the correlates that are selected by an elastic net regularization
     procedure, where the regularization parameter lambda is chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the minimum. The elastic net
     mixing parameter used is 0.7. The coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure are shown as crosses.
     F IGURE OA.8: C ORRELATES                      OF    B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS : E LASTIC N ET R EGULARIZATION C OEFFICIENTS A CROSS D IFFER -
     ENT  M IXING PARAMETERS


                        Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)                                                       l l lllll l l
                                 Share of Wholesaler Bidders                                                                                     lll l llll
                             Share of Foreign−owned Bidders                                                                          l l l ll l lll
                          Share of Bidders from Same Region                                                                                           llll l l
                                        Regional Organization    lll l lll l   l
                     Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes                                                         l l l l ll l l l
                                        Number of Applicants                                                    l ll ll l ll
                                         In−house Bureaucrat                                                                             ll l l l ll ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mixing
                                         Federal Organization                                                                                                                                      l lllll l l l   Parameter
                               Distance from Regional Capital                                                                                                                                  l   l llll ll        l   0

                                      Customer Success Rate                                                                                  ll l llll l ll                                                         l   0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   0.2
                    Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Month)                                                         l lllll l l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   0.3
                Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)                                   l llll l ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   0.4
75




                      Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)                                                                            l l l ll l ll l                                                            l   0.5
              Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)                                    l ll l lll                                                                                                          l   0.6

                         Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid                                                                          l ll l l l                                                                   l   0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   0.8
                                    Autonomous Organization                                                                        l l lllll l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   0.9
                                             1[Early Delivery]                                                               l lll ll l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l   1
                     1[Customer works in Veterinary Services]                                                                      lll l l lll
                          1[Customer works in Transportation]                                                                                                    l   ll ll l
                         1[Customer works in Social Services]                                                l l ll lll ll
                                 1[Customer works in Internal]                                                               l l l ll l ll
                                1[Customer works in Housing]                                                                 l l l l llll
                            1[Customer works in Health Care]                   ll ll ll l l l
                                 1[Customer works in Culture]                                                                                                                  l l ll l l ll
                       1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]                                                  l l lllll lll
                                                                 −0.02                 −0.01                                             0.00                                           0.01
                                                                                                                       Coefficient


     The figure shows the coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure on the estimated bureaucrat effects across different values of the mixing parameters.
     Each coefficient is represented by a small vertical line corresponding by color to mixing parameters. The variables shown are from the base model shown in Online
     Appendix Table OA.4 where the values of the regularization penalty lambda λ are chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the
     minimum.
     F IGURE OA.9: C ORRELATES OF O RGANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS : E LASTIC N ET R EGULARIZATION C OEFFICIENTS A CROSS D IF -
     FERENT M IXING PARAMETERS



                                    Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)                                                                          l l ll l l l
                                           Supplier Product HHI Index (Volume)                                                               l lll ll l
                                          Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)                                                               l llllll
                                             Supplier − Unique Export Products                                                            l llll l l
                                                    Supplier − Total Assets (log)                                                                           lll ll l
                                   Supplier − Perc. Revenue from SOE Contracts                                                                  lllllll l
                                            Supplier − Perc. Costs from Imports                                                                    l llll l l
                                                   Share of Wholesaler Bidders                                                                          lll lll l
                                                      Share of Importer Bidders                                                                  llll ll
                                               Share of Foreign−owned Bidders                                                                        lll lllll
                                                      Share of Exporter Bidders                                                                      l llll l
                                            Share of Bidders from Same Region                                                         lll llll
                                           Share of Bidders From Same County                                                                      l l ll l
                                                                  Reserve Price                                                                                                      l llll l
                                       Number of Unique 2−Digit Product Codes                                                           l llllll
                                                  Number of Request Revisions                                                                       lllll l ll
                                                            Number of Products                                          lll ll lll
                                                  Number of Contract Revisions                                                                                      l l lllll l
                                                          Number of Applicants                                                 lllllll l
                                                         Municipal Organization                              l   l l l ll                                                                                                                                Mixing
                                                           In−house Bureaucrat                                                                                                                                           l llll l ll                     Parameter
                                                      Government Organization                                                                              l l lll l                                                                                      l   0
                                                           Federal Organization                                                                                                                                                        l   l l l ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l   0.1
                                                 Distance from Regional Capital                l l lll   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l   0.2
                                                        Deposit / Reserve Price                                                                            lllllll l
76




                                                        Customer Success Rate                                                                                                   l ll lll                                                                  l   0.3

                                                    Customer Evaluation Score                                                                            l llll lll l                                                                                     l   0.4

                                      Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Month)                                                       ll llll l l                                                                                                          l   0.5
                                                      Bureaucrat Success Rate                                                                      lllllll l                                                                                              l   0.6
                                         Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)                                                                                                      l ll l                                                                l   0.7
                                        Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)                                                                            lll l l                                                                                        l   0.8
                                    Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Month)                                                                           l l ll l l l l                                                                                    l   0.9
                                                                 Auction Length                                                                        l l llll ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l   1
                                               1[Supplier is From Same Region]                                                                     ll llll ll
                                      1[Supplier is Federal Government Agency]                                                                                   lll l l l ll
                                             1[Supplier has Foreign Ownership]                                                                         ll l ll l
                                        1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)]                                                                        l lll l
                                                            1[Exporter Supplier]                                                                             l lll lll
                                                                1[Early Delivery]                                                                        l l ll
                                            1[Customer works in Transportation]                                                       l ll ll l
                                                1[Customer works in Television]                                                                          lll l l
                                                     1[Customer works in Sport]                                                                                    l lllll l
                                           1[Customer works in Social Services]                                    l ll l l l l
                                                    1[Customer works in Labor]                                                                        lll l l
                                                   1[Customer works in Internal]                                                                                                                      l lllll l
                                                  1[Customer works in Housing]                                                                                          llllll
                                              1[Customer works in Health Care]      l l l l ll l     l
                                              1[Customer works in Environment]                                                               ll ll l l
                                                   1[Customer works in Culture]                                                                                                            llllllll
                                               1[Customer works in Agriculture]                                                             l lllll l
                                          1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)]                                                                      lll l ll l
                                         1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]                                                            lll lll l
                                                 1[Auction Winner Not Supplier]                                                                        ll lll
                                                                                                   −0.02                                              0.00                                                        0.02                            0.04
                                                                                                                                                                     Coefficient



     The figure shows the coefficients from the elastic net regularization procedure on the estimated bureaucrat effects across different values of the mixing parameters.
     Each coefficient is represented by a small vertical line corresponding by color to mixing parameters. The variables shown are from the base model shown in Online
     Appendix Table OA.4 where the values of the regularization penalty lambda λ are chosen to return a cross-validation error within one standard deviation of the
     minimum.
                       TABLE OA.3: S UMMARY S TATISTICS - L ARGEST C ONNECTED S ET


                                                          All Products                         Pharmaceuticals Subsample

                                                   (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                             Analysis Sample    Largest Connected Set    Analysis Sample    Largest Connected Set
  (1) # of Bureaucrats                                54,771                   19,257              2,505                     153
  (2) # of Organizations                              59,574                   19,546              1,884                     142
  (3) # of Connected Sets                                984                        1                129                       0
  (4) # of Bureaucrats with >1 Org.                   12,538                    4,004                929                      24
  (5) # of Organizations with >1 Bur.                 42,438                   13,617              1,454                     110
  (6) # of Federal Organizations                      46,708                      513                 26                       0
  (7) # of Regional Organizations                     19,014                    7,493              1,613                      49
  (8) # of Municipal Organizations                    38,538                   11,540                245                      93
  (9) # of Health Organizations                        7,896                    2,879              1,719                     139
  (10) # of Education Organizations                   33,223                   10,424                 63                       0
  (11) # of Internal Affairs Organizations               867                      225                  3                       1
  (12) # of Agr/Environ Organizations                    339                       99                  1                       0
  (13) # of Other Organizations                       17,249                    5,919                 98                       2
  (14) # of Goods                                     16,223                   13,952              3,863                    1,440
  (15) # of Regions                                       86                       48                 79                        1
  (16) # of Auction Requests                       1,249,770                  469,957             42,929                    1,510
  (17) Mean # of Applicants                               3.6                    3.61               3.03                     2.79
  (18) Mean # of Bidders                                2.14                       2.2              1.98                     1.75
  (19) Mean Reservation Price                         25,004                   35,329             44,425                   14,694
  (20) Quantity Mean                                   1,117                    1,612              1,718                      223
            Median                                        25                       29                  45                      30
            SD                                        91,806                  153,179            172,099                    1,014
  (21) Total Price Mean (bil. USD)                      84.4                     90.2               91.2                     97.2
            Median                                      4.35                     4.37                 6.7                    6.86
            SD                                           535                      601                493                      532
  (22) Unit Price Mean (bil. USD)                       66.5                     66.7               25.4                     26.7
            Median                                      0.17                    0.163               0.18                    0.279
            SD                                        23,341                   14,723                265                      211
  (23) # of Observations                          11,516,088                3,975,113            182,060                    7,701
  (24) Total Procurement Volume (bil. USD)               399                      179               9.38                     0.13



The table reports summary statistics for four samples. The All Products columns show statistics for purchases of all off-the-shelf
goods, while the Pharmaceuticals Subsample columns restrict attention to purchases of medicines. Analysis Sample denotes all
unpreferenced auctions in connected sets that fulfill three restrictions: singleton bureaucrat-organization, bureaucrat-good, and
organization-good pairs are removed; each procurer (bureaucrats and organizations) implements a minimum of five purchases;
and connected sets have at least three bureaucrats and organizations. Largest Connected Set is the largest connected set from
the Analysis Sample (as measured by the number of organizations). Organizations working in Education include schools, uni-
versities, pre-schools, and youth organizations. Organizations working in Internal Affairs include police, emergency services,
local administration, taxes, and transportation. Organizations working in Agriculture or the Environment include environmen-
tal protection funds, agricultural departments and nature promotion agencies. The Other category includes funds, monitoring
agencies, and land cadasters, among many others. All sums are measured in billions of US dollars at an exchange rate of 43
rubles to 1 US dollar.




                                                                 77
              TABLE OA.4: T OTAL P ROCUREMENT IN R USSIA B Y T YPE OF M ECHANISM U SED

Type                                 2011       %      2012       %       2013         %       2014       %       2015       %       2016      %       2011-2016   %
Electronic Auctions                  76.60      46.5   107.65     54.55   106.78       57.98   72.62      51.80   45.13      51.12   45.95     56.39   454.73      53.12
Single Supplier                      39.08      23.7   42.95      21.76   39.30        21.34   24.60      17.54   19.61      22.22   19.54     23.98   185.08      21.62
Request for Quotations               6.07       3.7    5.66       2.87    5.32         2.89    1.67       1.19    0.91       1.03    0.77      0.94    20.39       2.38
Open Tender                          30.70      18.6   40.86      20.70   32.58        17.69   34.08      24.31   15.82      17.92   10.47     12.85   164.50      19.22
Other Methods                        12.17      7.4    0.22       0.11    0.17         0.09    7.23       5.16    6.81       7.72    4.75      5.83    31.36       3.66

Total Procurement                    164.62            197.33             184.15               140.19             88.28              81.49             856.06

Russian Non-Resource GDP             1,720.89          1,873.42           1,989.28             1,786.30           1,231.35           1134.47           9,735.72

Procurement / Non-Resource GDP (%)   9.6               10.5               9.3                  7.8                7.2                7.2               8.8

Exchange Rate (RUB/USD)              29.37             30.96              31.97                39.20              62.01              66.34             43.31
 This table presents summary statistics about how much procurement was completed under federal laws 94FZ and 44FZ each year according
 to the mechanism used. All sums are measured in billions of US dollars at current prices using the average ruble-dollar exchange rates
 shown. Data on Russian procurement comes from the central nationwide Register for public procurement in Russia (http://zakupki.gov.
 ru/epz/main/public/home.html). Data on Russian GDP comes from International Financial Statistics (IFS) at the International Monetary
 Fund (http://data.imf.org/), which we adjust using the percentage of GDP coming from natural resources rents as calculated by the World
 Bank (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.TOTL.RT.ZS?locations=RU&name_desc=true).




                                                                                  78
                                       TABLE OA.5: P RODUCTS C OVERED BY P REFERENCE L AWS ,         BY   Y EAR

     2011                                2012                              2013                               2014
     Live animals                        Live animals                      Live pigs                          Meat and meat products
     Textiles                            Fresh, chilled, and frozen pork   Fresh, chilled, and frozen pork    Fish and fish products
     Clothing and fur products           Sugar                             Meat, sausage and other meat       Salt
                                                                           products
     Leather and leather goods           Textiles                          Cheese, cream and milk             Rice, starches and flour
     Chemical products and               Clothing and fur products         Rice                               Grains, fruits and vegetables
     pharmaceuticals                                                                                          (various)
     Ratio and television                Leather and leather goods         Textiles                           Bread, desserts, and chocolate
     equipment
     Medical and measurement             Chemical products and             Clothing and fur products          Pharmaceuticals
     equipment                           pharmaceuticals
     Cars, trailers and semitrailers     Combine harvesters                Leather and leather goods          Medical and measurement
                                                                                                              equipment
     Transport vehicles (excluding       Self-propelled vehicles           Pharmaceuticals                    Ceramic products
     cars)
                                         Machinery parts                   Agricultural machinery             Iron, steel and ferroalloys (incl.
79




                                                                                                              pipes)
                                         Agricultural machinery            Ratio and television               Steam boilers
                                                                           equipment
                                         Ratio and television              Medical and measurement            Agricultural machinery
                                         equipment                         equipment
                                         Medical and measurement           Cars, trailers and semitrailers    Metals and mining equipment
                                         equipment
                                         Cars, trailers and semitrailers   Transport vehicles (excluding
                                                                           cars)
                                         Transport vehicles (excluding     Sporting equipment (various)
                                         cars)
     TABLE OA.6: S HARE OF VARIANCE OF P ROCUREMENT P RICES                              AND    PARTICIPATION         EXPLAINED BY        B UREAUCRATS         AND    O RGANI -
     ZATIONS : L ARGEST C ONNECTED S ET



                                                                                    Fixed                       Split                                   Covariance
                                                                                   Effects        (s.e.)      Sample          (s.e.)    Shrinkage        Shrinkage
                (1) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across burs)                         1.441    (0.0599)           1.502    (0.0383)            0.908             0.764
                (2) s.d. of Organization Effects (across orgs)                       1.330     (0.104)           1.384    (0.0593)            0.797             0.669
                (3) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across pairs)                        0.930    (0.0901)           0.941     (0.051)            0.655             0.480
                (4) s.d. of Organization Effects (across pairs)                      1.017     (0.139)           1.005    (0.0644)            0.707             0.466
                (5) Bur-Org Effect Correlation (across pairs)                       -0.532    (0.0492)          -0.386    (0.0521)           -0.480             0.301
                (6) s.d. of Bur + Org Effects (across pairs)                         0.945    (0.0398)           0.972    (0.0255)            0.696             0.763
                (7) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across items)                        0.841    (0.0398)           0.941     (0.051)            0.650             0.331
                (8) s.d. of Organization Effects (across items)                      0.921    (0.0398)           1.005    (0.0644)            0.704             0.383
                (9) Bur-Org Effect Correlation (across items)                       -0.728    (0.0398)          -0.386    (0.0521)           -0.687             0.246
                (10) s.d. of Bur + Org Effects (across items)                        0.654    (0.0499)           0.635    (0.0361)            0.538             0.564
                (11) s.d. of log unit price                                          2.231                       2.231                        2.231             2.231
80




                (12) s.d. of log unit price | good, month                            1.292                       1.292                        1.292             1.292
                (13) Adjusted R-squared                                             0.963                       0.963                        0.963             0.963
                (14) Number of Bureaucrats                                         19,257                      19,257                       19,257            19,257
                (15) Number of Organizations                                       19,546                      19,546                       19,546            19,546
                (16) Number of Bureaucrat-Organization Pairs                      101,375                     101,375                      101,375           101,375
                (17) Number of Observations                                     3,975,113                   3,975,113                    3,975,113         3,975,113


     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats and organizations, estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in equation (10). The
     sample used is the All Products-Largest Connected Set Sample summarized in Table 1 and discussed in Sub-Section 4.2. Rows 1–2 show the s.d. of the bureaucrat
     and organization effects. Rows 3–6 show the components of the variance of prices across bureaucrat-organization pairs, effectively weighting the estimates in rows
     1–2 by the number of pairs they appear in. Rows 7–10 show the components of the variance of prices across items, effectively weighting the estimates in rows 1–2
     by the number of purchases they conduct. Column 1 uses the fixed effect estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Each observation is
     an item procured by an organization j and a bureaucrat indexed by b(i, j ). Column 3 shows estimates from randomly splitting the sample in half, stratifying by
     bureaucrat-organization pair and calculating the covariance across the two noisy estimates as described in Section 4.2. Columns 2 and 4 show standard errors of the
     estimates in columns 1 and 3, respectively, estimated by bootstrapping 100 times. Column 5 uses the bootstraps to estimate the sampling error in each bureaucrat
     effect s2b and each organization effect s2j , and the signal variances of the bureaucrat and organization effects (σα       2      2
                                                                                                                                   and σψ respectively). The minimum-mean-squared
                                                            2    2     2
     error predictor for each bureaucrat effect is then [σ̂α /(σ̂α + sb )] · α̂b , where α̂b is the bureaucrat’s fixed effect from the decomposition in Column (1), and analogously
     for the organization effects. Column 6 shows our preferred estimates, which form predictions of the bureaucrat and organization effects that minimize the sum of
     the mean-squared errors of the predictions and take into account the covariance of the estimation errors, estimated from the bootstrapped estimates, as described in
     Section 4.2.
     TABLE OA.7: R OBUSTNESS              TO   U SING S UBSAMPLES         OF   I NCREASINGLY H ETEROGENEOUS G OODS (K HANDELWAL (2010) M EA -
     SURE )



                                                                                  Quintile 1     Quintiles 1–2       Quintiles 1–3      Quintiles 1–4      Quintiles 1–5
      (1) s.d.   of Bur + Org Effects Within CS (across items)                       0.931            0.856               0.818              0.806              0.779
      (2) s.d.   of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items)                           0.967            0.860               0.807              0.811              0.850
      (3) s.d.   of log P                                                            2.120            2.252               2.390              2.348              2.390
      (4) s.d.   of log P | good, month                                              1.300            1.302               1.355              1.392              1.378
81




      (5) s.d. of Bur+Org Within Efs / s.d. of log P | good, month                   0.716            0.658               0.604              0.579              0.565
      (6) s.d. of Bur+Org Total Efs / s.d. of log P | good, month                    0.744            0.660               0.595              0.583              0.617
      (7) Sample Size                                                               365,653          674,047           1,087,299           1,352,056          1,684,802


     The table implements the variance decomposition in equation (10) using the estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Each observation is
     an item procured by an organization j and a bureaucrat indexed by b(i, j ). Column (5) uses the sub-sample consisting of all auctions for goods that our text analysis
     classification method is able to assign a 10-digit product code and that we can match to the scope-for-quality-differentiation ladder developed by Khandelwal (2010).
     Column (4) removes the quintile with the highest scope-for-quality-differentiation according to the Khandelwal (2010) ladder, Column (3) the highest two quintiles,
     and so on.
TABLE OA.8: E LASTIC N ET N ONZERO C OEFFICIENTS                                                                              ARE       R OBUST A CROSS M IXING PARAMETERS
(B UREAUCRAT E FFECTIVENESS )
                                         Variable                                             0       0.1      0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6      0.7      0.8      0.9       1
                                         Admission Rate to Auction                         0.000
                                         Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)           0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.001
                                         Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)            -0.002   -0.003   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.003
                                         1[Auction Winner Not Supplier]                    0.001                                                 0.000                               0.000
                                         Auction Length                                   -0.001                                                 0.000                               0.000
                                         1[Problem with Execution]                         0.000
                                         1[Auction Held]                                   0.000
                                         1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]          -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.004   -0.003   -0.003   -0.002   -0.004
                                         1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]          0.001
                                         1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)]            -0.001
                                         1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)]           -0.001
                                         Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)   -0.006   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007   -0.007
                                         Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)    -0.006   -0.006   -0.006   -0.006   -0.006   -0.006   -0.007   -0.006   -0.006   -0.006   -0.007
                                         Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Month)        -0.002
                                         Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Month)         -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003
                                         1[Customer works in Agriculture]                  0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Culture]                      0.008   0.009    0.009    0.009    0.009    0.009    0.010    0.009    0.009    0.009    0.010
                                         Distance from Regional Capital                    0.012   0.015    0.015    0.015    0.015    0.015    0.016    0.015    0.016    0.015    0.016
                                         1[Customer works in Education]                    0.002
                                         1[Customer works in Emergency Services]          -0.001                                                0.000             0.000             0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Environment]                  0.000                                                0.000                               0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Forestry]                     0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Health Care]                 -0.010   -0.012   -0.012   -0.012   -0.012   -0.011   -0.013   -0.011   -0.012   -0.011   -0.013
                                         1[Customer works in Housing]                     -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.002
                                         1[Customer works in Internal]                    -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.002   -0.001   -0.002   -0.001   -0.002
                                         1[Customer works in Labor]                        0.001
                                         1[Customer works in Mining]                       0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Natural Resources]            0.000
                                         1[Customer works in News]                         0.000
                                         Customer Evaluation Score                         0.002                                                 0.000                               0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Social Services]             -0.003   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.005   -0.004   -0.005   -0.004   -0.005
                                         1[Customer works in Sport]                        0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Television]                   0.000
                                         1[Customer works in Transportation]               0.005    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.005    0.006
                                         1[Customer works in Veterinary Services]         -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.002
                                         1[Customer works in Youth Services]               0.000
                                         1[Delayed Delivery]                               0.000
                                         1[Early Delivery]                                -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   0.000    -0.001
                                         Deposit / Reserve Price                          -0.001
                                         Length of Delay                                   0.000
                                         Number of Days Early                              0.000
                                         In-house Bureaucrat                               0.002    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000     0.001   0.000     0.001             0.001
                                         Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid             -0.001    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000
                                         1[Bureaucrat Missing Concentration Data]         -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003
                                         1[Supplier Missing Concentration Data]            0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                                         1[Customer Missing Evaluation Data]               0.003    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.000
                                         1[Supplier Missing Registration Data]             0.005    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004
                                         1[Supplier Missing Contract Data]                 0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002
                                         1[Supplier Missing Customs Data]                 -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001
                                         1[Supplier Missing Financial Data]               -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005   -0.005
                                         Number of Bidders                                 0.000
                                         Number of Unique 2-Digit Product Codes           -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.002   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.001   -0.003
                                         Number of Products                                0.000
                                         Number of Contract Revisions                     -0.001   0.000    0.000                               0.000             0.000             0.000
                                         Number of Request Revisions                       0.000
                                         Autonomous Organization                          -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   0.000    -0.001   0.000    -0.001   0.000    -0.001
                                         Budget Organization                               0.000
                                         Federal Organization                              0.015   0.016    0.016    0.016    0.016    0.016    0.017    0.016    0.016    0.015    0.017
                                         Government Organization                          -0.001                                                0.000             0.000             0.000
                                         Municipal Organization                            0.005
                                         Other Organization                                0.001
                                         Regional Organization                            -0.013   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020   -0.020
                                         Organization AKM Estimate                         0.251    0.250    0.250    0.250    0.250    0.250    0.249    0.250    0.250    0.250    0.249
                                         Time to Prepare Documents                         0.000
                                         Quantity (log)                                   -0.005   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.005   -0.004
                                         Reserve Price                                     0.000
                                         Share of Individual Bidders                       0.000
                                         Share of Foreign-owned Bidders                   -0.001   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    -0.001   0.000    0.000             -0.001
                                         Share of Bidders in Ruslana                      -0.001                                                 0.000                               0.000
                                         Share of Exporter Bidders                         0.000
                                         Share of Government Bidders                       0.000
                                         Share of Bidders From Same County                -0.001
                                         Share of Importer Bidders                         0.000
                                         Share of Bidders with Large Profits               0.001
                                         Share of Bidders with Large Revenue              -0.001
                                         Share of Wholesaler Bidders                       0.002   0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.000    0.001
                                         Share of Bidders from Same Region                 0.002   0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.002
                                         Bureaucrat Success Rate                           0.000
                                         Customer Success Rate                             0.002   0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.002
                                         Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)      0.000
                                         Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)       0.000
                                         Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Month)          -0.002                                                0.000                               0.000
                                         Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Month)            0.000
                                         1[Supplier has Large Profits]                     0.001                                                0.000             0.000             0.001
                                         1[Supplier has Large Revenue]                     0.000
                                         1[Supplier has Foreign Ownership]                 0.000
                                         1[Supplier is NGO]                                0.001                                                                                    0.000
                                         Supplier - Number of Export Destinations          0.000
                                         Supplier - Number of Employees (log)              0.001
                                         1[Exporter Supplier]                              0.001
                                         1[Supplier is Federal Government Agency]          0.001
                                         Supplier Age (log)                                0.000
                                         1[Importer Supplier]                              0.000                                                                                    0.000
                                         Supplier - Perc. Revenue from Exports             0.000
                                         Supplier - Perc. Costs from Imports               0.000
                                         Supplier - Perc. Revenue from Contracts           0.000
                                         Supplier - Perc. Revenue from SOE Contracts       0.000
                                         Supplier - Net Profit                             0.000
                                         1[Supplier is Private Company]                    0.000
                                         Supplier Profit per Worker                        0.000
                                         1[Supplier is Regional Government Agency]        -0.001
                                         Supplier - Total Assets (log)                    -0.001
                                         Supplier - Turnover (log)                         0.000
                                         Supplier - Unique Export Products                 0.000
                                         Supplier - Unique Import Products                 0.001                                                                                    0.000
                                         1[Contract Canceled]                              0.000
                                         Number of Applicants                             -0.004   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.004   -0.003   -0.004   -0.003   -0.004
                                         Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)             0.001
                                         Supplier Product HHI Index (Volume)              -0.001
                                         1[Supplier is Registered Firm]                    0.000
                                         1[Supplier is Entrepreneur]                      -0.001                                                0.000                               0.000
                                         1[Supplier is From Same Region]                   0.001                                                0.000                               0.000

This table shows the nonzero coefficients predicting bureaucrat effectiveness taken from the elastic net regularization procedures that had values of the regularization penalty λ that minimized
the mean squared error in K-fold cross-validation. Each column shows the coefficients from different mixing parameters being used, which can range from 0 to 1 for the basic elastic net
approach. Note that we require the regularization procedure to include nine indicators in the elastic net procedure due their importance in predicting the bureaucrat effectiveness estimates:
quantity (log), the organization effectiveness estimate, and seven indicators of missingness in data on suppliers, bureaucrats, and customers.



                                                                                                            82
TABLE OA.9: E LASTIC N ET N ONZERO C OEFFICIENTS                                                                             ARE       R OBUST A CROSS M IXING PARAMETERS
(O GRANIZATION E FFECTIVENESS )
                                        Variable                                             0       0.1      0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6      0.7      0.8      0.9       1
                                        Admission Rate to Auction                         0.000
                                        Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Auctions)           0.001    0.000    0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                                        Supplier Product HHI Index (Auctions)            -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001
                                        1[Auction Winner Not Supplier]                    0.001             0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        Auction Length                                    0.001   0.000     0.001    0.000             0.001    0.000   0.000     0.001   0.000    0.000
                                        1[Problem with Execution]                         0.000
                                        1[Auction Held]                                   0.000
                                        1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]          -0.003   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.001   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002
                                        1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Auctions)]          0.000
                                        1[Bur. Bought Product Often (Volume)]             0.001   0.000     0.001   0.000              0.001    0.001             0.001   0.000    0.000
                                        1[Supp. Bought Product Often (Volume)]           -0.001   0.000    -0.001   0.000             -0.001   -0.001            -0.001   0.000    0.000
                                        Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)   -0.001
                                        Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)     0.001             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        Bureaucrat Number of Auctions Run (Month)         0.002    0.001    0.003    0.002    0.000    0.003    0.002    0.001    0.003    0.002    0.002
                                        Bureaucrat Value of Auctions Run (Month)         -0.005   -0.004   -0.005   -0.004   -0.003   -0.005   -0.005   -0.004   -0.005   -0.004   -0.004
                                        Bureaucrat AKM Estimate                           0.322    0.320    0.319    0.320    0.320    0.319    0.319    0.320    0.319    0.320    0.320
                                        1[Customer works in Agriculture]                 -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002
                                        1[Customer works in Culture]                      0.008    0.008    0.009    0.008    0.008    0.009    0.008    0.008    0.009    0.008    0.008
                                        Distance from Regional Capital                   -0.019   -0.021   -0.022   -0.021   -0.021   -0.022   -0.022   -0.021   -0.022   -0.021   -0.021
                                        1[Customer works in Education]                    0.000            -0.001                     -0.001    0.000            -0.001
                                        1[Customer works in Emergency Services]           0.000             0.000                      0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Environment]                 -0.001   0.000    -0.002   -0.001   0.000    -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.002   -0.001   -0.001
                                        1[Customer works in Forestry]                     0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Health Care]                 -0.020   -0.023   -0.027   -0.025   -0.023   -0.027   -0.026   -0.024   -0.027   -0.025   -0.024
                                        1[Customer works in Housing]                      0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.003    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004    0.004
                                        1[Customer works in Internal]                     0.013    0.013    0.014    0.014    0.013    0.014    0.014    0.014    0.014    0.014    0.014
                                        1[Customer works in Labor]                       -0.001             0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Mining]                      -0.001             0.000                      0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Natural Resources]            0.000             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        1[Customer works in News]                         0.000
                                        Customer Evaluation Score                         0.002    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.000    0.001    0.001    0.000    0.001    0.001    0.001
                                        1[Customer works in Social Services]             -0.006   -0.007   -0.009   -0.008   -0.007   -0.009   -0.008   -0.008   -0.009   -0.008   -0.008
                                        1[Customer works in Sport]                        0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003    0.003
                                        1[Customer works in Television]                   0.001             0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Transportation]              -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.003   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004
                                        1[Customer works in Veterinary Services]          0.000             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        1[Customer works in Youth Services]               0.000             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        1[Delayed Delivery]                              -0.001
                                        1[Early Delivery]                                 0.001            0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        Deposit / Reserve Price                           0.002   0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001
                                        Length of Delay                                   0.001            0.000
                                        Number of Days Early                              0.000
                                        In-house Bureaucrat                               0.024   0.026     0.027   0.027    0.026     0.027    0.027   0.026     0.027   0.027    0.027
                                        Average of Losing Bids / Winning Bid              0.001             0.000                      0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        1[Bureaucrat Missing Concentration Data]          0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002
                                        1[Supplier Missing Concentration Data]            0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001
                                        1[Customer Missing Evaluation Data]               0.010    0.008    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007
                                        1[Supplier Missing Registration Data]            -0.009   -0.008   -0.009   -0.008   -0.008   -0.009   -0.009   -0.009   -0.009   -0.009   -0.009
                                        1[Supplier Missing Contract Data]                 0.002    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000
                                        1[Supplier Missing Customs Data]                  0.007    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008    0.008
                                        1[Supplier Missing Financial Data]                0.000    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.002    0.001    0.001    0.002
                                        Number of Bidders                                 0.000
                                        Number of Unique 2-Digit Product Codes           -0.003   -0.003   -0.004   -0.003   -0.002   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003   -0.003
                                        Number of Products                               -0.007   -0.007   -0.008   -0.007   -0.007   -0.008   -0.008   -0.007   -0.008   -0.007   -0.007
                                        Number of Contract Revisions                      0.004    0.003    0.004    0.003    0.003    0.004    0.004    0.003    0.004    0.003    0.003
                                        Number of Request Revisions                      -0.001    0.000   -0.001    0.000            -0.001   -0.001    0.000   -0.001    0.000    0.000
                                        Autonomous Organization                           0.000
                                        Budget Organization                              -0.001             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        Federal Organization                              0.030    0.037    0.038    0.037    0.037    0.038    0.038    0.037    0.038    0.038    0.038
                                        Government Organization                           0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.001
                                        Municipal Organization                           -0.013   -0.009   -0.010   -0.009   -0.008   -0.010   -0.010   -0.009   -0.010   -0.009   -0.009
                                        Other Organization                               -0.001
                                        Regional Organization                            -0.006
                                        Time to Prepare Documents                        -0.001            0.000                      0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        Quantity (log)                                    0.005   0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005    0.005
                                        Reserve Price                                     0.008   0.007    0.008    0.008    0.007    0.008    0.008    0.007    0.008    0.007    0.007
                                        Share of Individual Bidders                       0.001
                                        Share of Foreign-owned Bidders                    0.001   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                                        Share of Bidders in Ruslana                       0.001            0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        Share of Exporter Bidders                         0.001   0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000    0.001     0.001   0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000
                                        Share of Government Bidders                       0.002                                                 0.000
                                        Share of Bidders From Same County                 0.000            -0.001   0.000             -0.001    0.000            -0.001
                                        Share of Importer Bidders                        -0.002   0.000    -0.001   0.000             -0.001   -0.001            -0.001   0.000    0.000
                                        Share of Bidders with Large Profits               0.000
                                        Share of Bidders with Large Revenue               0.001             0.000                      0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        Share of Wholesaler Bidders                       0.001    0.000    0.001    0.000             0.001    0.001    0.000    0.001    0.000    0.000
                                        Share of Bidders from Same Region                -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004   -0.004
                                        Bureaucrat Success Rate                          -0.001    0.000   -0.001   -0.001            -0.001   -0.001    0.000   -0.001   -0.001    0.000
                                        Customer Success Rate                             0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006   0.005     0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006    0.006
                                        Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Cumulative)     -0.004             0.000
                                        Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Cumulative)       0.004   0.002     0.002   0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002    0.002
                                        Supplier Number of Auctions Run (Month)           0.002             0.000                     0.000    0.000             0.000
                                        Supplier Value of Auctions Run (Month)           -0.001
                                        1[Supplier has Large Profits]                    -0.001
                                        1[Supplier has Large Revenue]                    -0.001
                                        1[Supplier has Foreign Ownership]                 0.001   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                                        1[Supplier is NGO]                                0.000
                                        Supplier - Number of Export Destinations          0.000
                                        Supplier - Number of Employees (log)             -0.001
                                        1[Exporter Supplier]                              0.001   0.001    0.002    0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.001    0.002    0.002    0.002
                                        1[Supplier is Federal Government Agency]          0.002   0.002    0.003    0.003    0.002    0.003    0.003    0.002    0.003    0.003    0.003
                                        Supplier Age (log)                                0.000
                                        1[Importer Supplier]                              0.000
                                        Supplier - Perc. Revenue from Exports             0.000
                                        Supplier - Perc. Costs from Imports              -0.001   0.000    -0.001   0.000             -0.001   0.000    0.000    -0.001   0.000    0.000
                                        Supplier - Perc. Revenue from Contracts           0.000
                                        Supplier - Perc. Revenue from SOE Contracts      -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   0.000    -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001
                                        Supplier - Net Profit                             0.001
                                        1[Supplier is Private Company]                   -0.002            -0.001                     -0.001   0.000             -0.001
                                        Supplier Profit per Worker                        0.000
                                        1[Supplier is Regional Government Agency]        -0.002
                                        Supplier - Total Assets (log)                     0.002            0.001    0.000             0.001    0.001             0.001    0.000
                                        Supplier - Turnover (log)                         0.001
                                        Supplier - Unique Export Products                -0.003   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.001   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002   -0.003   -0.002   -0.002
                                        Supplier - Unique Import Products                 0.001
                                        1[Contract Canceled]                              0.000             0.000                      0.000                      0.000
                                        Number of Applicants                             -0.006   -0.005   -0.006   -0.006   -0.005   -0.006   -0.006   -0.005   -0.006   -0.006   -0.006
                                        Bureaucrat Product HHI Index (Volume)             0.006    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007    0.007
                                        Supplier Product HHI Index (Volume)              -0.002   -0.001   -0.002   -0.002   -0.001   -0.002   -0.002   -0.001   -0.002   -0.002   -0.001
                                        1[Supplier is Registered Firm]                    0.000
                                        1[Supplier is Entrepreneur]                       0.000
                                        1[Supplier is From Same Region]                  -0.002   -0.001   -0.001   -0.001   0.000    -0.001   -0.001   0.000    -0.001   -0.001   0.000

This table shows the nonzero coefficients predicting organization effectiveness taken from the elastic net regularization procedures that had values of the regularization penalty λ that
minimized the mean squared error in K-fold cross-validation. Each column shows the coefficients from different mixing parameters being used, which can range from 0 to 1 for the basic
elastic net approach. Note that we require the regularization procedure to include nine indicators in the elastic net procedure due their importance in predicting the bureaucrat effectiveness
estimates: quantity (log), the organization effectiveness estimate, and seven indicators of missingness in data on suppliers, bureaucrats, and customers.



                                                                                                           83
TABLE OA.10: B ID P REFERENCES ARE M ORE E FFECTIVE W HEN I MPLEMENTED                                      BY   L ESS E FFECTIVE
B UREAUCRATS (U SING R AW F IXED E FFECTS E STIMATES OF E FFECTIVENESS )

                                                          All Products                            Pharmaceuticals

                                                 Log Price        No. Bidders        Log Price    No. Bidders     Domestic Winner
                                                    (1)                  (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)
 log Standardized Quantity                         −0.330∗∗∗              0.045∗∗∗    −0.027∗∗∗        0.009∗∗          0.003∗∗∗
                                                   (0.014)               (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.001)

 Bureaucrat FE * Preferenced * Policy Active       −0.209∗∗∗              0.064∗∗     −0.121∗          0.366∗∗          0.081∗∗∗
                                                   (0.020)               (0.025)      (0.066)         (0.149)          (0.029)

 Organization FE * Preferenced * Policy Active     −0.155∗∗∗              0.058∗∗∗    −0.004           0.276∗∗          0.019
                                                   (0.018)               (0.021)      (0.063)         (0.114)          (0.020)

 Constituent Terms                                   Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
 Month, Good FEs                                     Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
 Year×Product×Size×Region FEs                        Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
 Outcome Mean                                       5.57              2.11             6.22          1.89              0.36
 Observations                                    16,575,168        16,575,168        461,989        461,989           293,538
 R2                                                0.696              0.295           0.950          0.300             0.736


 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 This table estimates the triple-differences equation (14): pigt = Xigt β + µg + λt +
 δPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet + γPreferencedgt × α̂b + ζPreferencedgt × ψ̂j + ηPolicyActivet × α̂b + θPolicyActivet × ψ̂j +
 πPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × α̂b + νPreferencedgt × PolicyActivet × ψ̂j + εigt . The With Bid Preferences samples sum-
 marized in columns (3) and (6) of Table 1 are used, i.e. the combination of each Analysis Sample and the treated auctions
 that procurers therein carried out. Columns (1) and (3) estimate the ITT on the log price paid (P); columns (2) and (4) the ITT
 on the number of bidders participating in the auction (N); and Column (5) the ITT on an indicator for the winner supplying
 domestically made goods. In the All Products sample an item has Preferenced = 1 if the type of good appears on the list of
 goods covered by the preferences policy for that year. In the Pharmaceuticals sample, Preferenced = 1 if the drug purchased
 is made—by at least one supplier—both in Russia and abroad. Policy Active = 1 during the part of the relevant year that the
 preferences policy was in effect. Bureaucrat and Organization FEs are the raw fixed effects estimates from Section 4. Month
 and good fixed effects are included in all columns, as are interactions between 2-digit HS Product categories, years, region, and
 lot size. (We use “product” to distinguish the categories used in these interactions from the much more disaggregate goods
 categories used for the good fixed effects). Standard errors are clustered on month and good.




                                                                 84
                     TABLE OA.11: R ESULTS ARE R OBUST TO A LTERNATIVE C LASSIFIERS AND T RIMMING F EWER O UTLIERS


                                                                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                       Machine learning Method                                                       lr             lr             svm             hm
                       Classification Confidence Threshold                                          50              50              50             50
                       Outlier Trimming                                                             2.5             5                5              5
                       (1) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across burs)                               1.731           1.385           1.351           1.360
                       (2) s.d. of Organization Effects (across orgs)                             1.575           1.209           1.225           1.203
                       (3) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across CS)                              1.149           0.843           0.836           0.855
                       (4) s.d.   of Bureaucrat Effects (across items, merge)                     1.104           0.747           0.719           0.748
                       (5) s.d.   of Organization Effects (across items, merge)                   1.236           0.827           0.831           0.839
                       (6) s.d.   of Connected Set Effects (across items, merge)                  0.487           0.402           0.358           0.420
85




                       (7) s.d.   of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items, merge)                0.894           0.630           0.594           0.640
                       (8) s.d. of log unit price                                                 2.434           2.197           2.205           2.196
                       (9) s.d. of log unit price | good, month                                   1.417           1.283           1.253           1.286
                       (10) Adjusted R-squared                                                    0.959           0.964           0.965           0.963
                       (11) Number of Bureaucrats                                                61,815          54,771          55,187          54,361
                       (12) Number of Organizations                                              65,204          59,574          59,685          59,146
                       (13) Number of Bureaucrat-Organization pairs                             309,912         284,710         286,394         283,900
                       (14) Number of Connected Sets                                              1,035            984             971             972
                       (15) Number of Observations                                             12,287,649      11,516,088      11,539,042      11,527,796


     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in
     equation (10) in different samples. The decomposition uses the fixed effect estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Column (2) replicates
     the findings in column (1) of table 3. Column (1) removes the top and bottom 2.5% of outlier observations for each good. Column (3) uses the Support Vector Machine
     classifier described in Section OA.3 instead of logistic regression. Column (4) uses the hierarchical classifier described in Section OA.3 instead of logistic regression.
                           TABLE OA.12: R ESULTS ARE R OBUST TO A LTERNATIVE C LASSIFIER R ELIABILITY T HRESHOLDS


                                                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
       Machine learning Method                                                       lr              lr              lr             lr              lr              lr
       Classification Confidence Threshold                                          45              50              55              45              50              55
       Outlier Trimming                                                             2.5             2.5             2.5             5                5               5
       (1) s.d. of Bureaucrat Effects (across burs)                               1.689           1.731           1.661           1.483           1.385           1.406
       (2) s.d. of Organization Effects (across orgs)                             1.505           1.575           1.477           1.356           1.209           1.251
       (3) s.d. of Connected Set Effects (across CS)                              1.087           1.149           1.065           0.969           0.843           0.888
       (4) s.d.   of Bureaucrat Effects (across items, merge)                     0.993           1.104           0.948           0.940           0.747           0.777
       (5) s.d.   of Organization Effects (across items, merge)                   1.069           1.236           1.069           1.030           0.827           0.895
       (6) s.d.   of Connected Set Effects (across items, merge)                  0.465           0.487           0.396           0.495           0.402           0.449
       (7) s.d.   of Total Bur + Org Effects (across items, merge)                0.781           0.894           0.742           0.750           0.630           0.677
86




       (8) s.d. of log unit price                                                 2.445           2.434           2.434           2.214           2.197           2.197
       (9) s.d. of log unit price | good, month                                   1.428           1.417           1.417           1.302           1.283           1.283
       (10) Adjusted R-squared                                                    0.958           0.959           0.959           0.963           0.964           0.964
       (11) Number of Bureaucrats                                                62,712          61,815          61,815          55,785          54,771          54,771
       (12) Number of Organizations                                              66,063          65,204          65,204          60,018          59,574          59,574
       (13) Number of Bureaucrat-Organization pairs                             312,281         309,912         309,912         287,173         284,710         284,710
       (14) Number of Connected Sets                                              1,038           1,035           1,035            981             984             984
       (15) Number of Observations                                             12,337,810      12,287,649      12,287,649      11,535,202      11,516,088      11,516,088


     The table shows the components of the variance due to bureaucrats, organizations, and connected sets estimated by implementing the variance decomposition in
     equation (10) in different samples. The decomposition uses the fixed effect estimates from equation (9): pi = Xi β + αb(i,j ) + ψj + γs(b,j ) + εi . Column (5) replicates
     the findings in column (1) of table 3. As described in Section OA.3, column (4) deemed sentences to be correctly classified if their predicted value ĝC (xi ) was above
     the 45th percentile and their normalized cosine similarity θgi was above the 45th percentile. Column (6) uses the 55th percentile. Columns (1)–(3) are analogous to
     columns (4)–(6) but on the sample in which only the top and bottom 2.5% of outlier observations for each good are removed.
