                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 COST OF SERVICE REGULATION IN U.S. HEALTH CARE:
                          MINIMUM MEDICAL LOSS RATIOS

                                             Steve Cicala
                                           Ethan M.J. Lieber
                                           Victoria Marone

                                         Working Paper 23353
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w23353


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2017




We are grateful to Michael Chernew, Leemore Dafny, Joshua Gottlieb, Neale Mahoney, Magne Mogstad,
Matthew Notowidigdo, Christopher Ody, Morten Olsen, Ariel Dora Stern, and GlenWeyl, as well
as seminar participants at Chicago, Northwestern, and Harvard for helpful comments and suggestions.
This paper combines work from Marone ("Bending the Cost Curve the Wrong Way? Evaluation of
Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Regulation in the Health Insurance Industry") that was initially conducted
in parallel with that of Cicala and Lieber. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Steve Cicala, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and Victoria Marone. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cost of Service Regulation in U.S. Health Care: Minimum Medical Loss Ratios
Steve Cicala, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and Victoria Marone
NBER Working Paper No. 23353
April 2017, Revised July 2017
JEL No. I10,L5,L98

                                            ABSTRACT

A health insurer's Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) is the share of premiums spent on medical claims. The
Affordable Care Act introduced minimum MLR provisions for all health insurance sold in fully-insured
commercial markets, thereby capping insurer profit margins, but not levels. While intended to reduce
premiums, we show this rule creates incentives analogous to cost of service regulation. Using variation
created by the rule's introduction as a natural experiment, we find claims costs rose nearly one-for-one
with distance below the regulatory threshold: 7% in the individual market, and 2% in the group market.
Premiums were unaffected.


Steve Cicala                                       Victoria Marone
Harris School of Public Policy                     Northwestern University
University of Chicago                              Evanston, IL 60208
1155 East 60th Street                              marone@u.northwestern.edu
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
scicala@uchicago.edu

Ethan M.J. Lieber
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
elieber@nd.edu
I      Introduction

One goal of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) was to reduce the cost
of health insurance. To that end, the law instituted minimum requirements on the share of
premiums that commercial insurers must spend on medical claims. This share is known as the
Medical Loss Ratio (MLR), and is a measure of the actuarial fairness of insurance.1 This paper
formalizes the connection between this type of mandated actuarial fairness in insurance markets
and cost of service regulation, and then uses recent federal regulatory changes to estimate the
distortion such a policy induces in the provision of health insurance. We find that rather than
reducing premiums, insurers increased their claims costs nearly one-for-one with their distance
below the regulatory threshold.

    Some form of MLR regulation has existed at the state level since 1980, but was typically used
as a tool to assess and compare insurer value (America’s Health Insurance Plans, 2010). State
insuance commissioners would use projections of costs to approve premium increases based on
the MLR, but did not enforce regulations based on the ex post realization of costs (Harrington,
2013). The ACA standardized and extended this regulation to the federal level, becoming
effective for the commercial, fully-insured market in January 2011.2 Specifically, on a state by
state and segment by segment basis, insurers are required to maintain a MLR of at least 80% in
the individual and small group market segments and 85% in the large group market segment (it
has become colloquially known as the ‘80/20 rule’). A similar regulation also went into effect
for the Medicare Advantage market beginning in 2014.

    In an important departure from prior state MLR regulations, federal MLR regulation requires
insurers to issue rebates to customers based on their realized MLR. As an example, if an insurer
collects $100 in premiums in the individual market, but spends only $79 paying medical claims
that year, they are required to write a $1 check to policy holders. This regulation was indeed
binding for many insurers, with over $1 billion in rebates issued to consumers in 2011. MLRs
have risen (and rebates have fallen) in subsequent years, with an additional $1.8 billion rebated
in total between 2012–2015. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), which
administers the rule, routinely cites rebates and increased MLRs as evidence of the program’s

1
    This regulation was established by Section 2718 of the ACA, entitled “Bringing Down the Cost of Health
    Coverage.” The regulatory definition of MLR also has adjustments for taxes, regulatory fees, and insurer
    expenditures on health plan “quality,” which we discuss in greater detail below.
2
    The market for “fully-insured” health insurance products is distinct from the market for “self-insured” products
    often purchased by medium and large employers. In the former “fully-insured” case, a health insurance company
    bears the financial risk of adverse health events and actually provides the risk pooling function; in the latter
    “self-insured” case, the health insurance company merely sells its services as as claims administrator and does
    not bear any financial risk on behalf of the purchaser. Self-insured products are not subject to MLR regulation,
    nor many other regulations. Fully-insured products account for roughly 58% of the private commercial health
    insurance market as of 2013, by covered lives (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research &
    Educational Trust, 2015). Non-profit insurers were also exempt from the regulation.


                                                          1
success, calculating savings by applying pre-2011 MLRs to observed claims costs to estimate
how much higher premiums would have been if not for the regulation (The Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services, 2014a). We use the imposition of this binding regulation as identifying
variation to estimate the effects of minimum MLR regulation–thus the magnitude of rebates
(which are small relative to the industry) demonstrate the opportunity to estimate the response
to MLR regulation, but does not bound its overall importance in determining costs in the health
insurance sector.

    At its simplest level, this paper observes that our hypothetical insurer with $100 in premium
revenue and $79 in claims finds it must bear the full administrative cost of keeping expenditures
below $80, but reaps none of the rewards. That is, minimum MLR requirements encourage
higher costs, not lower. We draw the direct parallel between MLR regulation and cost of
service regulation, and show empirically that the 80/20 rule has, indeed, substantially increased
insurers’ medical expenditures.3 While perhaps obvious ex post, this connection has not been
established (nor estimated) to date.

    The paper therefore contributes to our understanding of both firm response to regulation in
the health care sector, and to cost of service regulation more broadly. Recent empirical work
has shown the importance of Averch and Johnson (1962)-type bias in input choices both in
health care (Acemoglu and Finkelstein, 2008) in addition to the electricity sector (Cicala, 2015;
Fowlie, 2010). In our setting, the regulatory instrument is even more blunt than favoring one
input over another, and the regulator has no authority to deny reimbursement for ‘imprudent’
expenditures. It has also been shown that both providers and insurers respond to such eco-
nomic incentives: doctors and hospitals change how they treat patients in response to Medicare
reimbursement incentives, (Einav et al., 2017; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014), drug makers charge
higher prices to more price-inelastic customers (Duggan and Scott Morton, 2006), and insurers
free-ride on Medicare reimbursement schedules to economize on negotiation costs (Clemens and
Gottlieb, 2017; Clemens et al., 2015). Such responses have not been studied in the context
of minimum MLR regulations, where existing work has focused on its connection to markups,
and the response of firms in imperfectly competitive markets to such regulation, holding costs
fixed (Starc, 2014; Ericson and Starc, 2015; Karaca-Mandic et al., 2015; Abraham and Karaca-
Mandic, 2011).4

    We model the behavior of a monopolistic insurer offering coverage of a fixed health shock

3
    We note the important distinction here between insurers’ medical expenditures and total medical expenditures,
    where the difference is accounted for by out-of-pocket costs. While we find that insurers’ medical expenditures
    have risen as a result of MLR regulation, we do not have strong evidence on its effects on total medical
    spending.
4
    Harrington (2013) qualitatively connects minimum MLRs to economic regulation broadly, and reviews a num-
    ber of potential unintended consequences–in particular the asymmetry created when rebates limit the upside
    risk to insurers.


                                                         2
at a chosen price per dollar of insurance. We show that the imposition of an MLR constraint
yields a model that is identical to that of Averch and Johnson (1962), but with a single input.
We then endogenize the cost of insuring the health shock by allowing the insurer to also choose
how much effort to exert to keep costs down, in the spirit of Laffont and Tirole (1993). We
show that minimum MLR regulations are predicted to curtail cost-reducing effort and increase
medical expenditures, while the impact on premiums is ambiguous (and depends on the relative
curvatures of the demand and cost-reducing effort functions).

    We measure the impact of the 80/20 rule on MLRs, medical claims per life-year, and premi-
ums per life-year using annual data from 2005–2013 from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC). This organization standardizes state-level reporting of insurer finances
and formed the basis of reporting requirements that were adopted as part of federal MLR regula-
tion. These data allow the construction of a panel both preceding and after the implementation
of federal MLR regulation at the unit of observation at which the regulation applies: for each
insurer, in each market segment, in each state, for each year.5

    We use a difference-in-difference framework that compares changes in outcomes over time
between insurers with historically low MLRs versus those who were persistently already in
compliance with the rule before it took effect. We show that this regulation is associated with
an abrupt increase in MLRs for “treated” firms that is approximately one-for-one with their
distance from the mandated MLR minimum. This increase was accomplished (particularly
after a year or two of adjustment) almost entirely by increases in medical claims expenditures.
Our preferred estimates show a 7% increase in claims in the individual market for firms that were
previously out of compliance; in the group market, we estimate a 2% increase in claims, though
the latter estimate is imprecise. These increases occur with a sharp break from historical trends.
We find little evidence of a reduction in premiums in either the individual or group markets.
Consistent with our model of cost-reducing effort, we find suggestive evidence that insurers
cut administrative spending when the regulation was binding, but that the magnitudes of the
changes in administrative costs are small relative to the magnitude of changes in claims costs
(and thus simple “relabelling” of administrative costs as claims costs cannot explain our results).

    There are two main challenges to interpreting our results as causal estimates of the impact
of the 80/20 rule. First, we cannot actually observe treatment, i.e., whether a firm’s unregu-
lated MLR would have been beneath the minimum threshold, since we only observe realized
MLRs. Because the majority of a firm’s MLR variation is persistent (and to avoid issues of
mean-reversion), we use the five-year average MLR preceding the ACA to measure treatment
intensity, and show general robustness to the width of this window. This is a noisy proxy
5
    Federal MLR regulation distinguishes between the large and small group market segments, but the NAIC data
    reports these segments jointly. Thus, our analysis of the group market looks at these two market segments
    together; we discuss this in greater detail below.


                                                      3
for true treatment, and therefore adds attenuation bias to our estimates. Second, MLRs are
not randomly assigned, but reflect endogenous decisions of firms in response to demand, mar-
ket structure, regulations, provider negotiations, etc. We assume that prior compliance with
the rule before its implementation means that no policy-induced changes in behavior occurred
among firms with high MLRs, and that the other regulations did not fall differentially upon
high- versus low-MLR firms. The absence of diverging pre-trends and robustness to alternative
specifications lends credibility to these assumptions. At a minimum, we show there has been a
stark, abrupt relative change in outcomes for low-MLR firms following the implementation of
the ACA rule.

    It is important to note at the outset that while our results show impacts of MLR regulations
that are sharply divergent from their original intention (lowering premiums), it is difficult to
make a statement about net welfare. To the extent that higher claims result from additional
care, the presence of moral hazard in the consumption of insured health care would suggest that
such costs exceed policyholder willingness to pay for them. On the other hand, if insurers were
inefficiently restricting the actuarial value of plans, this expansion in claims has a positive net
value to society insofar as it moves equilibrium toward the intersection of the marginal cost and
marginal willingness to pay for insurance. Even if the entire increase in claims costs were due
to higher provider prices with no change in quantities (a transfer to providers), one would still
need to account for the benefit to insurers of less price-reducing negotiation effort. Instead of
making net welfare statements, our goal in this paper is to take a first step in characterizing the
nature (and magnitude) of the problem so that the tools developed elsewhere for such settings
might be brought to bear in the future.6

    The paper is organized as follows: in the next section, we provide background on minimum
MLR regulation and present descriptive evidence of its impact on insurers to motivate our
estimation strategy. The third section demonstrates the equivalence of this rule with cost of
service regulation and derives theoretical predictions of its effect on claims costs and premiums.
The fourth section describes the data, and the fifth details the estimation strategy. The sixth
section presents the results, and the final section concludes.



II      Background and Motivating Evidence

MLR regulation was only one of many systemic changes to the health insurance industry set
in motion by the ACA, which was passed on March 23, 2010. As we are going to attempt to
disentangle the direct effects of MLR regulation, it is important to document other potentially

6
    See Laffont and Tirole (1993), for example, for a comprehensive treatment.


                                                       4
confounding factors. The most important changes made in the individual and small-group
insurance markets were the establishment of the public health insurance exchanges, a near total
ban on individual risk rating, the individual health insurance mandate, and the creation of a set
of Essential Health Benefits (EHBs) that plans must cover. These changes fundamentally altered
the business of writing individual and small-group insurance policies, and were implemented in
2014.7 As such, we end our study period in 2013.8

    There were, however, a number of provisions in the ACA that went into effect at the end of
2010 or the start of 2011. Those changes which were likely to have affected the private, fully-
insured health insurance market are the extension of coverage of dependents up to the age of
26, the elimination of cost sharing for a set of preventive care procedures (e.g., mammograms),
the prohibition on lifetime limits on coverage, and the creation of a national high-risk pool.
For example, research on the coverage of dependents up to the age of 26 has found that this
provision reduced uninsurance levels and led to somewhat higher insurance premiums (Antwi
et al., 2013; Depew and Bailey, 2015). Section VI discusses how these contemporaneous policy
changes affect the interpretation of our results.

    Prior to the ACA, 29 states had some form of MLR regulations on the books, but the reg-
ulations do not appear to have been binding on realized MLRs. In some cases, states had
thresholds that were very low; the median MLR threshold among states with some regulation
was only 0.65. Even where the MLR thresholds were higher, states often lacked the ability to
enforce the regulation. For example, in states where the MLR threshold was 0.75 or higher in
the individual market, more than 40 percent of life-years were in plans that did not meet the
requirement in 2010. Harrington (2013) explains this apparent non-enforcement in the context
of the rate hearings process: state commissioners would use projections of costs to approve
premium increased based on the MLR, but did not enforce regulations based on the ex post
realizations of costs.

    Regulation of minimum MLR thresholds was brought to the federal level as part of the ACA.
These thresholds are not enforced on a plan-by-plan, nor an insurer-by-insurer, basis. Instead,
the insurer aggregates all of its business within a given state, market segment, and year, and
the MLR realized over this block of business must meet the MLR threshold. The threshold is
0.80 for the individual and small group markets and 0.85 for the large group market. In the
year immediately preceding the implementation of MLR regulation, more than 52 percent of


7
    These regulations applied to all new plans offered as of 2014, but plans already in existence were given
    “grandfathered” status and allowed to remain unchanged. Insurers may have differed in the extent to which
    they utilized these “low value” health plans prior to the ACA, and the effect may play out over time as these
    “grandfathered” plans are phased out gradually. EHB requirements were put into place in 2014.
8
    Our discussion of ACA provisions is based primarily upon information from Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
    (2013).


                                                        5
consumers insured in the individual market were in plans with an MLR below 0.80.9 Beginning
in 2011, if an insurer fell below the applicable MLR threshold, it had to send rebates to its
policyholders.10

     Figure 1 shows the cumulative density function (CDF) of MLRs in the individual market for
the years 2005 through 2010 as well as for 2013. The gray lines show the CDFs for each year
from 2005 through 2009. Although there is some variation from year to year, the CDFs remain
fairly similar over this period, and 2010 (the blue line) does not appear to be systematically
different from the other pre-ACA years. However, by 2013, the distribution of MLRs has moved
to the right as MLRs increased, but not evenly throughout the distribution. The increase in
MLRs is heavily concentrated among firms with MLRs below the federal 0.80 threshold (denoted
by the vertical red line). As mentioned previously, in 2010, 52 percent of lives were covered by
insurers with MLRs below the regulated threshold, but by 2013, only 30 percent of covered lives
were below the threshold. One can also note the sharp jump in density in the neighborhood
of the threshold in 2013, while prior distributions are far less concentrated around this point.
Those insurers below the threshold in 2013 were required to pay rebates.

     The corresponding distribution for the group market is somewhat less informative because
prior to the ACA, the NAIC did not collect information separately for the small group and
large group market segments. This creates measurement error in our aggregated data. A firm
could be far below the ACA threshold in one market segment and above the threshold in the
other. The degree to which we expect to see a response in the aggregate data depends upon
how much of the firm’s group business was in the segment below the threshold, something we do
not observe. With that caveat in mind, Figure 2 presents the CDFs of MLRs for the aggregate
group market from 2005 through 2010 and for 2013.

     Comparing 2010 and 2013, there appears to be a small increase in MLRs at the low end of
the distribution. Because 0.80 is the minimum threshold set by the ACA, it is quite likely that
firms with an aggregate MLR below 0.80 are below their relevant threshold.11 Above 0.80, there
is very little difference between the 2010 and 2013 distributions. This is consistent with the
changes observed in the individual market, which were that the distribution of MLRs appears
to have been shifted to the right for low MLR firms, but there was very little movement above

9
     Unfortunately, we are not able to separate insurer’s small and large group business in the data used for this
     calculation. As a result, we can not directly calculate the fraction of consumers in group plans in 2010 with
     MLRs below the ACA group thresholds. However, we can bound this fraction. Using a threshold of 0.80
     (correct for the small group market), we find that 20 percent of consumers in the group market were in plans
     below the ACA threshold; using the threshold of 0.85 (correct for the large group market), approximately half
     of the consumers would have been in plans that did not meet the threshold.
10
     Rebates are calculated such that after the insurer has paid out the rebates, and the rebates are added to the
     MLR numerator, its MLR would be equal to the regulated threshold.
11
     There are adjustments to the ACA MLR threshold that can reduce the target level further. These are discussed
     in Section IV


                                                         6
                        Figure 1: Distributions of MLRs in the Individual Market Over Time

                                         1



                                         .8
                Cumulative Probability




                                         .6



                                         .4



                                         .2



                                         0
                                              0.50   0.60   0.70      0.80   0.90       1.00   1.10    1.20   1.30     1.40   1.50
                                                                                        MLR

                                                                   2005,...,2009                2010                 2013

             Note: Each CDF represents the fraction of life-years (not firms) at a particular MLR
             level, where MLR is defined as claims over premiums. The figure is based on NAIC data
             (see Section IV for details)


the MLR thresholds. That said, the year-to-year variance in group market MLRs and concerns
about measurement error mentioned above prevent us from inferring too much from this figure
on its own.

     By the end of 2015, insurers had paid nearly $2.8 billion in rebates to consumers as a result
of not meeting the MLR thresholds. Figure 3 shows these rebates by market segment and
year, where the left panel shows total rebates, and the right panel shows rebates per life-year
of enrollment (i.e, per enrollee). We combine the small- and large-group market segments into
one “group” market to be consistent with our later analysis. In 2011, $400 million in rebates
were paid in the individual market and $700 million in the group market. Significantly lower
rebates were paid in subsequent years. Rebates in 2012 were approximately half of those paid
in 2011, and in 2013, they were approximately one-third of 2011 rebates. There appears to have
been slight increases after the exchanges came online in 2014, which was likely the result of
significant uncertainty around the health of the population entering the market.

     Much of the relative magnitude of total rebates between the individual and group markets
can be attributed to total enrollment: in 2011, 11.5 million people obtained coverage in the
individual market and 71.4 million in the group market.12 On a per life-year basis, however,

12
     Authors’ calculation based upon the CMS data (see Section IV for details).


                                                                                    7
                                     Figure 2: Distributions of MLRs in the Group Market Over Time

                                     1



                                     .8
            Cumulative Probability




                                     .6



                                     .4



                                     .2



                                     0
                                          0.50   0.60   0.70      0.80   0.90       1.00   1.10    1.20   1.30     1.40   1.50
                                                                                    MLR

                                                               2005,...,2009                2010                 2013

         Note: Each CDF represents the fraction of life-years (not firms) at a particular MLR
         level, where MLR is defined as claims over premiums. The figure is based on NAIC data
         (see Section IV for details)


rebates in the individual market are far greater, reflecting the lower MLRs in this market
segment. In 2011, insurers in the individual market paid approximately $35 in rebates per
enrollee; in the group market, the analogous number is $10. Rebates have converged over time
between markets on a per-enrollee basis.

  While the magnitude of the rebates is small relative to the overall size of the market for
health care, they are providing a measure of the amount of identifying variation that exists,
not the potential impact of MLR regulation on the market as a whole. Many firms might
have maintained high MLRs as a result of competitive forces, but it is also possible that the
mechanism that we seek to measure was already at work on a forward-looking basis during state
rate hearings before the ACA. These rebates, particularly those in 2011, are a measure of what
variation in exposure to the regulation exists for estimating the effect of MLR regulation, not
its sum total impact. The reduction in rebates over time suggests that firms made changes to
bring their business into compliance with the regulated MLR minima.

  There is a small but growing literature on the impacts of the ACA’s MLR regulation (Abraham
et al., 2014; McCue et al., 2013; McCue and Hall, 2015; Clemans-Cope et al., 2015). These papers
use data from 2010-2012 and have found that MLRs increased, particularly in the individual




                                                                                8
                        800                                   Figure 3: Rebates Paid by Year and Market Segment




                                                                                                                   40
     Total Rebates in Millions of Dollars




                                                                                                   Rebate per Life-Year in Dollars
                                  600




                                                                                                                             30
                   400




                                                                                                               20
      200




                                                                                                   10
                        0




                                                                                                                   0
                                             2011      2012        2013   2014      2015                                             2011      2012        2013   2014      2015

                                                    Group Market           Individual Market                                                Group Market           Individual Market


Note: Rebates are tabulated from CMS data, combining large and small group market segments to form the
“Group Market” (see Section IV for details).


market and for for-profit insurers.13 While McCue et al. (2013) and McCue and Hall (2015)
study the reduced form impact of the change in regulation on outcomes, Abraham et al. (2014)
and Clemans-Cope et al. (2015) study outcomes as a function of a firm’s 2010 MLR. Because
these studies rely on a single year of data before the regulations went into effect, it is not clear
whether the estimated changes are reflecting other underlying trends in the insurance market or
are causal impacts of the regulation. Our work complements these studies by explicitly linking
the regulation to the theoretical literature on cost of service regulation and using data from a
much longer time frame in combination with a research design that allows us to address concerns
about underlying trends and mean reversion.



III                                         Minimum MLRs as Cost of Service Regulation

We next present a model of insurer behavior subject to MLR regulation to derive predictions
of the industry’s response. Moreover, we show minimum MLR requirements are equivalent
to cost of service regulation. To demonstrate this equivalence, we consider the decision of a
monopolistic insurance provider choosing a price p per dollar of coverage against a negative
health shock H that occurs with probability r in a homogenous population. Consumers choose
a level of coverage q ∈ [0, H] that pays off q dollars if they experience the health shock, and have


13
     These studies have also explored the impacts on a number of financial outcomes such as administrative costs,
     profits, and quality improvement expenditures.


                                                                                               9
an elastic demand for coverage q(p). The level of coverage q chosen by the consumer determines
                                           q
the actuarial value of the plan,equal to   H.   In this setting, the actuarially fair price per dollar of
insurance would be p = r, at which the insurer would make zero profits in expectation. Without
any regulatory constraints the monopolist would maximize expected profits

                                      max        pq(p) − rq(p)
                                           p


with the usual results. MLR regulation requires that expenditures on medical care (expressed
here as the insurer’s expected liability, rq(p)) exceed some share of premium revenues, so that
rq(p)
pq(p)   ≥ k for some k ∈ (0, 1). Under MLR regulation, the firm therefore faces the objective
function
                            max    pq (p) − rq(p) + λ [rq(p) − kpq(p)]                               (1)
                              p


  Note that this constrained maximization is equivalent to the Lagrangian of Averch and John-
son (1962), equation (7), but with a single input, and the probability of the health shock playing
the role of the marginal cost of the input. When the constraint binds, this yields
                                         
                                        1    1−λ
                                   p 1+ D =        r<r                                               (2)
                                       ε    1 − kλ

The relationship between the optimal MLR and the inverse of the elasticity of demand makes
clear that this is a markup regulation for all intents and purposes. The more inelastic is demand,
the higher the optimal markup (and lower the MLR) for the unconstrained monopolist, and the
more heavily behavior will be impacted by a minimum MLR requirement. Compared with the
unconstrained monopolist, MLR regulation in this framework leads to expanded coverage (i.e.,
higher actuarial value of plans), as well as a lower price per dollar of insurance (i.e., a lower
price per dollar of covered potential loss) for consumers. While MLR regulation reduces the
monopoly distortion, it may not necessarily improve welfare in the presence of the other market
imperfections that are ubiquitous in this sector. In any case, it certainly does not lead to a
reduction in the insurer’s health care expenditures: the elastic demand implied by the first
order condition leads to an increase in total premium revenue (pq(p)), and total claims paid
(rq(p)) increase with the more complete coverage.

  Having shown the equivalence of minimum MLR regulation with cost of service regulation,
we now introduce the notion that the insurer decides how much effort, e, to exert in order
to keep marginal costs down. That is, instead of just paying some share of the cost of the
exogenous health shock, insurers participate in the the determination of the prices paid for
healthcare services. In practice, this is a more accurate description of U.S. health insurance,
in which insurers establish networks of doctors and hospitals with whom prices are negotiated
(Dranove et al., 1993; Ho, 2009; ?). Using the framework of Laffont and Tirole (1993), this


                                                   10
effort is measured in dollars of reduced marginal costs, which are c = β − e where e ∈ [0, β].
Effort is treated as a fixed cost, and reduces profits according to a convex function ψ(e), where
ψ 0 (e) > 0, ψ 00 (e) > 0.14 The insurer therefore solves

                                    max           [p − (β − e)] q (p) − ψ(e)                                  (3)
                                      p,e
                                            s.t. (β − e) ≥ kp

where k continues to denote the minimum allowable MLR. Supposing the constraint binds, one
can substitute in for price to solve an unconstrained objective function in effort. This yields the
first order condition:
                                                                 k
                                       q (p) + pq 0 (p) = −           ψ 0 (e)
                                                              (1 − k)


The following result is proven in Appendix A:


Proposition 1 Suppose the conditions necessary for (3) to be concave hold, and denote pM , eM
                                                                                                                     

the monopolist’s optimal price per dollar of coverage and effort, respectively, when the constraint
does not bind. Then the optimal level of effort under MLR regulation k, eR (k) ≤ eM , with strict
inequality if the regulation binds.


Differentiating the binding regulatory constraint, the impact of a marginal increase in k on the
price per dollar of coverage is
                                                             
                                            dp         1     de
                                               =−         p+                                                  (4)
                                            dk         k     dk

     This shows that in the absence of moral hazard’s impact on the insurer’s effort, the immediate
effect of the MLR regulation is to reduce the price of a dollar of insurance (though, again, this
causes an increase in total premiums due to the elastic demand for insurance). The ability
                                                                                                         de
to decide how hard to work to reduce marginal costs, however, erodes this effect, as                     dk   < 0
(included in the proof of Proposition 1). If effort is sufficiently responsive (i.e., if the effort
function ψ(e) is not too convex relative to the curvature of premium revenues), an increase
in the minimum allowable MLR will be accompanied by an increase in the price per dollar of
insurance. Thus the impact on total premium revenues (and the comprehensiveness of coverage)
is ambiguous.

     The impact of MLR regulation on total claims costs depends on the potentially offsetting
effects of higher marginal costs of providing insurance due to reduced effort and changes in the
14
     Spending on effort in this setting can be appropriately thought of as spending on administrative costs, which
     detract directly from profits, and do not enter the numerator of MLR.


                                                        11
level of coverage purchased q(p). The second order condition for (3) is nonetheless sufficient to
ensure that total claims rise, also proven in Appendix A:


Proposition 2 Retaining the assumption that the solution to (3) is a maximum is sufficient
to ensure that total claims under minimum MLR regulation, C R (k) ≡ β − eR (k) q pR (k) ≥
                                                                                      

C M , the total claims under unconstrained monopoly, with strict inequality when the regulation
binds.


This model makes strong predictions about the impact of minimum MLR regulation on claims
costs, but abstracts away from several important features of insurance and health care markets to
focus on parallels with cost of service regulation. Two additional margins of complexity strike us
as promising for further study. First, insurers face demand uncertainty when setting premiums
and negotiating provider prices. Thus, MLR regulation may affect the behavior of insurers for
whom the regulation is non-binding, even in expectation, because they have optimized over the
range of realizations of the demand distribution for which the regulation would bind. The law
of large numbers implies this consideration would be more salient for smaller insurers than large
ones, who face less uncertainty. Second, this model abstracts from consumer heterogeneity, a key
focus of modern health economics research. One could imagine that another method by which
to raise MLR could be to reduce screening effort aimed at avoiding high-cost consumers, thus
expanding the cost base. The framework presented here does, however, provide a foundation to
guide our empirical analysis of the impact of minimum MLR regulations on claims, utilization,
and premiums per life-year, to which we now turn.



IV       Data

In this section, we describe the sources of data used in our empirical analysis, discuss the sample
restrictions used to create our analysis datasets, and present summary statistics overviewing the
data.



Description of Data

The main source of data we use is from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
(NAIC), which is a standard-setting and regulatory support organization governed by insurance
regulators from each state. As part of its mandate to coordinate regulatory oversight, the NAIC
collects and publishes operational data from insurance companies. The data used in this study
comes from the health insurance Exhibit of Utilization, Premiums, and Enrollment files, which


                                                12
include data on enrollment, claims expenses, and premiums written. These data are currently
available for all health insurers by state and market segment between 2001 and 2014.15 The
market segments we will use in our analysis are the individual segment and the group segment.
The NAIC data prior to 2011 does not distinguish between the small group (employer groups
under 100 people) and large group (employer groups over 100 people) market segments; thus,
we will pool the small and large group segments together throughout our analysis. We use
this data for years 2005–2013, as reporting rule changes create compositional shifts during the
2001–2004 period, and major non-MLR regulatory changes begin in 2014 (described in Section
II).

     The second data source we use is a regulatory database maintained by the federal government.
In order to implement the myriad changes set in motion in 2010, the ACA gave a new regulatory
mandate to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), with the goal of coordi-
nating and overseeing the major reforms in the health insurance industry.16 As part of this
effort, CMS implemented its MLR enforcement system in 2011 by setting new data reporting
requirements for health insurers and collecting these data into a new regulatory database. This
database contains detailed financial information about health insurers across different market
segments (individual, small group, and large group) at the state level and is currently available
for 2011–2015. Among many other measures, this data contain enrollment, insurer MLRs, re-
bate payments, administrative costs, health improvement expenses, medical claims costs, and
premium revenue by insurer, state, and market segment. To help insurers (and the government)
prepare for this administrative burden, NAIC introduced the Supplemental Health Care Exhibit
(SHCE) in 2010, which we append to the CMS database to provide us with a single year of
pre-ACA data on these more detailed outcomes. We also use the CMS data to present the
magnitudes of MLR rebate payments, and show how they have changed between 2011–2015.

     From the NAIC data, we create an unbalanced panel dataset at the market segment-insurer-
state (i) by year (t) level, and define insurer MLR as follows:17,18

                                                            Claimsit
                                             M LRit ≡                                                            (5)
                                                          P remiumsit

15
     A notable omission from the NAIC datasets are the majority of insurers in California, which follow different
     reporting requirements and report directly to the state as opposed to the NAIC.
16
     In fact, an entire new regulatory entity was created under the umbrella of CMS, named the Center for Consumer
     Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO). For simplicity, we will refer to this just as CMS.
17
     Note that an “insurer” as defined here is a unique reporting entity within a state, not a unique insurer “group”
     within a state. For example, LifeWise Health Plan of Washington is owned and operated by Premera Blue
     Cross, but reports to the NAIC under a separate licensing number, thus LifeWise and Premera are considered
     different insurers for the purposes of this analysis. Additionally, insurers commonly report their HMO business
     separately from the rest of their business, and thus these are treated separately.
18
     The field used to define Claims is Claims Incurred: “Amount incurred for provision of health services;” the
     field used to define Premiums is Premiums Earned: “Health premiums earned.”


                                                          13
The MLR calculated for 80/20 compliance is also a function of an insurer’s “Quality Improve-
ment Expenditures,” which are allowed to enter the numerator of the MLR in order not to
discourage spending on quality. Expenses that can fall into this category are specifically desig-
nated by the regulator as “activities that are likely to improve health outcomes, prevent hospital
readmissions, improve patient safety and reduce medical errors, and increase wellness and health
promotion” (The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2014b). Additionally, insurers are
allowed to make deductions from the MLR denominator for taxes and regulatory fees. We
cannot observe these additional items in the pre-period and therefore do not use them in our
calculation of insurers’ MLR. Both of these omissions will bias our calculated insurer MLRs
downwards. This will have the effect of attenuating our estimates by classifying some insur-
ers as persistently below the minimum threshold even if they were in compliance once these
adjustments were made (see Section V for more details).

     To arrive at the final analysis dataset, we censor outlier observations with MLRs below the
1st and above the 99th percentiles, exclude observations with missing or negative data in key
fields (claims, premiums, enrollment), and exclude insurer observations with fewer than 1,000
covered lives.19 The majority of outlier observations are those for which the insurer had fewer
than 1,000 covered lives, so the restrictions are highly overlapping. Geographically, we exclude
observations from California (for reasons noted above) and U.S. territories. We also exclude a
handful of observations manually that are clearly data errors.20 We also omit insurers present in
the NAIC data that are not present in the CCIIO data, to ensure we are studying only insurers
that were subject to MLR regulation. Finally, given that our identification strategy relies on
determining whether an insurer is likely to be directly affected by MLR regulation by examining
their pre-period MLRs, we limit to insurers with at least one year of pre-period (2010 or earlier)
data.



Summary Statistics

As a graphical summary of our data, Figure 4 presents the cumulative growth of average pre-
miums and claims over our analysis period: 2005–2013. Premiums and claims are expressed on
a per-person, per-month basis, as “Per-Member-Per-Month” (PMPM) values.21 Additionally,
means are enrollment-weighted to reflect the experience of the average enrollee, as opposed to
the average insurer. In the group market, average claims and premiums in 2005 were $205 and
$247, respectively. In the individual market, average claims and premiums in 2005 were $145
19
     1000 lives in the threshold for an insurer to be considered “credible” and to be subject to MLR regulation at
     all.
20
     A list of these errors is available from the authors upon request.
21
     As health insurance premiums are typically paid on a monthly basis, it is standard to express values in this
     way.


                                                          14
and $185, respectively. Growth in both claims and premiums has been substantial over this
time period, with higher levels and slightly faster growth in the group market, where higher
risk individuals can pool through their employer rather than be priced out, as may happen in
the individual market. This figure also makes clear that the variation among insurers used in
this paper is unlikely to have had a noticeable impact on overall mean outcomes, as historical
trends have largely persisted unabated at the aggregate level.

      Figure 4: Cumulative Growth of Claims and Premiums by Market Segment: 2005–2013


                                                         Group Market                                    Individual Market
                        1.5
      Cumulative growth above 2005 level
       1.1      1.2     1 1.3       1.4




                                           2005   2007       2009       2011        2013   2005   2007         2009          2011   2013

                                                                               Premiums           Claims

Note: The 2005 value of each series has been normalized to one. Growth is calculated on means that are
enrollment weighted and taken from the panel of insurers used in our analysis from the NAIC data.



     Next, Table 1 presents summary statistics for the analysis datasets in each market segment
(group and individual) during the pre-period (2005–2010). It shows the average policyholder
purchased a plan that was just in compliance with the eventual federal regulations. Premiums
account for 4–6% of median income over this period (∼$55,000/year). Claims and premiums
tend to be higher in the group market than individual market. This is a highly concentrated in-
dustry, as is well-known, with even greater concentration in the market for individual insurance
(an HHI of 10,000 represents perfect monopoly, and the Department of Justice defines concen-
trations in excess of 2,500 to be highly concentrated ). We have found the utilization measures
in the NAIC data (“Ambulatory encounters” and “Inpatient admissions”) to be somewhat noisy
(and do not use them elsewhere in our analysis), but the means broadly reflect the difference in
claims between market segments.22



22
     “Ambulatory encounters” are any broadly defined contacts with health providers on an outpatient basis.


                                                                                      15
                            Table 1: Insurer Summary Statistics (2005–2010)


                                                         Group Market          Individual Market
          MLR                                                 0.85                     0.81
                                                                [ 0.06 ]                 [ 0.13 ]
          Claims PMPM                                            242                      169
                                                                 [ 59 ]                   [ 72 ]
          Premiums PMPM                                          284                      208
                                                                 [ 67 ]                   [ 68 ]
          # of insurers per state                                12.4                      4.3
                                                                [ 6.2 ]                  [ 2.9 ]
          State market HHI                                      2,617                    5,873
                                                               [ 1,795 ]                [ 2,594 ]
          Percent nonprofit                                      0.39                     0.39
                                                                [ 0.49 ]                 [ 0.49 ]
          Ambulatory encounters per life-year                     9.6                      7.8
                                                                [ 6.1 ]                  [ 6.7 ]
          Inpatient admissions per life-year                     0.07                     0.05
                                                                [ 0.03 ]                 [ 0.04 ]
          Lives per insurer in 2010 (000s)                      107.8                     37.4
                                                               [207.9 ]                  [ 62.5 ]
          Total lives in 2010 (000s)                           42,596                    6,691
          # of insurers in 2010                                 395                       179
          Note: Insurer statistics are enrollment-weighted. Standard deviations are given in brackets.


V        Empirical Strategy

Estimating the causal impact of minimum MLR requirements on insurer behavior in this setting
presents two main empirical challenges. First, the level of “treatment,” meaning the difference
between an insurer’s unconstrained MLR and the regulated minimum, is unobserved. Second,
treatment is not randomly assigned, but depends on equilibrium objects determined endoge-
nously depending on demand, market structure, and regulation. In this section, we describe
how features of the regulation permit the use of a difference-in-difference design to bound the
causal impact under standard assumptions.

     Minimum MLR regulation requires that firm i in year t refund its customers if its realized
MLR, mit , is below some threshold k.23 Nothing is required of the firm if its MLR is above
k. However, mit is an equilibrium outcome determined after annual claims cost and premium
uncertainty is resolved, so the contemporaneous distance from k cannot be used as a measure

23
     In practice, this exact threshold allows for adjustments based on the number of lives covered by the insurer
     and special exemptions. We assume a single threshold here for ease of exposition. In addition, the unit of
     observation i is technically a firm-state-market combination.


                                                        16
of the intensity of treatment. Instead, let m∗it denote what the firm’s profit maximizing target
MLR would have been if not for the regulation.24 This suggests the kinked treatment design
                                               
                                          ∗
                                               0                if m∗it ≥ k
                                         dit =
                                               (k − m∗ )        if m∗it < k
                                                           it


Where d∗it is firm i’s true continuous level of treatment in year t. Although in reality firms are
either “treated” or “untreated” on a yearly basis, our empirical strategy will rely only upon a
firm’s estimated treatment based on the mean of observed MLRs in the five years preceding the
ACA, defined as m̂i , to measure the persistent component of a firm’s distance from k.25 Our
continuous treatment measure dˆi is defined analogously to the true treatment measure above,
but uses these noisy estimates m̂i instead of the true unobserved m∗it . This treatment definition
is motivated by the fact that 70% (60%) of the MLR variation in the individual (group) market
during the baseline period is due to these time-invariant differences across insurers. Using the
mean mit from the five-year baseline period 2006–2010 also prevents an anomalously low MLR
just before the ACA from categorizing a firm into treatment, and subsequent mean-reversion
from producing spurious results.

     Measurement error in the treatment variable introduces attenuation bias to our estimates of
the impact of minimum MLR regulations. Attenuation takes two forms: first, on the extensive
margin, firms are mis-categorized in and out of treatment depending on whether the error
is larger or smaller than k − m∗it . Second, on the intensive margin the mis-measurement of
treatment intensity induces classical measurement error.

     Converting treatment into a binary measure depending on the sign of k − m̂i limits measure-
ment error to the extensive margin of mis-categorization. This is particularly helpful in the
kinked design because firms most likely to be mis-categorized are those with the lowest levels
of treatment. This substantially reduces the attenuation of treatment effect estimates relative
to situations in which treatment is uniform once the running variable crosses the threshold. On
the other hand, when much of the treated data is close to the threshold (as it is in our case),
fitting a slope parameter allows the insurers predicted to be most treated (those with low m̂it ) to
exert greater influence on the estimate of the effect. Ultimately, the binary treatment measures
the average effect on the treated population (and will be small if most of the sample is lightly
treated), while the kinked design estimates the effect of an additional MLR-point of distance
below the minimum threshold. In Appendix Section B.3 we employ an instrumental variables
strategy to reduce measurement error. We use noisy estimates from part of the pre-period to in-
24
     We emphasize that a firm’s target MLR, m∗it , is based on decisions made at the beginning of the year (regarding,
     e.g., premiums and effort) as well as on expected claims costs. Realized claims costs will not be known until
     the end of the year.
25
     General robustness to the width of this window is shown in Appendix B.1.


                                                          17
strument for noisy-estimates from the other part of the pre-period, finding qualitatively similar
and statistically indistinguishable results, suggesting that measurement error has a relatively
minor impact on our estimates.26

     The second main empirical challenge is that MLRs are not randomly assigned: costs and
premiums are choice variables, so that firms are treated according to endogenous business deci-
sions. Using the time-invariant definition of treatment assignment described above ensures that
transitory shocks are not pushing firms in to one group or another. Combining this treatment
definition with a complete set of insurer (γi ) and year(δt ) fixed effects yields a difference-in-
difference framework of the form
                                                             n       o
                                  yit = γi + δt + τ Dit + βt1 dˆi > 0 + uit                                    (6)


                 n                o
  where Dit ≡ 1 dˆi > 0; t > 2010 in the binary treatment version (and 1 {· } is an indicator
function evaluating to one if the statement inside is true), or Dit ≡ dˆi for the continuous
treatment version, and yit is an outcome variable of interest. The parameter β measures the
slope of a treatment group-specific linear trend, which is omitted in the event-study figures that
estimate year-specific τt . This framework identifies the treatment effect based on the change
in exposure to MLR regulation experienced between the pre- and post-period, recognizing that
firms with dˆi < 0 were already in compliance before the regulation took effect, and therefore
serve as the control group. This requires that unobservable determinants of outcomes be either
time-invariant, common across firms, or linear in time according to treatment group assignment.
We use event-study-type figures to diagnose the potential for confounding differential trends, as
well as demonstrate the robustness of our results to various specifications of unobservables.

     The key remaining threat to identification is that other regulations also implemented as part
of the ACA might have had a differential impact on firms depending on their baseline MLR. To
diagnose the potential magnitude of this concern, we also evaluate enrollment as an outcome
variable: regulations mandating coverage for particular groups (such as dependents up to age
26) should lead to a differential change in enrollment if it were to confound our estimates of
the impact of minimum MLR regulations. On the other hand, signing up a disproportionate
number of high-risk individuals might also be an insurer’s strategy for MLR compliance. Thus
this diagnostic rules out a potential threat if an effect is not detected, but does not necessarily
invalidate the exercise if there is a relative change in enrollments coincident with the ACA.27

26
     It is unfortunately not possible to use states’ heterogenous MLR regulation preceding the ACA as an instru-
     mental variable for treatment since only eight firms experienced a state-based change in MLR regulation during
     the baseline period, making the instrument nearly completely collinear with firm fixed effects.
27
     The wider roll-out of exchanges for individual coverage in 2014 substantially disrupts the individual market
     for health insurance, and thus as mentioned previously, we end our analysis in 2013.


                                                         18
  Table 2 presents summary statistics for firms separated by the binary measure of treatment
        n       o
(Di ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 ) during the baseline period, for both the group and individual market seg-
ments. Consistent with Table 1, it shows that the distance beneath the minimum threshold was
substantially larger among treated firms in the individual market than the group market. In
both market segments, the driver of lower MLRs among treated insurers is significantly lower
claims costs than their untreated counterparts, with the gap in premiums between the two
groups being much narrower. For example, in the individual segment, average premiums among
untreated insurers were 11% higher than among treated insurers, while average claims were 37%
higher. For differences in ambulatory encounters to explain the gap in claims between these
groups, each additional encounter in the treatment group would have to cost $600 ($300) more
than in the untreated group in the individual (group) market. Given that treated insurers are
substantially larger than untreated insurers, it seems likely that treated insurers are able to
negotiate lower prices with providers (?), and perhaps otherwise take advantage of economies of
scale. The fact that the average treated insurer in both market segments had more policyhold-
ers than their untreated counterparts also suggests that a smaller customer base to cover fixed
costs (thus requiring a higher operating margin) was not the reason for their persistently lower
MLRs. Nonprofits were exempt from minimum MLR regulation, and so are never classified as
treated, regardless of their MLR.

  Finally, using our binary measure of treatment, we can present a graphical description of the
data that is now broken out between treated and untreated insurers. Figures 5 and 6 recreate
the same plots shown in Figure 4, but now separately for treated and untreated insurers for
each market segment. As before, weighted average claims and premiums are expressed as growth
rates above their 2005 levels. Starting with the individual market in Figure 5, it is immediately
evident that there appears to be a break in trend in the growth of claims costs of treated insurers
in 2011, with no such break experienced by untreated insurers or in the premium series of either
set of insurers. In the group segment, shown in Figure 6, there is not as obvious of a movement
in means between treated and untreated insurers, but it appears that claims and premiums
for treated insurers grow more quickly that those of untreated insurers after 2011. In the next
section, we aim to formalize and quantify the findings suggested in these figures using regression
analysis.




                                                19
             Table 2: Insurer Summary Statistics by Treatment (2005–2010)

                                                 Group Market              Individual Market
                                             Treated      Untreated       Treated       Untreated
MLR                                           0.80          0.87             0.71         0.87
                                              [ 0.04 ]      [ 0.05 ]        [ 0.07 ]     [ 0.12 ]
Claims PMPM                                     223          248              137          188
                                               [ 50 ]        [ 61 ]          [ 29 ]       [ 83 ]
Premiums PMPM                                   281          286              194          216
                                               [ 60 ]        [ 70 ]          [ 35 ]       [ 80 ]
# of insurers per state                         3.1          10.5             2.3          3.8
                                               [ 1.5 ]      [ 5.6 ]          [ 1.5 ]      [ 3.0 ]
State market HHI                               2,550        2,642            6,218        5,667
                                              [ 1,419 ]    [ 1,916 ]        [ 2,377 ]    [ 2,697 ]
Percent nonprofit                              0.00          0.53             0.00        0.62
                                              [ 0.00 ]      [ 0.50 ]        [ 0.00 ]     [ 0.49 ]
Ambulatory encounters per life-year             8.9           9.9             6.0          8.9
                                               [ 5.7 ]      [ 6.2 ]          [ 4.1 ]      [ 7.7 ]
Inpatient admissions per life-year             0.07          0.07             0.05        0.05
                                              [ 0.03 ]      [ 0.03 ]        [ 0.06 ]     [ 0.03 ]
Lives per insurer in 2010 (000s)               127.6        101.7             49.2        32.3
                                              [192.0 ]     [212.5 ]         [ 87.6 ]     [ 47.4 ]
Total lives in 2010 (000s)                    11,990       30,606            2,655        4,036
# of insurers in 2010                           94          301               54           125
Note: Statistics are enrollment-weighted. Standard deviations are given in brackets.




                                                 20
Figure 5: Cumulative Growth of Claims and Premiums in the Individual Market, by Treatment


                                                           Treated                                Untreated
                                       1.6
    Cumulative growth above 2005 level
             1.2        11.4




                                             2005   2007    2009     2011    2013 2005   2007       2009      2011   2013

                                                                        Premiums         Claims

Note: The 2005 value of each series has been normalized to one. Growth is calculated on means that are
enrollment weighted and
                     n takeno from the panel of insurers used in our analysis from the NAIC data.
T reatment ≡ Di ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 .



 Figure 6: Cumulative Growth of Claims and Premiums in the Group Market, by Treatment


                                                           Treated                                Untreated
                                       1.6
    Cumulative growth above 2005 level
             1.2        11.4




                                             2005   2007    2009     2011    2013 2005   2007       2009      2011   2013

                                                                        Premiums         Claims

Note: The 2005 value of each series has been normalized to one. Growth is calculated on means that are
enrollment weighted and
                     n takeno from the panel of insurers used in our analysis from the NAIC data.
T reatment ≡ Di ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 .



                                                                               21
VI     Results

In this section, we begin by presenting event-study plots of our main empirical specifications,
which serve to provide a graphic illustration of our findings as well as motivate our final re-
gression specification. We then present our main results using the outcome variables of M LR,
ln(Claims), and ln(P remiums), using both our binary and continuous definitions of treatment,
in both the individual and group market segments. We also present the results using various
alternative specifications, confirming the robustness of our results. We then use enrollment
as the outcome variable to bound the extent to which differential changes might explain our
results. Finally, we use Quality Improvement expenditures and administrative costs as out-
come variables to provide suggestive evidence of how insurers may have complied with MLR
regulation.



Estimates by Year to Implementation

Figure 7 presents regression-adjusted estimates of the difference in average MLRs across the
treated and control groups for each year, relative to 2010. It is based on our empirical specifi-
cation in equation (6), but estimates each τt separately and does not control for a differential
treatment group-specific trend. By omitting this variable, we are able to assess the extent
to which a difference in trends across our treated and control groups might contribute to the
overall point estimate. As seen in Panel (a), in the individual market, the treated and control
groups have similar MLRs between 2005 and 2010. However, as soon as the rule is implemented,
MLRs rise in the treated group relative to those in the control group. Panel (b) shows similar
findings in the group market, though the magnitude of the increase is smaller, consistent with
the distributions of pre-period MLRs presented in Section II.

  Next, Figure 8 shows analogous results using the natural log of claims per life-year as the
outcome variable. Panel (a) presents the individual market, where claims for treated firms
appear to be falling slightly relative to untreated firms. This further motivates the separate
trend for the treated group in our main specifications. Upon the implementation of the ACA’s
MLR regulation in 2011, the treated group’s claims jump up and continue to rise. Panel (b)
shows the results in the group market, where the treated and control firms have similar claims
costs prior to the ACA. After MLR regulation goes into effect, claims in the treated group appear
to grow slightly relative to those in the control group. However, the estimates are imprecise and
there appears to be a role for differential trends to play in lowering the ultimate point estimate.

  Figure 9 presents the same analysis using the natural log of premiums per life-year as the
outcome variable. Again, Panel (a) shows the individual market, and reveals a downward trend


                                                22
                                              Figure 7: Treatment Effects by Year: M LR
                                                            (a) Individual Market
                  .15
  Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
      0          .05
                  −.05      .1




                                       2005          2007              2009           2011              2013
                                                                       Year

                                               Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval



                                                             (b) Group Market
                  .04
  Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
    −.02          0
                  −.04      .02




                                       2005          2007              2009           2011              2013
                                                                       Year

                                               Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval


Note: Event-study figures are based on estimation of equation (6) using the binary
definition of treatment, with year-specific treatment effects relative to 2010, and
omitting the treatment group-specific linear trend. Regressions are weighted n by o
enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 .




                                                                     23
                                               Figure 8: Treatment Effects by Year: ln(Claims)
                                                                 (a) Individual Market
                     .15
   Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
      0           .05−.05     .1




                                        2005              2007                2009         2011               2013
                                                                              Year

                                                    Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval



                                                                   (b) Group Market
                     .2
   Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
     −.1           0 −.2      .1




                                        2005              2007                2009         2011               2013
                                                                              Year

                                                    Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval


Note: Event-study figures are based on estimation of equation (6) using the binary
definition of treatment, with year-specific treatment effects relative to 2010, and
omitting the treatment group-specific linear trend. Regressions are weighted n by o
enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 .
The logged outcome variable Claims is measured on a per life-year basis.




                                                                           24
during the pre-period. In this case, it is not clear whether the lower premiums observed after
2011 are actually a response to the regulation, or simply the continuation of a previous trend.
In the group market, Panel (b) shows a pattern quite similar to those of claims in Figure 8(b).
Taken together, these figures suggest that MLRs increased after the passing of the ACA and
that this increase is due largely to a rise in claims costs rather than a reduction in premiums.
In addition, the differential pre-trends observed in claims costs and premiums motivate the
inclusion of treatment group-specific linear trends in our main empirical specification, equation
(6). Trends in claims costs and premium revenues were moving together in each market as to
largely remove a differential trend in the MLR.




                                               25
                                            Figure 9: Treatment Effects by Year: ln(P remiums)
                                                               (a) Individual Market
                                     .1
  Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
   −.05          0  −.1   .05




                                          2005          2007              2009           2011              2013
                                                                          Year

                                                  Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval



                                                                (b) Group Market
                    .1
  Coefficient on Treated X Year (τt)
         −.1        −.2 0




                                          2005          2007              2009           2011              2013
                                                                          Year

                                                  Avg. Treatment on the Treated        95% Confidence Interval


Note: Event-study figures are based on estimation of equation (6) using the binary
definition of treatment, with year-specific treatment effects relative to 2010, and
omitting the treatment group-specific linear trend. Regressions are weighted n by o
enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 .
The logged outcome variable P remiums is measured on a per life-year basis.




                                                                        26
Main Specifications

We now move to estimation of our main specifications, which we will present for both the
individual and group market segments, as well as using both our binary and continuous definition
of treatment. First, Table 3 reports the results of estimating equation (6) in the individual
market with our binary treatment specification. We present results for three outcome variables:
M LR, ln(Claims), and ln(P remiums).28 If interpreted causally, the coefficients on Post-2011 *
T reatment indicate the average treatment effect of MLR regulation on the treated insurers. The
coefficients on [Y ear] ∗ T reatment for 2011, 2012, and 2013 show how the estimated treatment
effect varied over the post-ACA period.


                  Table 3: Regression Results: Individual Market, Binary Treatment

                                            MLR                       ln(Claims)              ln(Premiums)
                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)
     Post-2011 * T reatment         0.073                        0.068                        -0.025
                                 (0.018)***                    (0.030)**                     (0.024)
     2011 * T reatment                             0.066                         0.048                   -0.036
                                                (0.017)***                     (0.027)*                 (0.022)
     2012 * T reatment                             0.082                        0.095                    -0.010
                                                (0.020)***                   (0.035)***                 (0.027)
     2013 * T reatment                             0.094                        0.112                    -0.008
                                                (0.025)***                   (0.042)***                 (0.035)
     R2                              0.75           0.75           0.89          0.89          0.86       0.86
     # Insurers                      184            184            184           184           184        184
     Observations                   1,417          1,417          1,417         1,417         1,417      1,417
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time
                                                                                   n trend.o The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<.01.



     Our estimates suggest that treated insurers experienced an increase in MLR post-2011 that
was 7.3 percentage points higher than the counterfactual, an amount roughly equal to treated
insurers’ average distance below the regulatory threshold (about 8%). Column (2) confirms
patterns in Figure 7: treated insurers experienced an immediate jump in MLRs in 2011 and
small additional increases in each subsequent year. Moving to column (3), the claims costs
of treated insurers rose by an average of 6.8% in the three years after the implementation
of federal MLR regulation, above what their past trends and the experience of untreated firms
would predict. Treated firms in the individual market appear to have adjusted their claims costs
28
     We note again here that Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year basis.


                                                        27
somewhat gradually. Column (4) shows that the impact on treated insurers’ claims increased
as time passed, rising from a 4.8% increase in the first year of the regulation to more than 11%
by 2013. In column (5), our point estimate suggests that premiums might have fallen slightly
for treated insurers after the regulation went into effect, but we lack the statistical precision to
reject the null of no effect. That said, the time path of the effect on premiums shown in column
(6) is consistent with a small reduction in the first year of the regulation, but then subsequent
adjustments with the effect that there was no impact on premiums three years out.

  Next, Table 4 presents the results of the same analysis, but using our continuous definition
of treatment, namely the distance below the MLR threshold a treated insurer was predicted to
be in 2011. Here, a coefficient of one would imply that moving an insurer’s target MLR one
percentage point farther below the regulated threshold in 2011 would increase the corresponding
outcome by 1%, a sort of MLR distance-elasticity. Using this specification, we can see that,
as expected, the treatment effect is strongly increasing in insurers’ exposure to the regulation.
In other words, insurers further below the regulatory threshold experience larger responses in
both MLR and claims costs. In terms of magnitudes, the point estimates in columns (1) and
(2) suggest that increasing treatment intensity by one MLR point (e.g., going from 0.07 to 0.08
below the MLR threshold) increases a firm’s MLR in the post period by almost 0.007 (e.g., the
rise in MLR goes from 0.049 to 0.056). Column (3) shows that the effect on claims is nearly
identical and growing over time.


             Table 4: Regression Results: Individual Market, Continuous Treatment

                                         MLR                      ln(Claims)               ln(Premiums)
                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment         0.695                         0.700                     -0.311
                              (0.117)***                    (0.199)***                 (0.148)**
  2011 * T reatment                            0.597                       0.415                      -0.450
                                            (0.120)***                   (0.184)**                  (0.143)***
  2012 * T reatment                            0.719                        0.836                      -0.214
                                            (0.112)***                   (0.210)***                   (0.162)
  2013 * T reatment                            0.835                        1.013                      -0.200
                                            (0.162)***                   (0.263)***                   (0.187)
  R2                              0.75          0.76           0.89          0.89         0.86          0.86
  # Insurers                      184           184            184           184          184           184
  Observations                   1,417         1,417          1,417         1,417        1,417         1,417
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ dˆi . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<.01.




                                                       28
  This specification again finds that treated insurers responded in the short run by lowering
premiums, but that this effect diminished over time. Unlike the binary treatment specification,
we now have the statistical power to reject the null of no effect on premiums in the first year
following the implementation of MLR regulation. If there are greater adjustment costs to raising
claims costs as opposed to simply dropping premiums, firms might choose to lower premiums in
the short run, but in the longer run, might reoptimize over inputs (e.g., effort) such that claims
ultimately rise and premiums return to whatever levels the market will bear.

  Next, Table 5 and Table 6 present an equivalent analysis for the group market. Generally,
the results closely parallel those we found for the individual market: MLRs and claims costs
grew each year after the new regulation went into effect. Our coefficient estimates in the group
market are closer to zero, reflecting the fact that the group market as a whole was much closer to
compliance than the individual market. However, instead of finding reductions in premiums in
the first year which then dissipated over time, our point estimates suggest that premiums might
have risen in the group market during the post period. The relatively low treatment intensity
received by insurers in the group market makes it difficult to distinguish the cost/premium
components of change as statistically different from zero.

                   Table 5: Regression Results: Group Market, Binary Treatment

                                                MLR                  ln(Claims)          ln(Premiums)
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
        Post-2011 * T reatment          0.015                     0.019                 0.003
                                      (0.007)**                  (0.024)               (0.022)
        2011 * T reatment                             0.011                  0.009                 -0.004
                                                     (0.007)                (0.019)               (0.016)
        2012 * T reatment                             0.017                  0.020                 0.001
                                                    (0.009)*                (0.029)               (0.025)
        2013 * T reatment                            0.023                   0.069                 0.043
                                                   (0.009)**                (0.060)               (0.057)
        R2                              0.69          0.69        0.86       0.86       0.87       0.87
        # Insurers                       406           406         406        406        406        406
        Observations                    3,295         3,295       3,295      3,295      3,295      3,295
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time
                                                                                   n trend.o The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<.01.




                                                        29
                   Table 6: Regression Results: Group Market, Continuous Treatment

                                               MLR                       ln(Claims)               ln(Premiums)
                                        (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
     Post-2011 * T reatment            0.523                         1.255                     0.577
                                    (0.123)***                     (0.651)*                   (0.654)
     2011 * T reatment                                0.464                       0.930                      0.333
                                                   (0.117)***                    (0.695)                    (0.712)
     2012 * T reatment                                0.502                       1.104                      0.446
                                                   (0.142)***                   (0.631)*                    (0.623)
     2013 * T reatment                                0.634                       1.917                      1.095
                                                   (0.146)***                   (0.827)**                   (0.808)
     R2                                 0.70            0.70          0.86         0.87         0.87          0.87
     # Insurers                         406             406           406          406          406           406
     Observations                      3,295           3,295         3,295        3,295        3,295         3,295
     Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
     include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
     Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ dˆi . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
     p<.01.


Robustness to Alternative Specifications

Changes in market structure, such as increased consolidation of providers or the entry of new
health insurers, potentially seem likelier to occur in markets where health insurers have market
power. Since Karaca-Mandic et al. (2015) have found that low MLRs are associated with market
power, we might think these other changes are happening more frequently in states and years
in which there is a higher concentration of low MLR insurers. To rule out these stories, and
others that would create confounding variation at the state-by-year level (such as the early
Medicaid expansions), we also include state-by-year fixed effects into our specifications. Table
7 presents these results for the individual market, binary treatment specification, with MLR as
the outcome of interest. The first two columns reproduce our baseline results, and columns (3)
and (4) show the results once state-by-year fixed effects have been included. The results are
qualitatively similar (if not somewhat stronger), and statistically indistinguishable.

     Table 7 also shows the results once we have dropped nonprofit insurers. Nonprofit insurers
were required to report their financial information just as for-profit insurers were, but they were
not actually subject to the same MLR requirements. It was not until 2014 when nonprofit in-
surers faced any penalties for not meeting the federal MLR thresholds.29 Up to this point in the
analysis, we have treated nonprofits as firms that were in compliance with their MLR require-
ments, regardless of their actual MLRs. However, unlike the hospital market where for-profit

29
     Nonprofit insurers were faced with losing the tax advantages they gain through their nonprofit status (Kirchhoff,
     2014).


                                                              30
                Table 7: Sensitivity Results: Individual Market, Binary Treatment

                                                                     MLR
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment        0.073                         0.081                     0.077
                             (0.018)***                    (0.024)***                (0.022)***
  2011 * T reatment                           0.066                        0.074                     0.067
                                           (0.017)***                   (0.024)***                (0.021)***
  2012 * T reatment                           0.082                        0.113                     0.089
                                           (0.020)***                   (0.032)***                (0.025)***
  2013 * T reatment                           0.094                        0.149                     0.109
                                           (0.025)***                   (0.042)***                (0.030)***
  State-by-year f.e.              No            No            Yes           Yes          No            No
  Exclude nonprofits              No            No             No            No         Yes           Yes
  R2                             0.75          0.75           0.85          0.85        0.71          0.71
  # Insurers                     183           183            183           183         125           125
  Observations                  1,412         1,412          1,412         1,412        926           926
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce results from our main
specification. Columns (3) and (4) include state-by-year fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) drop insurers that
were ever nonprofits. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
                                                                                                    n       oAll
specifications include insurer fixed effects and a treatment group linear time trend. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.


and nonprofit hospitals behave very similarly (Norton and Staiger, 1994; Sloan, 2000; Picone et
al., 2002), for-profit and nonprofit insurers do not appear to do so (Dafny and Ramanarayanan,
2012; Lieber, 2017). Because of this, it is not clear that nonprofit insurers can be reasonably
included in our control group. Despite these potential differences, columns (5) and (6) show
that nonprofit insurers are not driving our results, as our point estimates are largely unaffected
when we drop nonprofit insurers altogether. We have conducted these same alternative analyses
for our continuous treatment measure in the individual market, as well as for both treatment
measures in the group market. In each case, the state-by-year fixed effects and the exclusion of
nonprofits from our sample has no material impact on our estimates. Tables with these results
are included in Appendix B.1.

  To address directly whether our results can be explained by variation in market power or
market concentration, we next present specifications in which we interact our main treatment
variables with such measures. Table 8 presents our main specifications using the binary treat-
ment definition in the individual market, but adding interactions with either insurer market
share or state HHI. The results are presented for our three main outcome variables: MLR,
claims, and premiums. The variable M ktShare is constructed at the insurer-state level, and
gives each insurer’s market share in the individual segment. The variable HHI is constructed
at the state level, and measures the concentration of the individual health insurance market
in that state. Both measures are based on 2010 data. We do not find strong evidence that


                                                      31
the magnitude of treatment effects are correlated with either insurer market share nor market
structure. However, given that these variables are strongly correlated with whether an insurer
was treated in the first place (see Table 2), the presence of these controls reduces the precision
of our treatment effect estimates. The HHI interactions suggest that more competitive markets
are more likely to achieve MLR increases with a balanced combination of premium reductions
and claims increases, while concentrated areas focus on increasing claims (complementary to the
findings of (Cabral et al., 2015)), but we lack statistical precision to reject identical responses.
The corresponding results for our continuous treatment measure and the group segment are
presented in Appendix B.4. We find similar results for the individual market using the continu-
ous measure of treatment, and suggestive evidence that MLR response is decreasing in market
share in the group segment.

  Table 8: Heterogeneity Results by Market Structure: Individual Market, Binary Treatment

                                                        MLR                 ln(Claims)         ln(Premiums)
                                                 (1)            (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                        0.081           0.081      0.079     0.055     -0.031    -0.055
                                             (0.023)***      (0.026)***   (0.049)   (0.061)   (0.042)   (0.049)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * M ktShare           -0.014                      -0.018              0.009
                                              (0.028)                     (0.059)             (0.060)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * HHI                                 -0.013                0.023               0.053
                                                              (0.035)               (0.079)             (0.078)
  Interaction var. mean                        .2861           .5282      .2861     .5282     .2861      .5282
  R2                                            0.75            0.75       0.89      0.89      0.86       0.86
  # Insurers                                    184             184        184       184       184        184
  Observations                                 1,417           1,417      1,417     1,417     1,417      1,417
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year n       basis.
                                                              o     HHI is divided by 10,000 so that the HHI
                                                       ˆ
variable ranges between 0 and 1. T reatment ≡ 1 di > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.


  Our results are generally robust to different metrics used to define treatment, as presented
in Appendix B.1. One can vary the set of years used to predict whether a firm’s target MLR
m̂i was below the regulatory threshold in 2011; in our main analyses, we have used 2006–2010.
Tables B.4–B.7 in Appendix B.1 present results from our main specifications for both markets
and for both the binary or continuous treatment definitions using data from windows leading
up to 2010 of varying width (including 2010 alone) to predict treatment status. Our results
are quite robust to these variations. The results are also robust to the number of pre-period
observations a firm was required to have in order to predict whether or not it would be treated by
the new MLR regulations. One potential concern is that a single measurement during the 2006–
2010 period might be a poor predictor of what the firm’s MLR would be in 2011, and thereby
provide a particularly noisy measure of which firms are actually treated (not to mention one


                                                        32
which would be more likely subject to mean reversion). In our main analyses presented above,
we require firms to have only one pre-period observation. Tables B.8–B.11 in Appendix B.2
present results for specifications that vary the required number of pre-period observations on
which to base our treatment variable between 2 and 4. Again, the results are not sensitive to
which method is used. Finally, we pursue an instrumental variables strategy in Section B.3 to
account for noise in the definition of treatment. We create one estimate for a firm’s treatment
status using data from 2006-2008 and another using data from 2009-2010. We instrument for
the 2009-2010 measure with the 2006-2008 measure. In principle, this strategy isolates the signal
from the noise in our predicted treatment variable and provides estimates free of measurement
error. Our IV estimates are generally quite similar to our OLS estimates, again suggesting that
measurement error is not playing a major role in our results.



Effects on Enrollment

One way that we can investigate whether treated and untreated firms were differentially im-
pacted by concurrent ACA regulations, such as the requirement to extend coverage to depen-
dents up to age 26, is to test whether our treated firms experienced differential changes in
enrollment in the post period. This analysis is also useful for gauging the potential extent to
which insurers might have complied with the MLR rule by selecting higher-risk individuals,
increasing the “quality” of their insurance products (and thus attracting greater demand), or
concurrent changes in the industry that might confound our estimates.

  Table 9 presents the results of estimating equation (6) with the natural log of enrollment
as the outcome variable. Our point estimate is that enrollment increased disproportionately
among treated insurers in both segments, but we are unable to reject a null effect due to
imprecision. One pattern that is reassuring (though also not statistically significant) is that this
enrollment increase does not become stronger over time, suggesting it is not driving our estimates
of rising claims costs among treated insurers. To gauge the extent to which a differential increase
in enrollment could explain our results, suppose treated insurers experienced an increase in
enrollment of 20%, at the upper end of what our point estimates fail to reject. In order for a
20% increase in enrollment to explain a 7% increase in claims costs, the new enrollees would
have to be 42% sicker than the incumbent population. This change in risk pool health would
have to become even stronger over time. However, the contemporaneous changes that occurred
with the implementation of the 80/20 rule were the extension of coverage to dependents under
26 (which would likely pull claims per life-year down) and coverage of preventive care. We view
these offsetting effects as unlikely to explain the observed cost changes.




                                                33
                      Table 9: Regression Results: Enrollment, Binary Treatment

                                                    Individual                    Group
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)
                  Post-2011 * T reatment         0.072                   0.060
                                                (0.089)                 (0.063)
                  2011 * T reatment                            0.081                  0.087
                                                              (0.072)                (0.052)*
                  2012 * T reatment                            0.052                  0.018
                                                              (0.120)                (0.087)
                  2013 * T reatment                            0.083                  0.040
                                                              (0.164)                (0.113)
                  R2                             0.91         0.91      0.92           0.92
                  # Insurers                      184          184       406           406
                  Observations                   1,417        1,417     3,295         3,295
                  Note: The dependent variable is ln(Enrollment). Regressions are weighted by
                  enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
                  include year fixed effects, insurer
                                                n     fixed
                                                         o effects, and a treatment group linear
                  time trend. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




Cost-Reducing Effort and Utilization

Our theory predicts that minimum MLR regulations will reduce insurers’ incentives to keep
claims costs down, both by encouraging a lower price per dollar of insurance (and thus more
comprehensive coverage) and paying higher prices for medical services. We now present sug-
gestive evidence of these mechanisms at work using data on two additional outcomes: adminis-
trative expenses and Quality Improvement expenditures. A key limitation of our data on these
measures is that reporting only began in 2010.30 We therefore present these results as merely
suggestive because we are unable to examine preexisting differential trends across the treatment
and control insurers that might be driving the results.

     Administrative expenses are insurers’ non-medical costs for items such as salaries and ad-
vertising, which much like the cost of effort ψ(e) in our model, are not allowed to enter the
numerator of the MLR calculation. Thus, the portion of premium revenue that is not spent
paying medical claims (at most 20% or 15% under MLR regulation) must be split between
administrative expenses and profits. As of 2010, administrative costs represent approximately
10% of total premiums revenue, and thus the balance represents insurer profit margins. To
the extent that administrative spending reflect the direct costs of managing care or negotiating
30
     Other utilization measures reported to NAIC throughout the study period are sufficiently noisy that we are
     unable to reject large changes (positive or negative).


                                                         34
provider prices, our theory predicts that such spending should fall when the minimum MLR
regulation binds.

     As described in section II, qualifying Quality Improvement (QI) expenditures are defined
as insurer expenses to directly improve enrollee health outcomes (such as programs to reduce
medical errors and prevent hospital readmission). These are considered medical claims for the
purpose of MLR calculation under the ACA, and thus enter the numerator of MLR. To the extent
that there are certain administrative expenses that could be considered QI, one would suspect
there might be some relabelling in pursuit of MLR compliance. However, QI expenditures are
generally small, representing about 1% of premiums, so it would be difficult to make a material
change in MLR without substantially increasing QI expenditures, which could raise red flags.
We nonetheless expect such expenses to increase when the regulation binds.

     Tables 10 and 11 present the results of our main specifications for the individual and group
markets, respectively, using our binary definition of treatment based on historical MLRs during
the 2006–2010 period. Now, however, the sample only exists between 2010–2013, and thus the
baseline period is only 2010.31 Because this data was collected for ACA MLR regulation com-
pliance, we are now able to separately measure outcomes for the large and small group markets.
While the results generally lack precision, the signs are consistent across both segments: QI
spending goes up, and administrative costs fall.

     Given that administrative costs account for a roughly 10 times larger portion of premium
revenue than does QI, the fall in administrative costs is substantially larger than the increase in
QI expenditures, supporting the notion that this is not simply an exercise in relabelling. Instead,
the results are consistent with a fall in the marginal product of claims cost-reducing activities
that are costly to undertake, leading insurers to scale back these efforts. We again caution that
these estimates omit the treatment group-specific trends included in our main results.




31
     This data is pulled from the NAIC Supplemental Health Care Exhibit.


                                                      35
           Table 10: Impacts on Other Outcomes, Individual Market

                                        ln(QI Spending)           ln(Admin. Costs)
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)
Post-2011 * T reatment                  0.149                    -0.148
                                       (0.128)                  (0.089)*
2011 * T reatment                                   0.049                      -0.195
                                                   (0.093)                   (0.066)***
2012 * T reatment                                   0.025                       -0.180
                                                   (0.131)                    (0.084)**
2013 * T reatment                                    0.372                      -0.070
                                                   (0.218)*                    (0.139)
Mean Share of 2010 Premiums              .01         .01          .13            .13
R2                                       0.76        0.77         0.80           0.80
# Insurers                               171         171          171            171
Observations                             619         619          620            620
Note: The dependent variable is given in the column headings (“QI Spending” is Quality
Improvement Spending, and “Admin. Costs” are administrative costs). All dependent
variables are on per life-year basis. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard
errors are clustered
                 n by insurer.
                         o       All specifications include insurer and year fixed effects.
T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                            36
            Table 11: Impacts on Other Outcomes, Group Markets

                                         ln(QI Spending)           ln(Admin. Costs)
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)
Panel A: Small Group
Post-2011 * T reatment                   0.175                   -0.050
                                        (0.151)                 (0.063)
2011 * T reatment                                    0.264                      -0.051
                                                   (0.149)*                    (0.064)
2012 * T reatment                                    0.133                      -0.033
                                                    (0.154)                    (0.067)
2013 * T reatment                                    0.115                      -0.065
                                                    (0.177)                    (0.105)
Mean Share of 2010 Premiums               .01         .01         .09            .09
R2                                       0.81        0.81        0.82           0.83
# Insurers                                336         336         336            336
Observations                             1,127       1,127       1,164          1,164
Panel B: Large Group
Post-2011 * T reatment                   0.087                   -0.100
                                        (0.148)                 (0.080)
2011 * T reatment                                    0.152                      -0.057
                                                    (0.136)                    (0.084)
2012 * T reatment                                    0.067                      -0.097
                                                    (0.144)                    (0.091)
2013 * T reatment                                    0.038                      -0.145
                                                    (0.182)                    (0.081)*
Mean Share of 2010 Premiums               .01         .01         .06            .06
R2                                       0.78        0.78        0.83           0.83
# Insurers                                373         373         373            373
Observations                             1,285       1,285       1,320          1,320
Note: The dependent variable is given in the column headings (“QI Spending” is Quality
Improvement Spending, and “Admin. Costs” are administrative costs). All dependent
variables are on a per life-year basis. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and
standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications include insurer and year fixed
effects. The top panel shows results for the small
                                                 n groupomarket, and the bottom panel
shows the large group market. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<.01.




                                             37
VII      Conclusion

This paper connects regulations of actuarial fairness to cost of service regulation, and uses the
recently-implemented ‘80/20’ rule in the ACA to estimate the role these forces play in the
determination of claims costs and premiums in the market for health insurance. The 80/20
rule requires health insurers in the commercial, fully-insured market to keep the share of their
premium revenue spent on medical claims, known as the Medical Loss Ratio (MLR), above a
minimum threshold, and to rebate the difference to customers if they fall short of this minimum.
We find robust evidence that insurers increased their MLRs to comply with the regulation, and
that this increase came largely by increases in claims costs, not premium reductions.

  We find that insurers in the individual market were most strongly impacted by the 80/20
rule, with affected insurers increasing their claims costs 7% on average and as much as 11%
after two years of adjustment. We find that the rule also resulted in higher MLRs and claims
costs in the group market, though the regulation was less binding in this segment. We generally
find that the magnitude of the increase in claims costs scales with the initial distance from the
minimum threshold. These results stand in stark contrast to the original intention of the rule:
lower premiums. We do not find that insurers lowered premiums as a means to increase their
MLR.

  Although the exact mechanism by which insurers increased claims costs remains unclear, we
believe there are three possible explanations: (1) affected insurers experienced a decline in the
health of their insured populations, (2) affected insurers increased the “quality” or generosity
of their insurance products, or (3) affected insurers reduced costly efficiency effort and thus
increased input costs, holding services fixed. Concurrent industry changes such as requiring
coverage of dependents under 26 years old and mandatory coverage of preventative care poten-
tially have impacts parallel with explanation (1) to the extent such rules fell disproportionately
on historically low-MLR insurers. Our results on enrollment changes suggest that route (1) is
unlikely: if we were to suppose an even 20% increase in enrollment (at the upper end of what
our data can fail to reject, given imprecise estimates), these individuals would have to be 42%
sicker than the average policyholder to explain our changes in costs. Given that 26 year olds are
likely to be relatively healthy, this requires an extraordinary amount of preventive care among
just the right insurers to explain our results.

  Instead, it is more likely that insurers raised their claims costs from a combination of more
comprehensive coverage and reduced cost-containment effort, such as negotiations with providers
or claims utilization management practices. While the difference between these two mechanisms
is pivotal for interpreting the welfare effects of the regulation, our utilization data is too noisy
to directly measure which of these two explanations is more likely. As an indirect measure,


                                                  38
we consistently find across market segments that insurers with historically low MLRs reduced
their administrative expenses when minimum MLR rules were instituted. This is consistent
with a fall in the value of cost-reducing effort once profits and costs are coupled by regulatory
constraint.

  The implications for this sort of regulatory mechanism in health care are substantial. Al-
though a relatively small share of the population was directly impacted by the 80/20 rule, our
results suggest minimum MLR regulations have played an important role in shaping incentives
in health care to the extent that many insurers were already above the threshold due to sim-
ilar regulations already in place at the state level. A robust literature has grown out of the
original insights that cost of service regulation distorts firm incentives in the utilities sector.
Drawing parallels between this form of regulation and rules in force for health insurers raises
the possibility of transferring some of those lessons over to reduce the cost of care.




                                                39
References
Abraham, Jean M. and Pinar Karaca-Mandic, “Regulating the Medical Loss Ratio: Im-
  plications for the Individual Market,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2011, 17 (3),
  211–218.

  ,    , and Kosali Simon, “How has the Affordable Care Act’s Medical Loss Ratio Regulation
  Affected Insurer Behavior?,” Medical care, 2014, 52 (4), 370–7.

Acemoglu, Daron and Amy Finkelstein, “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
  Industries: Evidence From the Health Care Sector,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116
  (5), 837–880.

America’s Health Insurance Plans, “State Mandatory Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Require-
  ments for Comprehensive, Major Medical Coverage: Summary of State Laws and Regula-
  tions,” Technical Report November 1998, America’s Health Insurance Plans 2010.

Antwi, By Yaa Akosa, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon, “Effects of federal policy
  to insure young adults: Evidence from the 2010 affordable care act’s dependent-coverage
  mandate,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (4), 1–28.

Averch, Harvey and Leland L. Johnson, “Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory Con-
  straint,” The American Economic Review, 1962, 52 (5), 1052–1069.

Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney, “Does Privatized Health Insur-
  ance Benefit Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage,” 2015.

Cicala, Steve, “When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procurement in U.S.
  Electricity Generation,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 411–444.

Clemans-Cope, Lisa, Bowen Garrett, and Doug Wissoker, “Health Insurer Responses
  to Medical Loss Ratio Regulation: Increased Efficiency and Value to Consumers,” Technical
  Report May, Urban Institute 2015.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D. Gottlieb, “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect
  Medical Treatment and Patient Health?,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1320–
  1349.

      and   , “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s Influence on Private Physician Payments,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 1–39.

  , Joshua Gottlieb, and Tı́mea Laura Molnár, “The Anatomy of Physician Payments:
  Contracting Subject to Complexity,” 2015.



                                              40
Dafny, Leemore and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan, “Does it Matter if Your Health
  Insurer is For-Profit? Effects of Ownership on Premiums, Insurance Coverage, and Medical
  Spending,” 2012.

Depew, Briggs and James Bailey, “Did the Affordable Care Act’s dependent coverage
  mandate increase premiums?,” Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 41, 1–14.

Dranove, David, Mark Shanley, and William D. White, “Price and Concentration in
  Hospital Markets: The Switch from Patient-Driven to Payer-Driven Competition,” Journal
  of Law and Economics, 1993, 36 (1), 179–204.

Duggan, Mark and Fiona M. Scott Morton, “The Distortionary Effects of Government
  Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2006, 121 (1), 1–30.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney, “Provider Incentives and Health
  Care Costs: Evidence from Long-Term Care Hospitals,” 2017.

Ericson, Keith M Marzilli and Amanda Starc, “Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Com-
  petition on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange,” The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2015, 97 (3), 667–682.

Fowlie, Meredith L., “Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in Pol-
  lution Abatement,” The American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 837–869.

Harrington, Scott E., “Medical Loss Ratio Regulation Under the Affordable Care Act,”
  Inquiry (United States), 2013, 50 (1), 9–26.

Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Summary of the Affordable Care Act,” Technical
  Report 2013.

  and Health Research & Educational Trust, “Employer Health Benefits Annual Survey,”
  Technical Report 2015.

Ho, Katherine, “Insurer-provider networks in the medical care market,” American Economic
  Review, 2009, 99 (1), 393–430.

Karaca-Mandic, Pinar, Jean M. Abraham, and Kosali Simon, “Is the Medical Loss
  Ratio a Good Target Measure for Regulation in the Individual Market for Health Insurance?,”
  Health Economics, 2015, 24 (1), 55–74.

Kirchhoff, Suzanne M, “Medical Loss Ratio Requirements Under the Patient Protection and
  Affordable Care Act,” 2014, 1.



                                                 41
Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Reg-
  ulation, MIT Press, 1993.

Lieber, Ethan M.J., “Does Health Insurance Coverage Fall when Nonprofit Insurers Become
  For-Profits?,” 2017.

McCue, Michael J. and Mark A. Hall, “Health Insurers’ Financial Performance and Quality
  Improvement Expenditures in the Affordable Care Act’s Second Year,” Medical Care Research
  and Review, 2015, 72 (1), 113–122.

  ,   , and Xinliang Liu, “Impact of Medical Loss Regulation on the Financial Performance
  of Health Insurers,” Health Affairs, 2013, 32 (9), 1546–1551.

Norton, Edward C. and Douglas O Staiger, “How hospital ownership affects access to
  care for the uninsured.,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 1994, 25 (1), 171–85.

Picone, Gabriel, Shin yi Chou, and Frank Sloan, “Are for-profit hospital conversions
  harmful to patients and to Medicare?,” The Rand journal of economics, 2002, 33 (3), 507–
  523.

Sloan, Frank A., “Chapter 21 Not-for-profit ownership and hospital behavior,” 2000.

Starc, Amanda, “Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: Evidence from Medigap,” RAND
  Journal of Economics, 2014, 45 (1), 198–220.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Consumers Benefitted From 80/20 Rule
  in 2013,” Technical Report 2014.

  , “Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Annual Reporting Form Filing Instructions for the 2014 MLR
  Reporting Year Table,” Technical Report 2014.




                                              42
Appendix A               Theory Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1

Let k M denote the MLR of the unregulated monopolist, so that the constraint of (3) would just
bind if it were mandated as the minimum allowable MLR. Then the change in effort with the
introduction of MLR regulation k is
                                                                 Z   k
                                              R          M               de
                                             e (k) − e       =              dκ
                                                                 kM      dκ


  Total differentiation of the first order condition of (3), having substituted the constraint for
an unconstrained function of e yields

                                    [q(p) + pq 0 (p)] + (1 − k) p [2q 0 (p) + pq 00 (p)]
                                                                                          
                         de
                            =
                         dk             k 2 ψ 00 (e) − (1 − k) [2q 0 (p) + pq 00 (p)]


  In the numerator, the first term in brackets is negative from the first order condition since
ψ 0 (e)   > 0 and k ∈ (0, 1). The sign of the second term depends on the second derivative of pre-
mium revenue with respect to price, which must be negative for the unconstrained monopolist’s
objective function to be concave (i.e., downward sloping marginal revenue). The denominator
is the opposite sign of the second order condition, and is therefore positive for the regulated in-
surer’s solution to be a maximum. Effort is therefore declining in the MLR regulation whenever
the constraint binds, so that eR (k) − eM < 0 so long as the insurer’s decision is affected by the
regulation.



Proof of Proposition 2

The derivative of total insurer claims, C ≡ (β − e) q (p) with respect to k, assuming a binding
constraint is                                                      
                                         dC                 de     de
                                            = −q (p) εD p +      +
                                         dk                 dk     dk
                                              dp
after substituing equation (4) in for         dk ,   and letting εD < −1 denote the elasticity of demand.
Then insurer claims will rise with k so long as the expression in the braces is negative. Suppose
instead that this term in braces were positive, so that

                               de
                                              [q(p) + pq 0 (p)] + (1 − k) p [2q 0 (p) + pq 00 (p)]
                   εD > −     dk
                                        =−                                                           (7)
                              p+    de
                                    dk
                                                       [q(p) + pq 0 (p)] + pk 2 ψ 00 (e)




                                                          43
  However, the second order condition requires that (1 − k) [2q 0 (p) + pq 00 (p)] − k 2 ψ 00 (e) < 0 for
a maximum. Some rearranging of the second order condition shows that the right hand side of
(7) is greater than minus one in magnitude, in contradiction of the requirement that demand
              dC
be elastic.   dk   is therefore positive so long as the regulatory constraint is binding.




                                                   44
Appendix B                Sensitivity Analysis and Ancillary Results

B.1    Sensitivity Results: Adding Fixed-Effects and Excluding Non-profits

            Table B.1: Sensitivity Results: Individual Market, Continuous Treatment

                                                                          MLR
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
 Post-2011 * T reatment           0.695                            0.599                       0.681
                               (0.117)***                       (0.155)***                  (0.119)***
 2011 * T reatment                                0.598                         0.473                          0.555
                                               (0.120)***                    (0.164)***                     (0.121)***
 2012 * T reatment                                0.718                         0.635                          0.694
                                               (0.112)***                    (0.198)***                     (0.120)***
 2013 * T reatment                                0.836                         0.833                          0.853
                                               (0.162)***                    (0.181)***                     (0.160)***
 State-by-year f.e.                 No              No             Yes           Yes             No             No
 Exclude nonprofits                 No              No              No            No            Yes            Yes
 R2                                0.75            0.76            0.85          0.85           0.72           0.72
 # Insurers                        183             183             183           183            125            125
 Observations                     1,412           1,412           1,412         1,412           926            926
 Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce results from our main
 specification. Columns (3) and (4) include state-by-year fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) drop insurers that
 were ever nonprofits. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All
 specifications includen insurero fixed effects and a treatment group linear time trend.
 T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                           45
                Table B.2: Sensitivity Results: Group Market, Binary Treatment

                                                                         MLR
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)              (6)
Post-2011 * T reatment            0.015                         0.010                    0.015
                                (0.007)**                      (0.008)                 (0.008)*
2011 * T reatment                                0.011                      0.009                        0.011
                                                (0.007)                    (0.008)                      (0.008)
2012 * T reatment                                0.017                      0.009                        0.018
                                               (0.009)*                    (0.010)                      (0.009)*
2013 * T reatment                                0.023                       0.020                       0.027
                                               (0.009)**                   (0.010)*                   (0.010)***
State-by-year f.e.                   No            No            Yes         Yes           No              No
Exclude nonprofits                   No            No             No          No          Yes             Yes
R2                                  0.69          0.69           0.77        0.77         0.69            0.69
# Insurers                          402           402            402         402          312             312
Observations                       3,277         3,277          3,277       3,277        2,500           2,500
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce results from our main
specification. Columns (3) and (4) include state-by-year fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) drop insurers that
were ever nonprofits. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
                                                                                                    n       oAll
                                                                                                      ˆ
specifications include insurer fixed effects and a treatment group linear time trend. T reatment ≡ 1 di > 0 . *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.



             Table B.3: Sensitivity Results: Group Market, Continuous Treatment

                                                                         MLR
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
Post-2011 * T reatment           0.523                           0.411                       0.534
                              (0.123)***                       (0.165)**                  (0.126)***
2011 * T reatment                                0.464                         0.441                        0.465
                                              (0.117)***                    (0.164)***                   (0.123)***
2012 * T reatment                                0.502                        0.297                         0.501
                                              (0.142)***                     (0.188)                     (0.147)***
2013 * T reatment                                0.634                         0.511                        0.670
                                              (0.146)***                    (0.173)***                   (0.152)***
State-by-year f.e.                 No              No            Yes            Yes            No             No
Exclude nonprofits                 No              No             No             No           Yes            Yes
R2                                0.70            0.70           0.77           0.77          0.70           0.70
# Insurers                        402             402            402            402           312            312
Observations                     3,277           3,277          3,277          3,277         2,500          2,500
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce results from our main
specification. Columns (3) and (4) include state-by-year fixed effects. Columns (5) and (6) drop insurers that
were ever nonprofits. Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All
specifications includen insurero fixed effects and a treatment group linear time trend.
T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.



                                                          46
B.2        Sensitivity Results: Varying Years Used to Determine Treatment

Table B.4: Regression Results: Individual Market, Binary Treatment using Different Years to
Determine Treatment
                                   2005-2010                  2006-2010                  2007-2010                  2008-2010                  2009-2010               2010 only
                             (1)               (2)      (3)               (4)      (5)               (6)      (7)               (8)      (9)           (10)         (11)         (12)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.072                      0.073                      0.083                      0.082                      0.080                      0.082
                          (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***
 2011 * T reatment                         0.065                      0.066                      0.074                      0.073                      0.072                     0.071
                                        (0.017)***                 (0.017)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                 (0.018)***                (0.018)***
 2012 * T reatment                         0.081                      0.082                      0.093                      0.091                      0.091                     0.096
                                        (0.020)***                 (0.020)***                 (0.020)***                 (0.021)***                 (0.021)***                (0.020)***
 2013 * T reatment                         0.094                      0.094                      0.109                      0.107                      0.104                     0.109
                                        (0.025)***                 (0.025)***                 (0.026)***                 (0.027)***                 (0.027)***                (0.026)***
 R2                          0.75           0.75        0.75           0.75        0.75           0.75        0.75           0.75        0.75           0.75        0.75         0.75
 # Insurers                  185            185         184            184         182            182         182            182         182            182         179          179
 Observations               1,421          1,421       1,417          1,417       1,408          1,408       1,408          1,408       1,408          1,408       1,387        1,387

Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Column headers refer to the time period used to
determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group
linear time trend.
                n Regressions
                      o       are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.


Table B.5: Regression Results: Individual Market, Continuous Treatment using Different Years
to Determine Treatment
                                2005–2010                  2006–2010                  2007–2010                  2008–2010                  2009–2010                  2010 only
                             (1)               (2)      (3)               (4)      (5)               (6)      (7)               (8)      (9)           (10)         (11)         (12)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.665                      0.695                      0.773                      0.770                      0.670                      0.475
                          (0.109)***                 (0.117)***                 (0.127)***                 (0.119)***                 (0.123)***                 (0.140)***
 2011 * T reatment                         0.573                      0.597                      0.657                      0.659                      0.570                     0.388
                                        (0.113)***                 (0.120)***                 (0.130)***                 (0.121)***                 (0.110)***                (0.115)***
 2012 * T reatment                         0.695                      0.719                      0.798                      0.784                      0.683                     0.483
                                        (0.106)***                 (0.112)***                 (0.117)***                 (0.117)***                 (0.149)***                (0.175)***
 2013 * T reatment                         0.794                      0.835                      0.933                      0.938                      0.818                     0.609
                                        (0.153)***                 (0.162)***                 (0.178)***                 (0.168)***                 (0.159)***                (0.174)***
 R2                          0.75           0.76        0.75           0.76        0.75           0.76        0.75           0.75        0.75           0.75        0.75         0.75
 # Insurers                  185            185         184            184         182            182         182            182         182            182         179          179
 Observations               1,421          1,421       1,417          1,417       1,408          1,408       1,408          1,408       1,408          1,408       1,387        1,387

Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Column headers refer to the time period used to
determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group
linear time trend. Regressions
                    n       o are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                           47
Table B.6: Regression Results: Group Market, Binary Treatment using Different Years to
Determine Treatment
                             2005–2010                    2006–2010                        2007–2010                         2008–2010                          2009–2010                        2010 only
                            (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)           (11)             (12)
 Post-2011 * T reatment    0.003                       0.015                         0.022                               0.024                               0.029                           0.013
                          (0.007)                    (0.007)**                    (0.008)***                          (0.008)***                          (0.008)***                        (0.007)*
 2011 * T reatment                      -0.001                        0.011                            0.019                               0.020                              0.027                          0.009
                                       (0.007)                       (0.007)                         (0.008)**                           (0.008)**                         (0.007)***                       (0.007)
 2012 * T reatment                      0.006                          0.017                           0.023                                0.026                             0.028                          0.017
                                       (0.008)                       (0.009)*                        (0.009)**                           (0.010)***                        (0.010)***                      (0.008)**
 2013 * T reatment                      0.012                      0.023                               0.033                                0.035                             0.039                           0.024
                                       (0.008)                   (0.009)**                          (0.010)***                           (0.010)***                        (0.010)***                      (0.009)***
 R2                        0.69        0.69           0.69            0.69              0.69             0.69             0.69             0.69             0.69             0.69            0.69             0.69
 # Insurers                 409         409            406             406               405              405              402              402              402              402             395             395
 Observations              3,304       3,304          3,295           3,295             3,292            3,292            3,277            3,277            3,277            3,277           3,225           3,225

Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Column headers refer to the time period used to
determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group
linear time trend.
                n Regressions
                      o       are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
                   ˆ
T reatment ≡ 1 di > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




Table B.7: Regression Results: Group Market, Continuous Treatment using Different Years to
Determine Treatment
                                  2005–2010                      2006–2010                           2007–2010                       2008–2010                         2009–2010                       2010 only
                             (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)             (10)           (11)       (12)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.482                           0.523                                0.662                         0.538                             0.449                          0.120
                          (0.118)***                      (0.123)***                           (0.128)***                    (0.156)***                        (0.127)***                       (0.107)
 2011 * T reatment                          0.416                               0.464                              0.583                         0.484                             0.391                       0.085
                                         (0.111)***                          (0.117)***                         (0.122)***                    (0.140)***                        (0.118)***                    (0.104)
 2012 * T reatment                          0.461                               0.502                              0.658                         0.522                             0.438                       0.100
                                         (0.141)***                          (0.142)***                         (0.144)***                    (0.174)***                        (0.138)***                    (0.122)
 2013 * T reatment                          0.592                               0.634                              0.786                         0.640                             0.550                       0.197
                                         (0.138)***                          (0.146)***                         (0.155)***                    (0.195)***                        (0.170)***                    (0.127)
 R2                          0.70           0.70               0.70              0.70             0.69             0.70            0.69             0.69             0.69             0.69        0.69          0.69
 # Insurers                  409            409                406               406              405              405             402              402              402              402         395           395
 Observations               3,304          3,304              3,295             3,295            3,292            3,292           3,277            3,277            3,277            3,277       3,225         3,225

Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. Column headers refer to the time period used to
determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group
linear time trend. Regressions
                    n       o are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer.
T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                    48
Table B.8: Regression Results: Individual Market, Binary Treatment using Different Observa-
tions to Determine Treatment

                              1 Observation             2 Observations            3 Observations            4 Observations
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.073                     0.072                     0.070                     0.069
                          (0.018)***                (0.018)***                (0.018)***                (0.018)***
 2011 * T reatment                        0.066                     0.066                     0.063                     0.063
                                       (0.017)***                (0.017)***                (0.018)***                (0.018)***
 2012 * T reatment                        0.082                     0.078                     0.076                     0.076
                                       (0.020)***                (0.020)***                (0.020)***                (0.020)***
 2013 * T reatment                        0.094                     0.087                     0.088                     0.089
                                       (0.025)***                (0.025)***                (0.026)***                (0.026)***
 R2                          0.75         0.75         0.75         0.75         0.75         0.75         0.76         0.77
 # Insurers                  184          184          168          168          158          158          141          141
 Observations               1,417        1,417        1,356        1,356        1,305        1,305        1,204        1,204
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. The column headings indicate the minimum number of
observations required to determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects,
and a treatment group linear time trend.
                                     n Regressions
                                            o        are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are
clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




Table B.9: Regression Results: Individual Market, Continuous Treatment using Different Ob-
servations to Determine Treatment

                              1 Observation             2 Observations            3 Observations            4 Observations
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.695                     0.685                     0.665                     0.681
                          (0.117)***                (0.119)***                (0.116)***                (0.124)***
 2011 * T reatment                        0.597                     0.617                     0.583                     0.600
                                       (0.120)***                (0.129)***                (0.123)***                (0.133)***
 2012 * T reatment                        0.719                     0.709                     0.688                     0.699
                                       (0.112)***                (0.114)***                (0.111)***                (0.116)***
 2013 * T reatment                        0.835                     0.770                     0.773                     0.793
                                       (0.162)***                (0.154)***                (0.155)***                (0.165)***
 R2                          0.75         0.76         0.75         0.75         0.76         0.76         0.77         0.77
 # Insurers                  184          184          168          168          158          158          141          141
 Observations               1,417        1,417        1,356        1,356        1,305        1,305        1,204        1,204
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. The column headings indicate the minimum number of
observations required to determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects,
and a treatment group linear time trend. nRegressions
                                                  o    are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are
clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                              49
Table B.10: Regression Results: Group Market, Binary Treatment using Different Observations
to Determine Treatment

                                   1 Observation           2 Observations             3 Observations           4 Observations
                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
 Post-2011 * T reatment       0.015                        0.013                      0.013                    0.013
                            (0.007)**                    (0.007)*                   (0.007)*                 (0.007)*
 2011 * T reatment                           0.011                      0.010                     0.010                    0.011
                                            (0.007)                    (0.008)                   (0.008)                  (0.008)
 2012 * T reatment                           0.017                      0.015                     0.015                    0.015
                                           (0.009)*                   (0.009)*                  (0.009)*                 (0.009)*
 2013 * T reatment                          0.023                       0.020                    0.020                     0.020
                                          (0.009)**                   (0.009)**                (0.009)**                 (0.009)**
 R2                             0.69          0.69         0.69          0.69         0.69         0.69        0.70         0.70
 # Insurers                     406           406          386           386          366          366         353          353
 Observations                  3,295         3,295        3,224         3,224        3,125        3,125       3,049        3,049
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. The column headings indicate the minimum number of
observations required to determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects,
and a treatment group linear time trend.
                                     n Regressions
                                            o        are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are
clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




Table B.11: Regression Results: Group Market, Continuous Treatment using Different Obser-
vations to Determine Treatment

                              1 Observation               2 Observations              3 Observations            4 Observations
                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
 Post-2011 * T reatment      0.523                       0.503                       0.500                     0.501
                          (0.123)***                  (0.137)***                  (0.139)***                (0.139)***
 2011 * T reatment                         0.464                       0.469                      0.463                     0.464
                                        (0.117)***                  (0.131)***                 (0.132)***                (0.132)***
 2012 * T reatment                         0.502                       0.482                      0.476                     0.475
                                        (0.142)***                  (0.163)***                 (0.165)***                (0.165)***
 2013 * T reatment                         0.634                       0.578                      0.584                     0.585
                                        (0.146)***                  (0.155)***                 (0.157)***                (0.157)***
 R2                          0.70          0.70          0.69          0.69          0.70         0.70         0.70         0.70
 # Insurers                  406           406           386           386           366          366          353          353
 Observations               3,295         3,295         3,224         3,224         3,125        3,125        3,049        3,049
Note: The dependent variable in all columns is MLR. The column headings indicate the minimum number of
observations required to determine treatment. All specifications include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects,
and a treatment group linear time trend. nRegressions
                                                  o    are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are
clustered by insurer. T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                 50
B.3       Instrumental Variables

In this subsection, we implement an instrumental variables approach to further address concerns
of regression to the mean, or more generally, measurement error in our treatment variable. In
particular, we use data from 2006-2008 and data from 2009-2010 to separately predict whether
an insurer will be treated by the new federal regulations that went into effect in 2011. To fix
                                                                              n                 o
ideas, recall that our difference-in-differences treatment variable is Dit ≡ 1 dˆi > 0; t > 2010 .
Let dˆ10                ˆ                                           ˆ8                 ˆ
      i be a measure of di based on data from 2009 and 2010 and let di be a measure of di
                                                                                  10 and D 8
based on data from 2006 to 2008. Then we have corresponding treatment variables Dit       it
                 ˆ10     ˆ8 32
constructed with di and di . Because our predicted distance from the MLR threshold enters
                                                       n       o
our primary estimating equation through both Dit and t1 dˆi > 0 , we need to instrument for
                               n      o
both terms. We use Dit 8 and 1 dˆ8 > 0 as instruments to estimate the following system of
                                  i
equations via two-stage least squares.
                                                                  n         o
                                                       10
                                   yit = γi + δt + τ Dit  + βt1 dˆ10i   > 0    + uit                   (8)
                                                                    n         o
                                    10
                                  Dit  = λi + λt + α1 Dit8
                                                           + α2 t1 dˆ8i > 0 + ηit                      (9)
                           n        o                               n         o
                         t1 dˆ10
                              i  > 0   = λ
                                         ei + λ
                                              et + αe  D 8
                                                      1 it + α
                                                             e 2 t1   ˆ
                                                                      d8
                                                                       i >  0   + ωit                 (10)


     The first stage results are shown for the individual market in Table B.12. As seen in column
(1), predicted treatment based on 2006-2008 is closely and positively related to predicted treat-
ment based on 2009-2010 data. Not surprisingly then, column (2) shows that the differential
linear trend for our 2009-2010 predicted treatment group is also closely related to that for our
2006-2008 predicted treatment group. We find similar results, shown in the remaining columns
of the table, for the instruments when we use our continuous treatment measures as well.

     The instrumental variables results for the individual market with the binary treatment vari-
able are presented in Table B.13. The results are quite similar to the corresponding OLS results
in shown Table 3. The estimated impact of the federal regulation goes from a 7.3 percentage
point increase in the MLR to an 8.3 percentage point increase; for claims, our OLS results
indicate that the regulation increased claims by 6.8 percent while our IV estimates suggest a
9.6 percent increase. Our IV results do not suggest any impacts on premiums. Additional first
stage and IV estimates for the group market and our continuous treatment measure can be
found in Section B.3.1.




32                                                                             10
     As we saw in Tables B.4 through B.7, our estimated results using Dit and Dit are very similar.


                                                        51
                         Table B.12: First Stage Results: Individual Market

                                                Binary treatment
                                                           n        o           Continuous treatment
                                                D10
                                                  it    t1 dˆ10 > 0i              D10 it       tdˆ10  i
                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                       0.529             0.035             0.497          -3.231
                                            (0.077)***          (0.108)         (0.164)***      (1.615)**
  Post-2011 * T reatment * Year                -0.001            0.513             -0.005          4.787
                                              (0.004)         (0.087)***          (0.014)       (0.748)***
  F-test on instruments                        23.53             22.85              9.13           21.44
  # Insurers                                    184               184               184             184
  Observations                                 1,311             1,311             1,311           1,311
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed
                 n effectsoand insurer fixed effects. The outcome variables are given in the column headings.
T reatment ≡ 1 dˆ8i > 0 for columns (1) and (2); T reatment ≡ dˆ8i for columns (3) and (4). * p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<.01.


B.3.1     Additional Instrumental Variables Tables




                                                       52
       Table B.13: Instrumental Variables Results: Individual Market, Binary Treatment

                                          MLR                      ln(Claims)            ln(Premiums)
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment          0.083                        0.096                     -0.008
                               (0.024)***                    (0.042)**                  (0.035)
  2011 * T reatment                              0.078                       0.073                 -0.025
                                              (0.023)***                   (0.038)*               (0.031)
  2012 * T reatment                              0.088                      0.121                  0.011
                                              (0.027)***                  (0.048)**               (0.040)
  2013 * T reatment                              0.093                      0.145                  0.028
                                              (0.035)***                  (0.060)**               (0.051)
  # Insurers                       184            184           184          184          184       184
  Observations                    1,311          1,311         1,311        1,311        1,311     1,311
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects and insurer fixed
                                          n effects.
                                                  o The outcome variables Claims and P remiums are measured
on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆ8i > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




    Table B.14: Instrumental Variables Results: Individual Market, Continuous Treatment

                                          MLR                     ln(Claims)              ln(Premiums)
                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment          0.579                        0.700                     -0.092
                               (0.197)***                   (0.271)***                  (0.302)
  2011 * T reatment                             0.518                        0.468                  -0.238
                                             (0.192)***                    (0.245)*                (0.279)
  2012 * T reatment                             0.644                        0.961                  0.085
                                             (0.235)***                   (0.329)***               (0.342)
  2013 * T reatment                             0.731                        1.310                  0.290
                                             (0.233)***                   (0.416)***               (0.419)
  # Insurers                       184           184           184            184         184        184
  Observations                    1,311         1,311         1,311          1,311       1,311      1,311
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects and insurer fixed
                                          n effects.
                                                  o The outcome variables Claims and P remiums are measured
on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆ8i > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                       53
         Table B.15: Instrumental Variables Results: Group Market, Binary Treatment

                                             MLR                  ln(Claims)               ln(Premiums)
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment              0.010                    0.046                    0.036
                                     (0.010)                  (0.033)                  (0.032)
  2011 * T reatment                               0.011                    0.024                      0.013
                                                 (0.009)                  (0.025)                    (0.023)
  2012 * T reatment                               0.007                    0.051                      0.044
                                                 (0.012)                  (0.038)                    (0.035)
  2013 * T reatment                               0.016                    0.137                      0.120
                                                 (0.013)                  (0.091)                    (0.088)
  # Insurers                           406         406          406          406            406        406
  Observations                        3,125       3,125        3,125        3,125          3,125      3,125
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects and insurer fixed
                                          n effects.
                                                  o The outcome variables Claims and P remiums are measured
                                             ˆ8
on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 di > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                           Table B.16: First Stage Results: Group Market

                                                Binary treatment
                                                           n        o           Continuous treatment
                                                D10
                                                  it    t1 dˆ10 > 0i              D10 it       tdˆ10    i
                                                 (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                        0.504            -0.032            0.438             -0.217
                                             (0.055)***         (0.052)         (0.076)***          (0.764)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * Year                 0.002            0.526              0.001             7.309
                                               (0.002)        (0.056)***           (0.002)         (1.629)***
  F-test on instruments                        45.87             45.80              16.88            16.33
  # Insurers                                    406               406                406              406
  Observations                                 3,125             3,125              3,125            3,125
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed
                 n effectsoand insurer fixed effects. The outcome variables are given in the column headings.
T reatment ≡ 1 dˆ8i > 0 for columns (1) and (2); T reatment ≡ dˆ8i for columns (3) and (4). * p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                       54
      Table B.17: Instrumental Variables Results: Group Market, Continuous Treatment

                                            MLR                   ln(Claims)            ln(Premiums)
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment            0.428                       -0.407                 -0.915
                                  (0.207)**                    (0.873)                (0.778)
  2011 * T reatment                               0.443                    -0.444                  -0.977
                                                (0.196)**                 (0.683)                 (0.618)
  2012 * T reatment                                0.376                   -0.559                  -0.998
                                                  (0.271)                 (1.074)                 (0.918)
  2013 * T reatment                               0.506                    0.238                   -0.342
                                                (0.247)**                 (1.880)                 (1.780)
  R2                                 0.67           0.67         0.86       0.86        0.87        0.87
  # Insurers                         406            406          406        406         406         406
  Observations                      3,125          3,125        3,125      3,125       3,125       3,125
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects and insurer fixed
                                          n effects.
                                                  o The outcome variables Claims and P remiums are measured
                                             ˆ8
on a per life-year basis. T reatment ≡ 1 di > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                     55
B.4     Ancillary Results: Heterogeneity by Market Structure

Table B.18: Heterogeneity Results by Market Structure: Individual Market, Cont. Treatment

                                                       MLR                  ln(Claims)            ln(Premiums)
                                               (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)       (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                      0.820         0.620          1.241        0.512     -0.046    -0.476
                                           (0.169)***    (0.175)***     (0.409)***     (0.612)   (0.374)   (0.589)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * M ktShare          -0.214                      -0.933                  -0.458
                                             (0.223)                     (0.584)                 (0.534)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * HHI                                0.157                     0.389               0.342
                                                             (0.301)                   (1.130)             (1.112)
  Interaction var. mean                       .2861           .5282       .2861         .5282    .2861     .5282
  R2                                           0.75            0.75        0.89          0.89     0.86      0.86
  # Insurers                                   184             184         184           184      184       184
  Observations                                1,417           1,417       1,417         1,417    1,417     1,417
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year n       basis.
                                                              o     HHI is divided by 10,000 so that the HHI
variable ranges between 0 and 1. T reatment ≡ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.


  Table B.19: Heterogeneity Results by Market Structure: Group Market, Binary Treatment

                                                      MLR                   ln(Claims)            ln(Premiums)
                                               (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                      0.028        0.026         0.066         0.093      0.033     0.063
                                           (0.010)***    (0.012)**     (0.032)**     (0.038)**   (0.034)   (0.038)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * M ktShare         -0.042                      -0.145                   -0.091
                                           (0.016)***                   (0.111)                  (0.111)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * HHI                                -0.039                   -0.254               -0.205
                                                             (0.030)                  (0.162)              (0.158)
  Interaction var. mean                       .1455           .33       .1455          .33       .1455      .33
  R2                                           0.69          0.69        0.86         0.86        0.87     0.88
  # Insurers                                   406            406        406           406        406       406
  Observations                                3,295          3,295      3,295         3,295      3,295     3,295
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year      n basis.oHHI is divided by 10,000 so that the HHI
variable ranges between 0 and 1. T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                        56
Table B.20: Heterogeneity Results by Market Structure: Group Market, Continuous Treatment

                                                       MLR                    ln(Claims)         ln(Premiums)
                                                (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
  Post-2011 * T reatment                       0.738             0.509      1.704      2.486     0.730     1.830
                                            (0.148)***        (0.193)***   (0.989)*   (1.744)   (1.067)   (1.712)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * M ktShare           -0.854                       -1.785               -0.612
                                             (0.381)**                     (3.103)              (3.193)
  Post-2011 * T reatment * HHI                                  0.048                  -4.410              -4.493
                                                               (0.516)                (4.890)             (4.735)
  Interaction var. mean                        .1455             .33        .1455      .33      .1455      .33
  R2                                            0.70            0.70         0.86     0.87       0.87     0.88
  # Insurers                                    406              406         406       406       406       406
  Observations                                 3,295            3,295       3,295     3,295     3,295     3,295
Note: Regressions are weighted by enrollment, and standard errors are clustered by insurer. All specifications
include year fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and a treatment group linear time trend. The outcome variables
Claims and P remiums are measured on a per life-year      n basis.oHHI is divided by 10,000 so that the HHI
variable ranges between 0 and 1. T reatment ≡ dˆi ∗ 1 dˆi > 0 . * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                         57
