                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TAXATION AND OUTPUT GROWTH:
                          EVIDENCE FROM AFRICAN COUNTRIES




                                 Jonathan Skinner




                              Working Paper No. 2335




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




This research was funded by the World Bank. My primary debt is to Zmarak Shalizi
for illuminating discussions which led to this paper. I am grateful fo Lyn Squire,
Christophe Chamley, Jonathan Eaton, Maxim Engers, John Strauss, and workshop par-
ticipants at the Country Policy Department, World Bank, for valuable comments, and
to Jaber Ehdaie for excellent research assistance. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in. Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
or the World Bank.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2335
                                                August 1987




                        Taxation and Output Growth:
                      Evidence From African Countries




                                 ABSTRACT




     There is considerable debate over the appropriate role for tax
policy in developing economies. In one view, tax hikes reduce deficits
and ease budgetary pressures, thereby encouraging long-term growth. An
alternative view emphasizes the distortionary effects associated with
increased taxation and the positive benefits of a carefully designed
tax system.

     This paper tests these propositions by measuring the impact of
government taxation and expenditure on aggregate output growth. A
theoretical model is derived which shows that the impact of tax
distortions on output growth is usually negative. The theoretical
model is tested using a pooled cross-section time-series data set for
31 sub-Saharan African countries during 1965-73 and 1974-82.

     The regressions imply that the positive benefits of government
investment during 1965-73 outweighed the distortionary effects of taxes
necessary to finance them. By 1974-82, however, the marginal
productivity of government investment had fallen; tax-financed public
investment was predicted to have reduced output growth. The empirical
results also imply that a revenue neutral shift from the import,
corporate, and personal tax to a sales/excise (or consumption) tax will
encourage output growth.




                                            Jonathan Skinner
                                            Department of Economics
                                            Rouss Hall
                                            University of Virginia
                                            Charlottesville, VA 22901
     I. Introduction

     What   is   the appropriate role of tax policy for encouraging economic

growth in developing countries? One view is that tax hikes reduce current

account deficits and ease budgetary pressures, thereby encouraging

investment and long-term growth. In this view, it is less important

whether trade, personal, or excise taxes are used to raise revenue, since

the effect of tax-induced distortions are thought to be small relative to

institutional constraints such as price controls, foreign exchange

allocations, and trade quotas.

     An opposing view is that high marginal tax rates discourage work

effort, squelch new investment, limit foreign trade, and thereby present a

major hurdle to economic development. The long-run benefits of low rates,

or at least a carefully designed tax structure, are thought to offset the

disadvantage of temporary budget deficits (or expenditure cutbacks), and to

provide the developing country with the necessary and perhaps sufficient

environment to stimulate economic growth.

     This paper tests these competing hypotheses in a model that measures

the effect of taxation and government expenditures on output growth.

Previous studies have developed, and estimated, models of output growth and

government expenditure alone (Ram, 1986), or calculated the impact of tax

distortions in general equilibrium models (deMelo, 1978; Taylor and Rlack,

1974; Henderson, 1982). The model presented below provides an integrated

framework in which the impact on CDP growth rates of government
                                        2



expenditures, public and private capital accumulation, and sectoral tax

distortions are derived in a theoretical model, and estimated using pooled

cross-section time-series data for sub-Sahara Africa during 1965-82.

     Any study which attempts to relate government fiscal policies with

output growth rates must confront the theoretical problem that while taxes

and an inefficient government sector may reduce the level of GDP, it it is

not clear that the rate of growth of GDP should be affected. Lucas (1985),

and Manas-Anton (1985) have emphasized that taxation and (most) government

policy will have no effect on long-term growth rates. The first question

to be addressed, then, is why should tax rates affect output growth rates?

     The answer is that static tax distortions do affect output growth

along a transition path --   or   a sequenced change in the level of output --

by encouraging the flow of investment and labor supply into sectors which
largely escape taxation. The expansion of these lightly taxed (or even

subsidized) sectors will lead to lower sector-specific capital and labor

productivity. Hence for a given rate of investment and labor supply

growth, output growth is likely to decline. If the economy is on a

steady-state growth path (although this seems unlikely in Africa), taxation

will have no effect. Alternatively, if the lightly-taxed sectors provide

positive benefits (e.g., industrial production for export, or which

substitutes for imports), then taxes which direct more resources into these

socially productive activities can augment output growth rates.

Ultimately, the effect of taxation on output growth is an empirical

question.

    While Landau (1983, 1986) has found an often negative impact of the
                                          3



 level of government spending on growth rates, Ram (1986) has emphasized

 that the change in government spending is the theoretically correct factor

 in explaining a change in output. Regressions which follow Ram's

 formulation indicate that during the period 1965-73, the high marginal

 return from government investment more than offset the distortionary costs

of taxation. During the sharp economic downturns of 1974-82, however, the

regression coefficients suggest that public investment did not contribute

to GDP growth; hence a tax-financed increase in government investment equal

to 5 percent of GDP is predicted to have reduced output growth by nearly

0.6 percentage points. The productivity of private investment remained

relatively constant during both periods.

     The average increase in tax effort by the Sub-Sahara African countries

between 1965-73 and 1974-82 is predicted to have reduced output growth,

even after accounting for the positive effects of the additional government

spending. However, this is not to suggest that all tax instruments are

equally inefficient. Personal and corporate tax rates, for example, are

estimated to have a significant and negative direct effect on output

growth. Trade taxes have little direct effect on output growth - -     holding
private investment constant - -   but   they are predicted to reduce investment

and thereby indirectly attenuate output growth rates.      Finally, sales and

excise taxes are found to be generally neutral with respect to both output

growth and investment. These results have two implications. The first is

that government expenditures financed by sales or excise taxation may have

a positive effect on output growth. The second is that a revenue-neutral

shift from trade and direct taxes to sales or excise taxation can increase
                                     4




output growth rates.'

     The traditional view of direct versus indirect taxation is that direct

taxes creates dynamic distortions by reducing savings and investment, while

indirect taxation leads to static distortions. The results presented below

suggest a different view. Direct taxes are estimated to cause a "static"

distortion, while trade taxes are predicted to reduce investment. These

results can be explained by noting that developing countries often

concentrate direct taxation on a very limited number of large-scale firms

(such as those in manufacturing and mining); if in turn these taxes are

passed along to the output price (as suggested by Brent, 1985), the direct

tax could resemble a "static" excise tax. Similarly, companies may be

discouraged from investing because of heavy export taxes on processed

outputs, or the taxation of intermediate imports.

     The remainder of the paper is organizeu in the following way. Section

II discusses previous studies of tax distortions, shortcomings of cross-

country regression models, and the econometric growth model. Section III

presents the regression results, while Section IV concludes. An appendix

is also provided which discusses aspects of the theoretical model in more

detail.



     II. The Theoretical Model

     It is useful to review three approaches to the issue of how tax policy

affects output growth. The first adopts a neoclassical growth model, most




1This model cannot assess the distributional impact of such a tax
change.
                                      5




 commonly with a single good and with infinitely-lived individuals (Lucas,

 1985; Mnas-Anton, 1985). In such a model, taxes have no effect on output

growth in the long-run since steady-state output growth is determined by

exogenous factors such as population growth and technological change.

     During the transition path between the two steady-state equilibria,

growth rates will be affected. Lucas (1985) suggests that the

fundamentally "static" tax distortions might account for only 0.5

percentage point differences in growth rates along the transition path.

However, a 0.5 percentage point jump in annual growth rates would have

represented a 90 percent improvement over the average real per capita

growth rates in Sub-Sahara Africa during 197482.2

     There is little reason to believe that African (or other) countries

are in steady-state equilibrium. Only 5 sub-Sahara African countries had

achieved independence before 1960, and regime changes will presumably lead

to differing growth paths. Furthermore, the transition path is lengthy;

the "grand traverse" of the U.S. from a low capital intensity to a high

capital intensity economy took most of the 19th century (David, l977). A

model which allows for the possibility of transition paths seems

appropriate for the analysis of developing economies.

    A second approach uses computable general equilibrium (CGE) models of

specific countries to test the effect of static tariff or sectoral tax




2Thjs represents an unweighted average per capita growth rate.

3Life cycle simulation models also suggest a transition path in excess
of 30 years (Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner, 1983; Seidman, 1984).
                                     6




inefficiencies.4 These models compare the output (or income distribution)

of an economy using baseline parameters with the outcome using the

counterfactual alternative policy parameters. One drawback of these models

is that parameters necessary for policy recommendations, such as the impact

of government spending and investment on sectoral output, are not always

estimable. The dynamic specification of these simulation models presents a

particular problem (see Chamley, 1983).

     The third alternative approach compares tax policy and country growth

rates in cross-section empirical analysis. For example, Marsden (1983)

matched ten high-tax countries, such as Zambia, Britain, Chile, and Zaire,

with 10 low-tax countries such as Singapore, Korea, Uruguay, and Japan. He

found in comparing the 20 countries that higher overall tax effort led to

lower output growth. Two disadvantages with this study are the lack of an

underlying theoretical model, and the subjective procedure by which

countries are matched together.

     A number of studies have used cross-country regressions to measure the

impact of government expenditures and taxation on output growth. Martin

(n.d.) found that while tax effort (the ratio of tax revenue to GDP)

depressed output growth, deficits reduced it by even more, suggesting that

tax hikes could, by cutting back deficits, encourage output growth rates.5




 4See Henderson (1982), Taylor and Black (1974), and DeMelo (1978) for
 simulation models of developing countries, and Fullerton, King, Shoven,
 and Whalley (1981) for a model of the United States.

 5The causality between deficits and output growth is not clear.
 Countries typically run deficits during economic downturns and
 surpluses during economic booms. Under this interpretation, declining
 GDP growth rates would "cause" deficits, and not conversely.
                                        7




He also found that income/corporate and trade/indirect taxes (defined as

ratios of the specific tax revenue to GDP) reduced output growth.

     Landau (1983,1986) has performed extensive cross-country regressions

to measure the impact of government expenditures, revenue, and deficits on

output growth. While some components of goverrinient spending may have had a

positive effect on GDP growth rates, the combined effects of taxation to

finance the expenditures, and crowding-out of private investment, usually

offsets any positive effects. The question remains why a large and

inefficient government sector should necessarily affect the growth rate,

rather than simply the level, of GDP.

     To address this theoretical difficulty, Ram (1986) derived an

expression for output growth as a function of growth rates in government

spending. He found a strong, positive impact of government current

consumption on output growth. The goal of this section is to build on work

by Robinson (1971), Feder (1983), and Ram (1986), to develop a theoretical

framework for measuring the impact of taxation, government expenditures,

capital, and labor supply on output growth, and to test this model using

empirical data.

     Before deriving the model, it is useful to review some shorcomings of

cross-country regression analysis. The usual criticism of these

comparisons is that countries are sufficiently dissimilar that they cannot

be pooled together in a single data set; it makes little sense to interpret

regression estimates based on, e.g., France and Burundi. While this paper

restricts its attention to Sub-Sahara Africa, the criticism is a general

one for all regressions -- do the observations, whether of individuals,
                                     8




countries, or years, behave according to a similar structural model? If

yes, then the reported regression results will provide estimates of the

average, or representative parameters values. If not, the diversity should

be readily reflected in insignificant regression coefficients.

     A second, more serious, problem with any regression is the possibility

that measured independent variables proxy for the true, but unmeasured,

factors which determine output growth. For example, countries with large

mining sectors often rely heavily on corporate taxation. Downturns

suffered by some mining industries during 1974-82 could therefore have led

to a measured, but spurious, negative effect of corporate taxation on

output growth. To correct at least partially for this problem, the

regressions include non-government variables which affect output growth,

such as whether the country produces oil or mining outputs.

     An additional problem is the proper measurement of effective tax

rates. Developing countries often rely on non-tax constraints such as

industrial licenses, foreign-exchange and price controls, quotas, and

marketing boards, all of which cannot be reflected in standard measures of

tax rates. If the measured tax rates are inaccurate, then the regression

results will indicate little or no role for these measured tax rates in

determining output growth.

     The most serious shortcoming of cross-country regression models is the

potential endogeneity of the independent variables. Rapidly-growing

countries may also experience high investment rates and government

spending. While the 9-year accounting framework adopted by this paper

corrects in part for for short-run endogeneity in the independent
                                          9




variables, correcting for longer-term endogeneity is far more difficult.

     To simplify the theoretical analysis, I assume that the output of the

economy is comprised of an untaxed (or, more generally, a lightly-taxed)

sector and a taxed sector. For example, the untaxed sector might include

services, small-scale production, the informal sector, and smaliholder

agriculture. The government sector is included in the untaxed sector

because the payroll taxes assessed on government wages are simply returned

to the government, so the government pays only net wages. The taxed sector

includes large-scale manufacturing and export industries.   In many

countries, the distinction between the two sectors is not sharp. The

smallholder agricultural sector, for example, will escape the payroll

(i.e., personal) and corporate tax, but the marketing board may impose an

implicit output tax by paying farmers less than world prices.

     Let the taxed sector be x, and the untaxed n. Output (or GDP) is

written

                                   =
                                       1'nn + PQ                      (1)

where Pnand P xare the (fixed) prices to retailers or consumers in the

untaxed and taxed sectors, respectively, and Q and    are the equivalent

quantities produced in each sector.

    Value added in each sector is affected by government investments in

infrastructure and other projects, and by government spending for current

services. Let output in each sector be a function of these government

activities, plus private inputs;

                            Qn = F(K ,L ,I< ,G)                       (2)
                                    nfl g
                               =
                                   H(KxLxKgG)
                                      10




where K and K represent private capital in the untaxed and taxed sector,

L and L measure labor in each sector, K measures public capital, and C
 n      x                                  g
is current government consumption (excluding debt repayment). Total

capital is K = K
            T    x
                     + K + K
                        n
                                while total labor supply is L = L +
                                                                 n
                                                                      Lx   .   As
                            g
discussed by Ram (1986), C is included in both sectors owing to possible

external effects of government activity. Additionally, government capital,

which appears as a "public good" in each production function, may affect

output differently from private capital.

     Many developing countries rely heavily on commodity taxes such as

import, export, and sales taxation. The primary impact of each of these

taxes is to drive a "wedge" between the producer price and consumer price

of the output. In the case of sales or excise taxes, the tax would usually

affect domestically produced goods, while export taxes would affect large-

scale exports. Import taxes might provide a subsidy for domestic import-

substituting industries, thereby artificially attracting resources into the

"taxed" sector. For the purpose of the two-sector model presented below,

assume that a single commodity tax, ty is imposed on the taxed sector.

     Output taxes can be shifted forward, though higher consumer prices, or

shifted backwards, through a reduction in wages and interest rates. If the

CDP price deflator is calculated properly, the consumer price distortion

(or forward-shifting) of an excise tax should reduce CDP, since the value

of the distorted consumption bundle, evaluated at factor prices, is less

than the value of the undistorted consumption bundle. The derivations that

are presented below focus less on consumption distortion, and more on

production distortions by backward-shifted taxes, although the empirical
                                       11




estimation procedure is perfectly general with respect to the incidence of

the tax. Regression coefficients measure the combined impact of the tax

(whether forward- or backward-shifted) on output growth.

     Direct taxes such as the corporate and income tax will also affect the

allocation of investment and labor supply. The income tax is a combination

of a payroll tax on wages and an interest income tax, while the corporate

tax is imposed only on corporate accounting profits, and hence falls

(nominally) on capital. In combination, these two taxes drive varying

degrees of "wedges" between the gross and net interest rate and wage rate.

Like the output tax t, the tax on capital, tk and the tax on labor, t may

be shifted back onto wages and interest rates, or forward onto higher

consumer prices for the outputs. There is a strong equivalence between the

two taxes; the combined tax wedge between the net and gross return on

capital is rk   1 -
                      (lt)(ltk)     and for labor,     r = 1   -
                                                                   (l-t)(l-t).
That is, a 10 percent tax commodity tax has the same effect on incentives

as a 10 percent tax on capital and labor (if there are profits, the

commodity tax will raise more revenue). In the model below, the "capital"

tax rk and the "labor" tax     are used to summarize the combined

distortions of direct and indirect taxes, although in the empirical

section, each tax instrument will be entered separately.


                                                     n + Kx and labor L = Ln + Lx
    Assume that total (private) capital K = K

are in fixed supply, but the share of the input in each sector depends on

the vector of taxes r =
                          (rk,r};
                                    K =                                     (3)
                                            Pk(T)K
                                    Ln =
                                            12




                                        K =
                                                 (lk(T))K
                                        L =      (1-p(r))L
where uk(T) and p(r) are the shares of K and L, respectively, in the

untaxed sector. Next, a linear approximation of equation (1) is taken to

derive a measure explain output growth. With the difference operator

denoted by Li, and prices P and P set to 1.0 without loss of generality,

the change in output is written

                      =
                          k(T<    + f3(r)LiL + 'v,LiKg + lgLiG             (4)

where

                                                 =
                                                     IkT'k + (l-pk(r))Hk
                                   (r) p(r)F + (l-j.(r))H
                                   -y
                                    K
                                      =FK +HIC
                                   -y       =F +H
                                        g        g     g
     where F. and H., j=k,,K,g are production function derivatives with

respect to the four inputs: private capital, labor, government capital,

and government consumption. The interpretation of each coefficient is

straightforward. The parameter -y measures the combined shift in output of

both sectors caused by a one-unit increase in the stock of government

capital. Similarly,       measures the combined or "externality" effect on
                      g
sectoral output of government consumption (e.g., government services).

     The parameters    and     measure the average of the gross (or social)

marginal factor productivity of capital and labor, weighted by the input

shares in the untaxed and taxed sectors. Rearranging 3k and j3 yields:

                          =       + (FkHk)[dpk/drJ(rr)                     (5)

                  (r) = 2(r)      + (F-H1)[dp/dr](r-r)
                                      13




 where r is the average, or representative tax vector for the country

 sample, and dpk(r)/dr and d,a(r)/dr are 2x1 matrices measuring the (linear)

 impact of the country-specific tax vector r on the share of capital, and of

 labor, in the untaxed sector. That is, each country-specific coefficient

    and    consists of a measure of marginal productivity /3(r) which is

 comnion to all countries, plus an addition term which measures the

 tax-induced effects on aggregate marginal productivity. This second term

has a straightforward interpretation: the change in the share of capital

 and labor flowing out of the taxed sector and into the untaxed sector,

 times the difference in marginal productivity of the untaxed versus the

taxed sector. For example, if a high tax rate on capital caused the share

of new capital (or equivalently, investment), in the taxed sector to fall

by 5 percent, total capital productivity would change by 5 percent times

the difference between the marginal return to capital in the taxed, and in

the untaxed, sectors. To the extent that the       after-tax returns to each
factor tend towards equilization, the gross return Hk or H1 is likely to

exceed the gross return
                          Fk or F1. Given Hk > Fk, and H1 > F1, and making
the assumption that the "own price" effect of a tax on capital or labor

reduces its share in the taxed sector; aPk/ark, 8p1/8r1 > 0, it is clear

that the second terms on the RHS of (5) imply that increasing Tk or

reduces the marginal productivity of capital or labor, respectively.

     While I have argued above that the difference in marginal

productivity, Fk - Hk, and F1 -
                                H1, are negative, the existence of external
or "spillover" effects can lead to positive values (Feder, 1983).     For

example, if the untaxed sector generates sufficient positive externalities,
                                              14




(for infant industry or export led growth reasons), then F. - H. > 0,

i=k,L Tax policies, or Pigovian subsidies, which attract factors into the

untaxed sector can enhance, rather than retard, output growth.

     The growth equation presented above is also consistent with a

neoclassical growth model in the steady state. Given a constant

proportional growth rate in capital and labor equal of 8, the appendix

demonstrates that the proportional growth rate of output will be 8,

regardless of the structure of taxes.

     Dividing through by Y, and rearranging, yields the following

expression for the rate of growth in GDP, Y,

                    +                    +          +            + Yg[C/Y1C        (6)
                        13k(T)[IP/YI
where proportional changes are denoted x                Lx/x, x =   Y,L,G,    measures

unbiased productivity change and other factors, private investment I

                                          =                  the overall output elasticity
government investment 1g LKg                  /3,(L/Y),
with respect to labor, and k'             and           retain their original definition
                                                   1g
since they are unit-free.

     The next step is to specify how tax rates enter the estimation

equation. Substituting from (5) into (6), defining

                                        6kj =                                      (7)
                                                   (FkHk)ôPk/8rj
                                                   [L/Y}(F1-H)Bp/3r.          j   = k,
the econometric specification becomes

          =
               0+    + &kkrk    +                        +      + kTk   +

                              + 1,ç(Ig/Y) + Yg(G/Y)G                               (8)

    with the coefficients        and fl       reflecting      the interactive terms

involving r;    =         -         -               i=k,1.
                                           15



      The theoretical model therefore implies that individual tax rates

 enter interactively with (I/Y), and with L, in the output growth equation.

 However, with a large number of tax rates, and possible errors in

 measurement for I, L, and the effective tax rates, it may also be useful

 to consolidate the interactive tax terms into a linear expression, either

 for each individual tax rate, or for an overall measure of the tax "burden"

 given by the ratio of tax revenue to GDP;



            +
                kp"        +
                                   + YK(Ig/Y)   +
                                                    Yg(G/Y)G
                                                               +
                                                                   OkTk
                                                                          +
                                                                              9r   (9)



and 9. = 8 .(I /Y) +
     i    ki  p
                       S       .L i=k,i. (The two tax terms can be further

consolidated into a single term summarized by the overall tax effort.)

     Finally, the third method of including taxation in an output growth

equation is to focus on the net return to factor inputs. Output growth can

be expressed as a function of net factor returns, plus the change in tax

revenue R, written

                 zR=HriM(
                     kk x +HrE,L
                           .E x +r[HG+HtK]                                         (10)
                                 y g   K g
     The first two expressions on the RHS are the traditional increases in

tax revenue caused by growth in capital and labor in the taxed sector. The

third expression, in brackets, measures the increased revenue generated by

positive externalities on the taxed sector from government activities.

     At this point, we assume that net wages, or the net return on capital,

are equal between the two sectors. If workers, or investors, are allowed

to choose between the taxed and the untaxed sectors, their preference for

higher net wages or interest rates will tend to drive such rates in each
                                         16




sector to equality. Using this property that F.              I-I.(l-r.), i=k,i,

substituting in (10) and rearranging (9), output growth is expressed as



      =
           + f3(r)(I/Y)   +             + Y(Ig/Y)       +         + (R/Y)         (11)



                                                             *                       *
where R = LiR/R, and the net factor returns are defined to be k Fk,                      =

F(L/Y),   - =F   +   HK(lry),   and -         Fg
                                                   +
                                                       Hg(lTy)   That is, the

coefficients with astericks measure the after-tax factor productivity,

whether for private returns       and         or for government "external" effects

   and     Note that the net returns to government programs need only

subtract the output tax         since they do not affect the taxes paid on
                          Ty
factors, rk and r. A coefficient b on the revenue term is introduced to

allow for the imperfect linkage between tax collections and measured

"constant price" GDP.

     Even net labor and capital productivity are likely to depend on the

tax vector r. Given a fixed level of capital, a capital tax in sector x

will reduce the net return on capital when labor is held constant

(aithought the problem becomes more complicated when labor is allowed to
                                    *          *
vary; Harberger, 1962). Hence a and                continue to be written as

functions of r, and interactive terms involving I/Y and r, and L and r,

will continue to be used in the empirical section. Strictly speaking, the
                *      *.
impact of r on a and j3 is a second-order effect; hence squared terms

involving capital and labor should also be included in the regressions.

Empirical results which include these squared terms sharply reduce degrees

of freedom, but have little effect on the other coefficent estimates.
                                    17




     In the next section, the model is generalized to include trade taxes,

personal taxes, and sales or excise taxes, and the derivation of

appropriate tax bases is discussed. Additional factors which may have

affected output growth during the period are also explored.



     III. Empirical Implementation of the Theoretical Model

     The assumption of a two sector model is an obvious simplification, and

it is shown in the appendix that the results derived above carry over to

many sectors. Corporate and personal taxes will likely affect the

manufacturing and mining sectors, while the import tax is expected to

provide protection for import-substitution industries. The export tax will

affect export industries, while the sales/excise tax may distort the use of

market goods versus home production. Each tax is entered separately in the

regressions to reflect potentially different effects on output growth. The

tax rates required for the empirical estimation are discussed as follows.

     Import Tax: The most straightforward tax to calculate is the import

tax, defined to be the ratio of import tax revenue to total imports. Error

may be involved measuring this tax, since imports for government or foreign

aid use may not be taxed, while non-tax exchange constraints could lead to

unmeasured "shadow" tax rates. The sources of data are the Government

Financial Statistics collected by the IMF, and World Bank's World Tables.

     Export Tax:   The export tax is measured as export tax revenue divided

by the export tax base. It is therefore an output tax on the export

sector. The measured tax will likely be biased downward, since marketing

boards often collect an implicit tax on exported agriculture.
                                      18




     Corporate Tax: The corporate tax is expected to reduce the net return

on capital in the coporate sector. Because many corporations are involved

in manufacturing and exports (e.g., minerals, large-scale agriculture), the

corporate tax base is defined to be manufacturing value added plus export

sales. This tax base is a hybrid of value added (in manufacturing), which

can proxy for corporate profits, and export sales, which may include the

value of inputs purchased from other sectors. (Value added in export

industries would be a better measure, but it is unavailable.) There is

little chance of double counting, since less than 4 percent of African

manufacturing is exported.

     Personal Tax: The personal or individual tax is typically a payroll

tax, often for workers in larger establishments, and for government

workers. Thus the assumed personal tax base is the manufacturing sector

plus government consumption (which proxies for the government wage-bill).

The tax base will be biased upward to the extent that not all manufacturing

is subject to payroll tax,' but biased downward since some export-oriented

firms are subject to taxation.6

     Sales Tax: The sales and excise tax is calculated as the ratio of

sales and excise taxes to manufacturing value added plus imports,

reflecting the usual targets of sales and excise taxes; imported goods and

domestically manufactured products.

     Tax Effort: The tax effort is the average ratio of tax revenue to




6While government workers are assumed to be in the untaxed sector
(since taxes collected are paid back into the government) the proper
calculation of the tax rate in the taxed (private) sector requires that
government consumption be included in the tax base.
                                     19




DP. Tax effort can proxy for the overall level of tax distortion (as in

Marsden, 1983). Alternatively, a higher tax effort conditional on fixed

marginal tax rates could also reflect an expansion of the effective tak

base when more revenue is collected at the same tax rates.

     Additional variables measuring the change in output, government

expenditure, capital, labor, and other factors, are calculated in the

following way:

     GDP Growth (Y): The growth rate is defined to be the average log

growth in GDP measured at constant factor cost, or if factor cost measures

were unavailable, at constant market prices. The change in output was

taken over a 9-year period (or 8 or 7 years if recent data were

unavailable) 1965-73, or 1974-82.

     Weighted Government Growth ([G/Y]G): This variable is the share of

government consumption to GDP multiplied by C, the percentage change in

government consumption over the 9-year period. Government consumption from

the national accounts do not include debt service, a budget item with

presumably little productive value. Note that in the empirical section,

the weighted variable may be decomposed into Government Consumption,

defined as [G/YJ, and Government Growth, C.

     Private Investment (Ig/Y): This measure of the change in the private

capital stock was calculated by accumulating the ratio of annual private

investment to GDP over the 9 year period, depreciated at a yearly 8 percent

rate. Annual private investment was calculated first by measuring A, the

average ratio of public investment (defined as total minus current

government expenditures) to total investment over the 9 year period.
                                    20




Private gross investment in each year is then measured as (1-A) times total

gross investment. Private capital growth over the 9-year period is written


                  K/Y =
                          [(lA)[V(i)/Y(i)](l.O8)9t]/9               (12)


where V(i) and Y(i) are investment and GDP in year i.7 Note that this

procedure cannot account for the loss of existing capital stock through

depreciation.

     Government Investment (Kg/Y): The change in government capital is

simply the difference between accumulated total capital and accumulated

private capital, or A/(l-A) times the RHS of (12).

     Labor Supply Growth (L): Because there is little consistent data on

changes in workforce size, population growth (denoted Population) is used

to proxy for the change in labor supply.

     Inflation: The inflation rate is measured as the average annual

growth rate in the GDP deflator. This variable is used in the investment

regressions to proxy for a measure of real interest rates. If nominal

rates are fixed, higher inflation rates could lead both to lower real

borrowing costs, and higher returns to physical capital accumulation.

    Other Variables:    It is important to control for as many additional

non-tax factors as possible that may affect the output of the economy. For




7There is an alternative procedure for calculating K/Y, which is to
accumulate real investment over the 9 year period, and then divide by
the initial year GDP. However, such a procedure introduces
simultaneity bias, since even if all countries had constant investment
to GDP ratios, countries which happened to enjoy high growth rates
would also experience a higher ratio of accumulated investment to
initial GDP, leading to a spurious correlation between capital
accumulation and output growth.
                                    21



example, a sharp decline in the terms-of-trade will lead to a fall in real

GDP, independent of the tax system or of investment behavior. Similarly,

countries which discovered and exploited oil resources (The Congo, Gabon,

Cameroon, and Nigeria) are likely to have enjoyed higher growth rates

through 1982, conditional on factor inputs and tax policy. Political

instability can disrupt economic growth both through the destruction of

property and capital, the flight of skilled workers, and the loss of new

investment (Schneider and Frey, 1985; Stewart and Venieris, 1985). A

variable measuring the number of "successful" coups during the period is

included (Griffiths, 1984). Although coups are potentially endogenous

(declining economic fortunes spur coup attempts), Wheeler (1984) finds that

political disruption Granger-causes output changes, but not conversely. In

the next section, sources of data are described, and regression results are

reported.



     IV.    Empirical Results

     The data set described below will be used to estimate both the output

growth model developed in Section III, and also to estimate investment

demand equations. The data come from national accounts and government

financial statistics. To abstract from short-term fluctuations, income

growth is averaged over 9 years, 1965-73 and l97482.8 The period 1973-74

represents a significant transition for many countries from relatively

stable growth to uneven development as rising oil prices and worldwide




81n a few countries, 1974-81 growth rates were calculated; for Somalia,
1974-79 rates were measured.
                                    22




recessions led to declining export prices and increased debt. Although

some export prices rose later in the 1970s, the second oil price increase

in 1979-80, subsequent economic slumps, and increasing debt burdens all led

to increasing stress on government tax collection efforts. Despite these

downturns, government investment during 1974-82 was high relative to the

previous period (Shalizi, Ghandi, and Ehdaie, 1985). Overall tax effort

increased for Sub-Sahara African countries during this period, although

stepped-up government expenditures more than offset the additional revenue,

leading to increased deficits (Shalizi, Ghandi, and Ehdaie, 1985).

     Wheeler (1984) used a number of variables to explain the economic

downturns in many Sub-Saharan African countries. Important factors were

outbreaks of violence (or more exactly, years of peace), the terms of

trade, the diversity of exports, whether the country exported minerals, the

existence of foreign exchange controls, and a "habit" parameter that

measures how imports respond to declines in foreign exchange. While the

results presented below do not include all of his explanatory variables,

they do generally confirm the effects of political instability and terms of

trade on output growth. A study by Kormendi and McGuire (1985) which used

data from both developed and developing economies, suggest that other

variables, such as the variability in money growth, the growth in exports,

and the standard deviation of real output growth, can also explain

differences across countries in output growth rates.

    The sample of countries was selected by including all those which

reported complete information on tax, output, and investment variables. A

total of 56 observations remained; 27 countries from 1965-73 and 29
                                         23



countries from l974-82. This pooled cross-section time-series data set

compares the growth experience of similar countries over time, and provides

a larger number of observations than a simple cross-section data set. For

some coefficients, such as the marginal product of capital, interactive

terms are introduced which allow marginal productivity to differ across

periods.

     Table 1 presents regression results for the model in which taxes are

entered linearly rather than interactively. Column (1) describes an output

growth equation similar to that estimated by Ram (1986). Government

investment is estimated to be highly productive during the period 1965-73;

its marginal productivity is estimated to be a substantial 0.534, which is

significant at the .10 level, and larger than the corresponding marginal

productivity for private investment. However, the dummy variable for the

period 1974-82 interacted with public investment (Public Investment 74-82)

indicates a dramatic fall in the productivity of government capital during

this latter period --   from   .532 to - .077.   By contrast, the marginal

productivity of private capital exhibited no consistent change during this
        10
period.



91n 1965-73, the countries were Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Gabon,
Gambia, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Burkina Faso, Botswana, Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mauritius, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, and Zaire. In
1974-82, the Gambia, Guinea, Niger, and Zambia were included, while
Madagascar and Gabon were dropped.

10The interpretation of the private and public investment coefficients
as "marginal productivities" is consistent with a production function
model in which output depends, in the long run, on the supply of
inputs. In a traditional Keynesian model, autonomous investment will
be a function of Y, which reverses the causal relationship posited
above. I hope to correct for this reverse causation by (i) using a
                                     24




     Column (2) provides a simple measure of cumulative tax distortions

with the use of Tax Effort which is interacted with Private Investment and

with Population (this is roughly equivalent to assuming that rk =   ri).   The

predicted effect of a 3 percentage-point increase in tax effort is to

reduce output growth by 1/2 percentage points, an estimate which is
                                11
significant at the .05 level.

     Recall that Weighted Government Growth measures [G/Y]G. Assuming an

average 5.7 percentage point growth rate C, the regression in column (2)

predicts that a permanent three percent increase in G/Y financed by

increasing the tax effort will reduce output growth rates by 0.3 percentage

points, although this prediction is not significant at conventional levels.

     The third column once again uses Tax Effort to proxy for the overall

degree of tax distortions, although in this case it is entered linearly, as

in (9), rather than interactively. The coefficient is negative and

significant.

     Column (4) expands the regression to include different measures of tax




nine-year period, and (ii) using I/Y to measure investment, so that an
increase in Y which causes an autonomous, equal percentage increase in
I will have no effect on the independent variable.
     Even for the case in which investment is exogenous, it is still
not clear whether the coefficients measure a "multiplier" effect or a
marginal productivity. The implication of policies which either reduce
the marginal productivity, or dampen the "multiplier", are similar --
they reduce output growth rates.
11The sample means of Ig/Y and L are 11.5 and 2.7 percent,
respectively. The effect of a 5 percent increase in tax effort is
therefore 5(-.005x11.5 +-.048x2.7). The test of joint significance of
both coefficients is significant at the 0.08 level. While the taxation
t-statistics are insignificant, they are irrelevant for testing the
hypothesis that taxation is important.
                                     25




 distortion. The tax rates are entered linearly (Table 2 below presents

 results using the interactive specification of equation (8)). The most

notable aspect of these equations is the significant and negative impact of

 direct taxation (corporate and personal) on output growth rates. A 1

percentage point increase in the personal tax (equivalent to a 17 percent

 increase in personal tax rates) is predicted to reduce output growth rates

by 0.36 percentage points. The coefficients for the import, export, and

sales taxes, however, are insignificant, with coefficients near zero.

     The possibility that mineral exporting countries (Liberia, Sierra

Leone, Zaire, Guinea, and Zambia; see Wheeler, 1984) subject to high

corporate tax rates suffered output downturns because of trade-related

problems rather than high corporate tax rates was tested by including a

minteral exporting dummy variable. The regression (not reported) showed

only minor differences in the taxation coefficients.

     Landau (1983; 1986) has suggested that the ratio of government

consumption to GDP, G/Y, be entered as a component in GDP growth rates.

While it is difficult to justify its inclusion on a theoretical basis (as

discussed in the previous section), it is included nonetheless in the final

ttportmanteautt regression in Table 1. The coefficient on G/Y is negative

and significant, suggesting that this ratio may itself proxy for other

factors, such as an active regulatory presence, that affects growth rates

adversely.

     Table 2 presents regression results when the tax rates are interacted

both with capital accumulation and with population (or labor supply)

growth. The coefficients on these interacted terms are interpreted as the
                                      26




effect of a one percentage point increase in the tax rate on the marginal

product of capital, or of labor. To begin, column (1) in Table 2 interacts

the tax rates only with the growth in capital, since population may be an

imperfect proxy for labor supply growth. The results are consistent with

the previous regressions; a 1 percentage point increase in the corporate

tax rate (or a 17 percent increase in rates) and a 1 percentage point

increase in the personal tax rate (or an 18 percent hike in rates) is

predicted to reduce the marginal product of capital by 1.0 percentage point

and 2.4 percentage points, respectively. The other taxes are insignificant

and small in magnitude.

       When the tax variables are interacted with both capital and labor

growth (colunin 2), it appears that the t-statistics on the corporate and

personal tax are no longer significant. However, the test of whether the

individual taxes are significance is given by the combined effect of a

given tax on both labor and capital productivity. Evaluated at the sample

means, these linear combinations are significant and negative, indicating,

as above, that the effect of the corporate and personal tax on output

growth is negative and significant at the 0.05 level; other tax measures

are insignificant.

       Finally, the third column in Table 2 presents coefficient estimates of

the net return to factor inputs, along the lines of equation (11). The

estimated effects of the different tax instruments are similar to those

reported in column (2). The coefficient on the weighted tax variable ()

is   similarly significant, and close to one in value.

      As noted previously, there are two paths by which taxes can affect
                                       27



 income growth. The first is through the productivity of inputs, as the

 regressions above have been attempting to measure. The second is through

 the supply of factors; higher tax rates may reduce labor supply and the

 supply of investment.

      A regression which explains private investment for the sample is

 presented in column 1 of Table 3. In this first regression, tax variables

 are excluded; coups have a signficant negative effect on investment, while

 oil producing countries tended to have investment rates 7.5 percentage

 points above non-oil producing countries. In addition, the impact of

 government consumption (e.g., government current expenditures) on

 investment appears to be positive and significant.

     When tax variables are included (column 2) a different story emerges.

The effect of government consumption drops from 0.386 (in column 1) to an

 insignificant 0.028, conditional on overall tax effort. Furthermore,

import taxes, export taxes, and corporate taxes all exhibit strong negative

effects on investment behavior. The         rises from .292 to .559 with the

introduction of these tax variables.

     The corporate tax is likely to reduce equity investment since the tax

assessed against corporate profits is often quite substantial unless offset

by investment incentives and tax holidays. Similarly, the export tax will

reduce the often large-scale investment
                                            necessary to develop export-
oriented industries; holding total tax revenue constant, a 10 percentage

point increase in the export tax is predicted to reduce annual investment

by 30 percent. Assuming the marginal product of capital is 12 percent,

such an increase in the export tax would (indirectly) reduce output growth
                                      28




by 0.36 percentage points.

     The negative impact of import taxation on investment suggests that

investment is not necessarily attracted to countries which erect tariff

barriers to protect import-substitution industries. If existing import-

substitution industries have exploited domestic markets, new investment

might be directed towards projects which can be exported as well. Hence

high tariffs on intermediate and capital imports could discourage export-

oriented investment.

     Perhaps the most difficult coefficient to explain is the strong

positive effect of overall tax effort on investment. One explanation is

that increased tax revenue scales back deficits and, by freeing private

savings from government use, increases the supply of funds for private

investment purposes. There are two problems with this explanation. The

first is that the primary source of private investment is from foreign

sources (or retained earnings of partially foreign-owned corporations);

domestic savings in most African countries is not large. The second

problem with this explanation is that if the supply of investment funds

depended on the difference between government expenditures and tax revenue,

the coefficient on government expenditures (or consumption) should be

negative and of equal magnitude --   which it is not. Different
specifications of the tax effort variable (e.g., including its squared

value), or excluding extremely high values of tax effort affected the tax

effort coefficient only minimally, nor does including both tax effort and

tax growth (column 3) affect the strong positive impact of tax effort on

capital accumulation.
                                    29




     Taxes affect output directly by changing the marginal productivity of

capital and labor, and indirectly, by changing the supply of factors. The

combined effects may be estimated using Column (4) in Table 1 (the direct

effect) and Column (2) in Table 3 (the indirect effect). The private

marginal product of capital in 1974-82 from Column (4), 0.12, is used to

translate the effect of differences in accumulated capital on output. For

example, the effect of changing the import tax by one percentage point is

simply the direct effect, -0.014, plus the indirect effect -0.12(0.249), or

-0.04. Since the average import tax was 16.1 percent, a 20 percent

increase (or a 3.2 percentage point increase) in the import tax would lead

to a 0.14 percent decline in output growth.12 A 20 percent increase in the

personal tax is predicted to reduce output growth by 0.41 percentage

points, a 20 percent increase in the corporate tax is estimated to dampen

output growth by 0.17 percentage points, while the export tax is expected

to cut back output growth by a trivial 0.06 percentage points. The sales

tax is estimated to have no effect on CDI' growth or investment.

     These estimates can be used to predict how output growth would be

affected by a revenue neutral change in the structure of taxation. The

effect on output growth of cutting the import, export, personal, and

corporate tax rates by 20 percent and replacing the lost revenue by the

domestic sales tax is simply the measures calculated above since output

growth is predicted to be unaffected by the sales or consumption tax. A

revenue neutral shift from the personal tax to the sales tax, for example,




'2These estimates are based on holding revenue (or tax effort)
constant.
                                    30




is estimated to increase output growth by 0.40 percentage points.

    What were the costs of the increased tax effort between 1965-73 and

1974-82? Evidence from column (2) in Table 1 suggests that the tax

instruments that governments used to increase tax effort lead to a sharp

decline in output growth; the direct effect of increasing the tax effort by

5 percentage points was a 0.9 percentage point decline in output growth

rates (5x.187, from above). Accounting for the indirect positive effect of

tax revenue on investment attenuates this measure by 0.3 (5x.498x.12, where

.498 is the coefficient from Column 2, Table 3 and .12 is the marginal

product of capital); hence the total effect of the increased tax revenue

between 1965-73 and 1974-82 was to reduce output growth by 0.6 percentage

points each year. Had this revenue been used to finance government

investment projects during 1965-73, growth rates are predicted to have been

augmented substantially. However, during the later period 1974-82, the

marginal productivity of government investment was negligible, so a 5

percent increased tax effort to finance public investment during this

period would have reduced output growth rates by the same 0.6 percentage

points. A similar calculation reveals that using the revenue to finance

government consumption during the entire period 1965-82 would have lead to

a small decline in output growth rates.



IV. Conclusion

     This paper has presented a framework for measuring how the structure

of taxation and government spending affect output growth. It is shown that

when countries are not following a steady-state growth path, static and
                                     31




dynamic tax distortions will affect output growth. In particular, taxes

can affect output by (1) reducing the marginal productivity of capital and

labor, and (2) reducing the supply of capital and labor.

     Government expenditures also provide positive benefits; thus even tax-

induced distortions may be justified by the positive benefits of government

programs financed by the additional revenue. This paper allows this this

tradeoff to be evaluated by including both government spending and tax

variables in an econometric model explaining output growth.

     The model was tested using 31 African countries during the periods

1965-73 and 1974-82. It was found that the tax structure was an important

determinant of output growth; personal and corporate taxation reduce output

growth, while import, export, and coporate taxes discourage investment.

Although the costs of tax-financed government investment were justified by

its high marginal productivity during the period 1965-73, the sharp decline

in marginal productivity after 1973 suggested that tax-financed public

investment during 1974-82 reduced output growth rates.

     The distortionary costs of taxation differ depending on whether trade,

indirect, or direct taxation is used. In particular, a revenue neutral

shift away from personal, corporate, and import taxes to domestic sales (or

consumption based) taxes is predicted to increase output growth.

     One difficulty with this estimation exercise is the accurate

construction of the data. In particular, the effective tax base is

difficult to derive; even if, for example, corporate profits could be

determined, the appropriate corporate tax base would still be adjusted by

depreciation allowances and investment tax credits. Furthermore, tax rates
                                    32




are rarely proportional so that the calculated average ratios may

understate the effective marginal rate.

     All studies explaining how government expenditure and tax policies

"explain" GDP growth rates suffer from a potential endogeneity problem,

since government policies themselves will be strongly affected by economic

conditions. Bolnick (1978) has made a first step in this direction, but a

full simultaneous model of government policy and output growth remains to

be developed.

     This paper indicates that differences in tax policy can explain a

substantial degree of variation in output growth among African countries.

While measurement error and the potential for excluded variables suggest

that the regression results be interpreted cautiously, the results imply

that the structure, and not simply the level, of taxation can play a

important role for encouraging growth in developing economies.
                                      33




                        Appendix: The Theoretical Model

     This appendix discusses in more detail theoretical and empirical

aspects of models which measure the effect of government fiscal policies on

output growth rates.

     1. The Production Function Model and Basic Results

     There are two sets of assumptions that one can make about the

production functions H and F. The first is that they exhibit constant

returns to scale, which ensures a balanced growth path in the neoclassical

paradigm. The disadvantage of this assumption is that if factor shares are

equal, only one or the other sector will produce anything at all, except in

the knife-edge case where output prices lead to both goods being produced.

If factor shares do differ, then tax-induced sectoral output shifts will be

accompanied by changes in the relative price of capital and labor,

depending on whether the taxed sector is more or less capital intensive

than the untaxed sector. It is these shifts in relative prices which can

lead to the seemingly paradoxical result that an output tax can increase

the marginal productivity of capital, although the marginal product of

labor will fall by a sufficient amount that total output will still be

reduced by the distortionary tax.

     The alternative assumption about F and H is that there is an implicit

fixed factor --   say, land, or human capital --   that   leads to decreasing

returns to scale. This assumption gives rise to a concave production

possibility frontier (holding factor prices constant) between the output of

F and the output of H. While this assumption has intuitive plausability,

its steady-state properties are undesirable unless one assumes that the
                                          34




fixed factors grow over time at the exogenously determined population

growth rate.

     2.   Properties of the Output Growth Equation in the Neoclassical

     Steady State

     Is the model developed in the text consistent with the neoclassical

growth model? First assume that both F and C are linear homogeneous in all

inputs, including government capital and government expenditures, a

necessary assumption for a balanced growth path. Next consider a constant

steady-state growth rate of population (or population plus neutral

productivity growth) equal to .        For the steady-state to hold,
                             =   L/L      G/G tKg/Kg =         0               (A.l)

where the country specific subscripts are ignored. Because of linear

homogeneity,

                                                                               (A.2)
                          Y=/3kK+I3L+1gKg+YcG
Dividing each side of (A.2) by Y,

                                   ÷           +           +
                 Y/Y [       K•j                   1Kg_j/Y         (A. 3)
                                                  1gG—]
Substituting from (A.l) and (A.2), it is apparent that Y/Y = 0, regardless

of what r, and hence Iflk and ,    are.
     In the econometric specification, it may appear that taxes affect

output growth, even in the steady state. That is, rewriting (A.2),
                    =            + f3[L/L]     +               +               (A.4)
                                                   1,ç[Kg/Y]       1c{tC/'Y]
    If     and      differ systematically because of different tax policies,

that the predicted growth rate of output will also vary, depending on tax

policies -- even in the steady state. The apparent contradiction can be
                                       35




 resolved by noting that (for example) AK/Y = [AK/K] [K/Y], which in the

 steady state is simply OK/Y. For a country with a distortionary capital

 tax,      is lower than average. Since distortionary taxation leads to a

 lower level of output, Y in the country with a distortionary tax is also

less than average. Hence for a given proportional growth in capital 9,

AK/Y is higher than average when       is lower than average; on net, the two

effects cancel out. Note that this problem does not arise in the case of

labor supply, since the elasticity is measured. In some respects,

assumptions about what is held constant is motivated by what data are

available.

        In sum, the model indicates that tax policy will have no effect on

output growth in the steady state when both direct effects (conditional on

AK/Y and AL/Y) and indirect effects (through differences in AK/Y and AL/Y)

are accounted for.

        3. Application of the Model to Three or More Sectors

        The extension to many sectors is straightforward. Consider, for

example, a third sector, manufacturing, with a production function

M(KmLmKgG) a price m = 1, and there is a single output tax r; AK =
AK   + AK + AK, and equivalently for labor. Then the output growth

equation is written (for r =

                AY =
                       [Fkpk(r) + M,z(r) + H(lp(r)p(r)]AK +           (A.5)

                   {Fp1(r) + M?(r) + H(l-p(r)-(r))AL +
                       [FK +M +H]AK
                            IC  K  g
                                     ÷[Fg +Mg +HJAG
                                                     g
        where p(r) and p(r) are the shares of capital and labor used in the

manufacturing sector. It is straightforward to extend this model to derive
                                    36



the results presented in the text; thus more sectors does not change the

basic results of the simpler two period model.

     One complication that should be mentioned is the presence of revenue

from, for example, an import tax. In the context of the three period model

above, the import tax would have two effects. First, it would provide

revenue on a tax base which is not measured in GDP. One way to handle this

problem is to consider exports as an inputtt into the purchases of imported

goods. To the extent that imports are purchased using foreign currency

obtained from exports, a higher tax on imports simply implies that more

exports must be sold to purchase a given quantity of imports.

     The second effect is that an import tax will distort the price of the

domestic manufactured goods by providing protection. Thus if domestic

manufacturing and imported manufacturing were perfect substitutes, the

import tax would be equivalent to a subsidy for the manufacturing sector,

so that an increase in domestic manufacturing output would effectively

reduce tax revenue from imports.

     4. Issues in the Measurement of Constant Price GDP

     One difficulty with the estimation of CDP equations is the definition

of constant prices. In the example above, import tariffs lead to higher

prices for tradeable goods. However, if the tariffs had been in effect

since the price indices were begun, then the value of domestic

manufacturing would be overstated, since they would be valued at the

protected price rather than the world (or potential import) price (Kreuger,

1984).

     A related problem with the constant price series is the manner in
                                     37




which changes in tax rates are reflected in the price index. If income

taxes are collected in the taxed sector, some of the tax will be shifted to

the firm; and in turn some of that tax will ultimately be shifted to

consumers. If such a price rise is corrected in the constant price series,

then the retorted price    will appear not to rise. Hence the methods used

for calculating constant price series, and the extent to which indirect

taxes are shifted to consumers, can potentially affect the estimation

results in ways that are difficult to determine.

     Whether GDP should be measured at factor cost or at market prices is a

difficult question. This paper uses factor cost measures where available

to follow the convention that factor cost measures output measured at

producer prices, and not at potentially arbitrary consumer prices

reflecting any indirect tax rates.
                                     Bibliography


Auerbach, Alan, Laurence Kotlikoff, and Jonathan Skinner, "The
Efficiency Gains from Dynamic Tax Reform", International Economic
Review, (February 1983).

Bolnick, Bruce, "Demographic Effects on Tax Ratios in Developing
Economies," Journal of Development Economics 5 (1978) pp. 283-306.

Brent, Robert J., "Lagged Reactions in Short-Run Estimates of Tax
Shifting of Company Income and Sales Taxes in Kenya," Journal of
ueveiupuiei
rs____1
              teotiuii,ies LU
                                Il rO.\ . pp.   IZ


Chamley, Christophe, "Taxation in Dynamic Economies: Some Problems and
Methods," mimeo, World Bank, CPDRM (October 1983).

David, Paul, "Invention and Accumulation in America's Economic Growth:
A Nineteenth-Century Parable," In Brunner and Meltzer (eds.) Industrial
Organization. National Policies, and Economic Development (Amsterdam,
1977).

deMelo, J., "Estimating the Costs of Protection: A General Equilibrium
Approach", Quarterly Journal of Economics (1978), pp. 209-226.

Engen, Eric, and Jonathan Skinner, "Government Size, Economic Growth,
and Taxation," mimeo (May 1987).

Feder, Gershon, "On Exports and Economic Growth", Journal of
Development Economics 12 (1982) pp. 59-73.

Fullerton, Don, A. Thomas King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley,
"Corporate Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium
Approach," American Economic Review (September 1981) pp. 677-91.

Criffiths, Ieuan LL., An Atlas of African Affairs. New York: Methuen
(1984).

Henderson, J.M., "Optimal Factor Allocation for Thirteen Countries", in
A.0. Krueger, ed. Trade and Employment in Developing Countries (2).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1982).

Korniendi, Roger C., and Philip C. Meguire, "Macroeconomic Determinants
of Growth: Cross-Country Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics 16
(1985): pp. 141-63.
 Krueger, Anne 0., "Trade Policies in Developing Countries",in R. W.
 Jones and P. B. Kenen, eds. Handbook of International Economics,
 Elsevier Science Publishing (1984).

Landau, Daniel, "Government Expenditures and Economic Growth: A
Cross-Country Study," Southern Economic Journal 49 (January 1983):      pp.
 783-92.

Landau, Daniel, "Government and Economic Growth in the Less Developed
Countries: An Empirical Study for 1960-80," Economic Development and
Cultural Change (October 1986): pp. 35-75.

Lucas, Robert E. , "On the Mechanics of Economic Development", mimeo.
University of Chicago (1985).

Manas-Anton, Luis A., "Structure of Taxation and Growth in Developing
Economies", Mimeo, IMF Fiscal Affairs Department (September, 1985).

Marsden, Keith, "Links Between Taxes and Economic Growth: Some
Empirical Evidence," World Bank Staff Working Paper #605,
(August, 1983).

Martin, Ricardo, "Fiscal Variables and Growth: A Cross Sectional
Analysis," mimeo (n.d.).

Mathias, P., and P. O'Brien, "Taxation in Britain and France," Journal
of European Economic History 5.

Ram, Rati, "Government Size and Economic Growth: A New Framework and
Some Evidence from Cross-Section and Time-Series Data," American
Economic Review 76 (March 1986) p. 191-203.

Robinson, Sherman, "Sources of Growth in Less Developed Countries: A
Cross-Section Study", Quarterly Journal of Economics (1971) pp.
391-408.

Schneider, Friedrich, and Bruno S. Frey, "Economic and Political
Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment," World Development 13
(1985): pp. 161-175.

Seidman, Laurence S., "Conversion to a Consumption Tax: The Transition
in a Life-Cycle Model," Journal of Political Economy 92 (April 1984)
pp. 247-67.
Shalizi, Z. V. Gandhi, and J. Ehdaie, "Patterns of Taxation in
Sub-Sahara Africa: Trends in 'Tax Effort' and Composition during the
period 1966-81", mimeo, The World Bank (1985).

Stewart, Douglas B. and Yiannis P. Venieris, "Sociopolitical
Instability and the Behavior of Savings in Less-Developed Countries",
Review of Economics and Statistics, (November, 1985), pp. 557-63.

Taylor, L., and S.L. Black, "Practical General Equilibrium Estimation
of Resource Pulls under Trade Liberalization", Journal of International
Economics (1974) pp. 37-55.

Virniani, Arvind, "Tax Reform in Developing Countries: issues, Policies,
and Information Gaps," mimeo, World Bank (May 1985).

Wheeler, David, "Sources of Stagnation in Sub-Sahara Africa," World
Development 12 (1984): pp. 1-23.

World Bank, World Tables (3rd ed.), Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press (1984).
           Table 1: GDP Growth Regressions, Sub-Sahara Africa 1965-82



      [Variable]

Oil                          1.684      1.861      1.869     2.238       1.412
                            (1.41)     (1.61)     (1.68)     (1.80)     (1.22)
Coups                       -0.943     -1.016     -1.116     -0.824     -0.769
                            (1.99)     (2.39)     (2.50)     (1.79)     (1.79)
Private Investment           1.050      0.213      0.150     0.052       0.137
                            (0.85)     (0.73)     (1.20)     (0.40)     (1.12)
Priv Invest 74-82           -0.043      0.037      0.039     0.069       0.104
                            (0.29)     (0.24)     (0.27)     (0.47)     (0.77)
Public Investment            0.534      0.744      0.828      0.635      0.862
                            (1.82)     (2.50)     (2.83)     (2.29)     (3.25)
Public mv 74-82             -0.611     -0.653     -0.711     -0.635     -0.719
                            (1.88)     (2.07)     (2.33)     (2.06)     (2.60)
Population                   0.665      1.651      0.814      0.475      0.342
                            (1.21)     (1.03)     (1.58)     (0.86)     (0.66)
Terms of Trade               0.134      0.093      0.090      0.169      0.192
                            (1.47)     (1.03)     (1.05)     (1.88)     (2.18)
Gov Growth x Gov Shr         0.015      0.010      0.010      0.007      0.009
                             2.120     (1.90)     (2.05)     (1.44)     (2.00)
Tax Effort (R/Y)                                  -0.262                -0.117
                                                  (2.82)                (1.20)
Tax Eff. x Priv. mv.                   -0.005
                                       (0.31)
Tax Eff. x Pop Growth                  -0.048
                                       (0.61)
Import Tax                                                  -0.014      -0.011
                                                            (0.19)      (0.16)
Export Tax                                                  -0.010      -0.010
                                                            (0.16)      (0.17)
Personal Tax                                                -0.357      -0.342
                                                            (2.96)      (2.93)
Corporate Tax                                               -0.125      -0.135
                                                            (2.21)      (2.52)
Sales Tax                                                   -0.001       0.042
                                                            (0.01)      (0.55)
Government Shr                                                          -0.190
                                                                        (2.67)
1974-82 Interaction         0.672     -0.113      0.060      0.097       0.117
                            (.36)     (0.06)     (0.34)     (0.05)      (0.06)
Constant                   -1.460     -1.674      2.117      3.502       6.311
                            (.07)     (0.75)     (1.00)     (1.16)      (2.17)

R-Bar Squared               0.369      0.412      0.453      0.466      0.572

Note: Dependent variable is average annual logarithmic growth
rate of GDP. Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses.
      Table 2: Interacted GDP Growth Equations, Sub-Sahara Africa 1965-82


                                         (1)           (2)                  (3)

Oil                                2 .   534         3. 525           3.462
                                  (2.08)            (2.18)            (2.21)
Coups                             -0.827            -0.661           -0.662
                                  (1.93)            (1.30)            (1.35)
Private Investment                0.260              0.519            0.382
                                  (1.75)            (1.11)            (0.83)
Priv Invest. 1974-82              0 .    105         0.086            0.063
                                  (0.74)            (0.53)            (0.40)
Public Investment                 0.583              0.510            0.228
                                  (2.16)            (1.57)            (0.65)
Public Invest. 1974-82            -0.617            -0. 612           -0.30
                                  (2.04)            (1.81)            (1.01)
Population                        0. 532             0.128            0.379
                                  (0.94)            (0.06)            (0.20)
Terms of Trade                    0.182              0.207            0.208
                                  (2.13)            (2.20)            (2.28)
Coy Growth x Gov Share            0.718              0.668            0.390
                                  (1.60)            (1.30)            (0.75)
Import Tax x Invest               -0.004            -0.020            -0.016
                                  (0.59)            (0.95)            (0.81)
Export Tax x Invest               -0.003             0.010            0 .   009
                                  (0.60)            (0.58)            (0.53)
Personal Tax x Invest              0.024            -0.006            0.005
                                  (2.88)            (0.17)            (0.13)
Corporate Tax x Invest            -0.010            -0.031            0.023
                                  (2.53)            (1.20)            (0.86)
Sales Tax x Invest                -0.000            -0.021            -0.024
                                  (0.01)            (0.74)            (0.84)
Import Tax x Pop.                                    0.054            0.036
                                                    (0.68)            (0.46)
Export Tax x Pop.                                  -0.068            -0.055
                                                    (0.87)           (0.72)
Personal Tax x Pop.                                -0.098            -0.128
                                                   (0.55)            (0. 74)
Corporate Tax x Pop.                                0.088             0.041
                                                   (0.76)            (0.35)
Sales Tax x Pop.                                    0.095             0.125
                                                   (0.69)            (0.93)
Tax rate x Tax growth                                                 0.965
                                                                     (1.79)
1974-82 Interaction              -0.244             0.100            -0.084
                                 (0.13)            (0.05)            (0.04)
Constant                          1.240             0.739             1.127
                                 (0.61)            (0.32)            (0.50)

R-Bar Squared                     0.505             0.465             0.469

Note: The dependent variable is the annual logarithmic growth rate
in GD?. Absolute values of t-statlstics are in parentheses.
Number         Author                        Title                             Date

 2283    Robert P. Inman          Federal Assistance and Local Services in     6/87
                                  the United States: The Evolution of a New
                                  Federalist Fiscal Order

2284     Richard B. Freeman and   The Effect of Public Sector Labor Laws on    6/87
         Robert G. Valletta       Collective Bargaining, Wages, and
                                  Ernpl oyment

2285     Olivier J. Blanchard     Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey       6/87

2286     Albert Ando and          The Cost of Capital in the U.S. and Japan: 6/87
         Alan J. Auerbach         A Comparison

2287     Jeffrey D. Sachs         International Policy Coordination: The       6/87
                                  Case of the Developing Country Debt Crisis

2288     B. Douglas Bernheim      Intergenerational Altruism and Social        6/87
                                  Welfare: A Critique of the Dynastic Model

2289     James A. Follian         Understanding the Real Estate Provisions of 6/87
         Patric H. Heridershott   Tax Reform: Motivation and Impact
         and David C. Ling

2290     Patric H. Hendershott    Pricing Mortgages: An Interpretation of      6/87
         and Robert VanOrder      the Models and Results

2291     B. Douglas Bernheim      The Timing of Retirement: A Comparison       6/87
                                  of Expectations and Realizations

2292     Lawrence B. Lindsey      Federal Deductibility of State and Local     6/87
                                  Taxes: A Test of Public Choice by
                                  Representative Government

2293     J. David Richardson      International Coordination of Trade Policy 6/87

2294     Patric H. Hendershott    Private Saving in the United States:         6/87
         and Joe Peek             1950-85

2295     Randall Morck            Characteristics of Hostile and Friendly      6/87
         Andrei Sheifer and       Takeover Targets
         Robert W. Vishny

2296     Alberto Giovannini       Uncertainty and Liquidity                    6/87

2297     Andrei Shleifer and      The Efficiency of Investment in the          6/87
         Robert Vishny            Presence of Aggregate Demand Spillovers

2298     Andrew B. Abel           An Analysis of Fiscal Policy Under Oper-     6/87
                                  ative and Inoperative Bequest Motives
             Table 3: Private Investment Regressions,
                           Sub-Saharan Africa 1965-82


                             (1)          (2)           (3)


Oil                             7.468           4.870         4.549
                               (4.06)       (2.84)        (2.83)
Coups                          -1.652       -0.334        -0.352
                               (2.12)       (0.47)        (0.53)
Population                      1.146       -0.155        -0.475
                               (1.22)       (0.18)        (0.58)
Terms of Trade                 -0.235           0.024     -0.053
                               (1.56)       (0.17)        (0.39)
Government Share                0.386           0.028         0.047
                               (3.19)       (0.24)        (0.41)
Government Growth                                             0.132
                                                          (1.25)
Tax Effort                                      0.493     0.486
                                            (3.70)       (3.89)
Tax Growth                                                0.198
                                                         (2.10)
Import Tax                                  -0.249       -0.234
                                            (2.43)       (2.44)
Export Tax                                  -0.328       -0.309
                                            (3.43)       (3.45)
Personal Tax                                -0.208       -0.052
                                            (1.11)       (0.28)
Corporate Tax                               -0.171       -0.161
                                            (2.00)       (2.00)
Sales Tax                                    0.006        0.112
                                            (0.05)       (0.93)
Inflation                                    0.144        0.213
                                            (1.52)       (2.26)
1974-82 Interaction            0.260        -0.883       -1.028
                              (0.21)        (0.73)       (0.91)
Constant                       1.971        10.513        6.519
                              (0.58)        (2.59)       (1.59)

R-Bar Squared                  0.292        0.559         0.616

Note: Dependent variable is the share of private investment
to GDP. Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses.
