                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TURBULENCE, FIRM DECENTRALIZATION AND GROWTH IN BAD TIMES

                                         Philippe Aghion
                                         Nicholas Bloom
                                          Brian Lucking
                                         Raffaella Sadun
                                        John Van Reenen

                                      Working Paper 23354
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23354


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2017, Revised October 2017




We would like to thank Ufuk Akcigit, Laura Alfaro, Richard Blundell, Erik Brynjolfsson, Gabriel
Chodorow-Reich, Bob Gibbons, Rebecca Henderson, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline Hoxby, Guy
Laroque, Eddie Lazear, Kristina McElheran, Antoinette Schoar, David Thesmar, Jean Tirole and
participants in seminars in the AEA, UC Berkeley, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, Northwestern,
Stanford and Toronto for helpful discussions. The Economic and Social Research Centre,
European Research Council, Kauffman Foundation, National Science Foundation and Sloan
Foundation have all provided generous funding. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van
Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Turbulence, Firm Decentralization and Growth in Bad Times
Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 23354
April 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E0

                                         ABSTRACT

What is the optimal form of firm organization during “bad times”? We present a model of
delegation within the firm to show that the effect is ambiguous. The greater turbulence following
macro shocks may benefit decentralized firms because the value of local information increases
(the “localist” view). On the other hand, the need to make tough decisions may favor centralized
firms (the “centralist” view). Using two large micro datasets on firm decentralization from ten
OECD countries and US administrative data, we find that firms that delegated more power from
the Central Headquarters to local plant managers prior to the Great Recession out-performed their
centralized counterparts in sectors that were hardest hit by the subsequent crisis. Using direct
measures of turbulence based on product churn and stock market volatility, we show that the
localist mechanism dominates. This conclusion is robust to alternative explanations such as
managerial fears of bankruptcy and changing coordination costs. Although delegation is better
suited to some environments than others, countries with more decentralized firms (like the US)
weathered the 2008-09 Great Recession better: these organizational differences account for about
15% of international differences in post-crisis GDP growth.

Philippe Aghion                                 Raffaella Sadun
College de France                               Harvard Business School
3 Rue D'Ulm                                     Morgan Hall 233
75005 Paris                                     Soldiers Field
FRANCE                                          Boston, MA 02163
paghion@fas.harvard.edu                         and NBER
                                                rsadun@hbs.edu
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University                             John Van Reenen
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics, E62-518
579 Serra Mall                                  MIT
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         77 Massachusetts Avenue
and NBER                                        Cambridge, MA 02139
nbloom@stanford.edu                             and NBER
                                                vanreene@mit.edu
Brian Lucking
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
blucking@stanford.edu
 Turbulence, Firm Decentralization and Growth in Bad Times


Philippe Aghion∗, Nicholas Bloom†, Brian Lucking‡, Raaella Sadunand John Van Reenen¶

                                              October 25, 2017


                                                   Abstract


       What is the optimal form of rm organization during bad times? We present a model of delegation

   within the rm to show that the eect is ambiguous. The greater turbulence following macro shocks may

   benet decentralized rms because the value of local information increases (the localist view). On the

   other hand, the need to make tough decisions may favor centralized rms (the centralist view). Using

   two large micro datasets on rm decentralization from ten OECD countries and US administrative data,

   we nd that rms that delegated more power from the Central Headquarters to local plant managers prior

   to the Great Recession out-performed their centralized counterparts in sectors that were hardest hit by the

   subsequent crisis. Using direct measures of turbulence based on product churn and stock market volatility,

   we show that the localist mechanism dominates. This conclusion is robust to alternative explanations such

   as managerial fears of bankruptcy and changing coordination costs. Although delegation is better suited

   to some environments than others, countries with more decentralized rms (like the US) weathered the

   2008-09 Great Recession better: these organizational dierences account for about 15% of international

   dierences in post-crisis GDP growth.

       JEL No. O31, O32, O33, F23
       Keywords: decentralization, growth, turbulence, Great Recession
       Acknowledgments:        We would like to thank Ufuk Akcigit, Laura Alfaro, Richard Blundell, Erik
   Brynjolfsson, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Bob Gibbons, Rebecca Henderson, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline
   Hoxby, Guy Laroque, Eddie Lazear, Kristina McElheran, Antoinette Schoar, David Thesmar, Jean Tirole
   and participants in seminars in the AEA, UC Berkeley, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, Northwestern, Stanford
   and Toronto for helpful discussions.    The Economic and Social Research Centre, European Research
   Council, Kauman Foundation, National Science Foundation and Sloan Foundation have all provided
   generous funding.
       Disclaimer:     Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
   necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that
   no condential information is disclosed.




∗ College de France, LSE and Centre for Economic Performance,
† Stanford University, Centre for Economic Performance, NBER and CEPR
‡ Stanford University.
 Harvard   University, Centre for Economic Performance, NBER and CEPR
¶ MIT, Centre for Economic Performance, NBER and CEPR




                                                        1
1      Introduction
What makes rms more resilient to large negative macro shocks? A recent literature has focused on rms'

technological, nancial and governance structures as possible factors aecting their ability to cope with

                                                1
sudden changes in external conditions , but much less is known about the role of rm organization. This

paper focuses on how a specic organizational aspect of a rm:                      the extent to which decision-making is

decentralized down from headquarters to plant managers, aects performance during an economic crisis.

This has particular relevance following the Great Recession of 2009-08, which generated a debate over

how best to organize for recovery and survival. One common argument is that centralized rms were best

equipped to survive the recession because of the importance of cost cutting which, due to conicting interests

within the rm, is best directed from corporate headquarters (the centralist view). An alternative localist

view is that recessions are periods of rapid change, and being decentralized provides rms with the necessary

exibility to respond to turbulent business conditions.
                                                                  2

     To investigate these issues, we created two new panel datasets with explicit measures of decentralization

measured prior to the Great Recession.               One dataset, the World Management Survey (WMS) has rm

level data across ten OECD countries (France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal Sweden,

the UK and US). The other dataset, the Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS), is an

establishment level dataset covering U.S. manufacturing plants.
                                                                             3 which we constructed in partnership with

the Census Bureau. We combine these datasets with rm and plant performance data before and after the

2009-08 crisis.

     In order to guide the empirical analysis, we develop a model of rm decision-making building on the

Aghion and Tirole (1997) approach. The model illustrates two countervailing eects of decentralization on

rm performance during a crisis. On the one hand, a crisis is more likely to reduce the level of congruence

between the CEO and the plant managerfor example, tough decisions on closing down projects and laying

o sta will be resisted by local managers.             At the same time, however, a crisis can also increase turbu-

lence/uncertainty, thus making local information more valuable. In this case, a crisis would actually make

decentralization more attractive, since it enables rms to better understand and adapt to the turbulent busi-

ness environment. This result is akin to those emerging from a wide class of models where higher turbulence

and uncertainty increase the value of local knowledge and the benets of decentralization. The net eect of

    1 For   example, see Aghion, Askenazy, Berman, Cette, and Eymard (2012) on technology; Chodorow-Reich (2014) on nancial
structure and Alfaro and Chen (2012) or D'Aurizio, Oliviero and Romano (2015) on governance.
    2 Support   for these starkly dierent views can be found, for example, in reports by the Economist Intelligence Unit.    In
the depths of the Great Recession in June 2009 they wrote in favor of centralization during the crisis:        Firms should be
centralizing their decision-making processes. [...] In a recession investments and other decisions are scrutinized more carefully
by senior management and a greater emphasis is placed on projects that provide benets across the enterprise rather than
individual units.    Yet three months later in August the same publication supported decentralization: Companies have to
deal with dramatically more uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity in the current recession.        Success does not come from
centralization. True exibility arises when those who are closest to customers are empowered to respond to constant shifts in
demand, preferences and attitudes.
    3 We    use the terms establishment and plant interchangeably throughout.




                                                                 2
decentralization on rm performance is thus theoretically ambiguous.

    We then turn to the empirical analysis and nd compelling evidence that, in sectors that were exogenously

hit harder by the crisis, decentralized rms outperformed their centralized rivals in terms of survival chances

as well as in their growth of sales, productivity and prots. We use several measures of the shock, including

changes in trade patterns (exports in an establishment's industry by country cell) and a pre-recession measure

of product durability to measure the shock (durable goods industries suer more in recessions as consumers

can postpone purchases). Our ndings are robust to placebo tests, and a wide range of controls.

    Consistent with our model, we show that our empirical results are driven by the fact that the industries

which had the most severe downturns during the Great Recession also had the largest increase in turbulence.
                                                                                                                              4

To show this, we employ a novel industry level measure of turbulence, the rate of new product additions

and subtractions (product churn), which we built from the US Census of Manufactures ten digit product

data.   As shown in Bernard and Okubo (2015), product churn rises sharply during recessionsin a crisis

establishments both destroy more existing products and also create more new products.
                                                                                                       5 Using this measure

on the US Census sample, we nd that decentralization signicantly protected establishments from the

downturn in industries which had a bad shock, and an increase in product churn. We validate these results

using an alternative measure of turbulence based on the stock market volatility, which is available for the

international WMS sample as well as the US MOPS.

    Alternative explanations of our results based on reduced agency problems, nancial conditions, lower

coordination costs, omitted variables and other factors do not seem so consistent with the data.                       Finally,

although organizational change is slow (we show evidence of large adjustment costs), rms subject to large

negative shocks appear more likely to decentralize.

    Overall, our paper suggests that the internal organization of rms may serve as an important mediating

factor through which macroeconomic shocks aect rm performance and, ultimately, growth.

    Our paper builds on an extensive prior literature. The benets of exploiting local knowledge harks back

to a classic economic debate over economic systems between Lange (1936) and Von Hayek (1945). Lange

argued that a centralized socialist economy would outperform a decentralized market economy, partly because

the central planner could co-ordinate better, for example by setting prices to internalize externalities. By

contrast, Hayek argued that it was impossible to aggregate all the local knowledge of agents, and it was both

more ecient (and just) to allow individuals to make their decentralized choices based on the their local

information. Modern organizational economics builds upon these trade-os                  within   a rm rather than across

   4 Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten and Terry (2016) shows a large variety of datasets that suggest that turbulence
and uncertainty rise in downturns.
   5 Contrary   to Bernard and Okubo (2015), Broda and Weinstein (2010) report a pro-cyclical product churn. However, they
have a a very dierent focuslooking at the net change in the product oering in retail stores (the number of new bar code
products sold less current products no-longer sold)and a dierent time period (1994 and 1999-2003) spanning one mild recession.
In contrast, our measure is gross product churn (new products plus dropped products), is built on manufacturing establishment
production data, and spans 15 years from 1997-2012, exploiting aggregate and industry variation.




                                                               3
the economy as a whole. On the theory side, our paper relates to the literature on decentralization within

the rm (see Gibbons, Matouschek and Roberts, 2013, or Garicano and Rayo, 2016 for recent surveys) and

incomplete contracts (see Gibbons and Roberts, 2013, and Aghion, Bloom and Van Reenen, 2014 for surveys).

In particular, Hart and Moore (2005) analyze the optimal allocation of authority in multi-layer hierarchies.

Dessein (2002) analyzes how the allocation of control can help incorporate the agent's information into

decision-making in a situation where the agent has private information.
                                                                                       6

    Our paper also relates to the existing empirical literature on decentralization and its determinants.

For example, Rajan and Wulf (2006) and Blundell et al.                      (2016) document a movement towards atter

organizations and decentralized rms in the US and UK respectively. Caroli and Van Reenen (2001) and

Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) point at positive correlations between decentralization and both

human capital and information technology. Guadalupe and Wulf (2009) argue that the Canadian-US Free

Trade Agreement (FTA) in 1989 constitutes an exogenous increase in competition for US rms in the

industries where taris were removed and this caused greater delayering and decentralization. Closest to our

analysis is Acemoglu et al. (2007), whose model assumes rms can learn about the outcome of an investment

decision from observing other rms. Hence, in sectors with more heterogeneity/turbulence or where the rm

is closer to the performance frontier (so that learning is more limited) decision-making control should be more

decentralized. In the contract literature, Prendergast (1982) suggested that the puzzle of performance pay

in uncertain and turbulent environments (where higher risk should make the agent less willing to accept a

high-powered contract) could be because of the need to exploit local information more eectively. Similarly,

in the rm boundaries literature, Lafontaine and Slade (2007) also suggest that a similar puzzle over the

lack of a negative impact of turbulence on franchising (vs. direct control), could again be related to the need

to exploit the franchiser's superior local knowledge, which is more important in such environments. None of

these papers, however, look at the interplay between rm decentralization, shocks and turbulence which is

the center of our analysis.
                                 7

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model, Section 3 the data and methodology

and Section 4 establishes our main empirical nding that in times of crisis decentralized rms outperform

their centralized counterparts. Section 5 considers extensions, showing that volatility seems to matter rather

than other mechanisms such as changing levels of congruence and Section 7 concludes.

   6 In   contrast to Aghion and Tirole (1997), there is no information acquisition eort by the agent or the principal, therefore
in Dessein's model the allocation of authority is not so much a tool to motivate the agent (as in Aghion and Tirole) or give a
supplier incentives to make relationship specic investments (as in Grossman and Hart, 1986). A key insight in Dessein (2002)
is that in a world with asymmetric information and contractual incompleteness, the delegation of authority from a Principal to
an Agent is often the best way to elicit the agent's private information.
   7 Bradley   et al (2011) report a positive relationship between rm independencewhich they interpret as a proxy for greater
autonomy in resource allocation decisionsand rm survival during downturns using Swedish data.




                                                                 4
2      A simple model
To guide the empirical analysis of the relationship between rm performance and decentralization during a

crisis, we develop a simple model based upon Aghion and Tirole (1997). The key idea is that there is a trade

o between incentives and local information. Possible misalignment of interests between the CEO and the

plant manager favors centralization. But the plant manager is likely to have better local information than

the CEO, which is a force for decentralization. A negative shock may aect the returns to decentralization

in two, opposite, ways.            First, it may reduce the benets of decentralization, by increasing the possible

misalignment of interests between the CEO and the plant manager. Second, it may increase the benets of

decentralization by increasing the informational asymmetry between the CEO and the plant manager, and

thus the value of local information.




2.1 Basic set up
We consider a one-period model of a rm with one principal (the CEO/central headquarters) and one agent

(the plant manager). The CEO cares about the protability of the business,
                                                                                             8 whereas the plant manager

wants to maximize private benets and is not responsive to monetary incentives.
                                                                                                  9 Taking an uninformed

action involves potentially disastrous outcomes, thus an action will be taken only if at least one of the two

parties is informed. Also, the agent obtains private benets only if the rm remains in business.

     There are       n≥3      possible actions (or projects) and at any point in time only two of them are "relevant",

i.e. avoid negative payos to the parties. Among these two actions, one maximizes monetary protability,

one maximizes the agent's private utility. Other actions lead to very negative payos to both parties.

     With        ex ante   probability   α the agent's preferred action (conditional upon the rm remaining in business)
will also be the action that maximizes prots (or monetary eciency); this variable                  α   captures the degree

of congruence between the principal's preferences and the agent's preferences. If preferences coincide, then

the action that maximizes the private utility of the agent also yields monetary utility                  B   to the principal;

if preferences do not coincide, the action that maximizes the agent's private utility yields monetary payo

B−k         to the principal.

     Informational assumptions:                 We assume that the principal knows about project payos with prob-

ability     p,   but does not know directly which action the agent actually performed. On the other hand, the

agent is assumed to be perfectly informed about the project payos.

     Turbulence:           Suppose that the principal can obtain an early signal of forthcoming performance, e.g. a

current realization of income, at some cost            C,   and can then possibly decide to re the agent if she believes

    8 For   simplicity, we abstract from the agency problem between the owners of the rm and the CEO. The results just rely on
the plausible assumption that the CEO cares more about the overall prots of the company than the plant manager.
    9 This   is to rule out implementation of a performance pay contract to overcome the principal-agent problem.   Obviously,
we could allow some incentive contracts and so long as these only partially deal with the agency problem, the mechanisms we
describe here would still be at play.




                                                                  5
that the signal is due to the agent's choosing a non-prot maximizing action. In the absence of turbulence,

the signal reveals the bad action choice perfectly. But the higher the degree of turbulence, the more dicult

it is for the principal to infer action choice from performance.

        Thus, suppose that current performance is given by



                                                          y =a+ε


where      a ∈ {a1 , a2 }   denotes the agent's action choice (e.g.        a decision whether or not to introduce a new

       10
product , with          a1 < a2   and   ε   is a noise term uniformly distributed on the interval    [−u, u].


2.2 Solving the model
Suppose that the plant manager takes the non-prot maximizing action                    a1   (e.g. a decision which delays the

introduction of a new product). The CEO will infer the action choice from observing the signal realization:



                                                             y =a+ε,


if and only if     y ∈ [a1 − u, a2 − u)∪ (a1 + u, a2 + u]      and then can correct it if she has control rights, i.e. under

centralization.

        By Bayes' rule the probability of the CEO guessing the action choice is:



                                     P (u) = Pr(y ∈ [a1 − u, a2 − u) ∪ (a1 + u, a2 + u]) ,                                   (1)



that is:
                                                                   2(a2 − a1 )
                                                   P (u) = min{                , 1}.                                         (2)
                                                                  a2 − a1 + 2u

        The probability of guessing the correct action is clearly declining in the amount of noise parameterized

by   u.   Hence, the probability that the prot-maximizing action will be taken eventually under centralization

(   Ω   ), is equal to:

                                                    Ω(u) = P (u) + (1 − P (u))α,                                             (3)



where      P   is the probability that the principal acquires the information about projects payos.

    10 Equivalently,   this could be whether to drop an existing product from the portfolio or to make an investment in marketing
or sales that enhances the product's value to the consumer. The key thing is that the decision has to have some irreversibility.




                                                                   6
2.3 Centralization versus decentralization
The   ex ante    CEO's payo under decentralization, is equal to:



                                              Πd = αB + (1 − α)(B − k)


   The     ex ante    CEO's payo under centralization (i.e.         if the CEO delegates no authority to the plant

manager), is equal to:

                                        Πc = Ω(u)B + [1 − Ω(u)](B − k) − C                                        (4)



   The net gain from centralization is then given by:



                                        ∆Π = Πc − Πd = P (u)(1 − α)k − C.                                         (5)




2.4 Two countervailing eects of a bad shock
We think of a bad shock as reducing congruence between the principal and the agent.                  For example, the

negative shock may require cost-cutting such as closing down plants and laying o employees which will

be particularly resisted by middle managers. More formally, to the extent that the principal has invested

wealth in the project whereas the agent is subject to limited liability. In other words, a bad shock is likely

to increase   k.   For a given level of uncertainty   u,   this will make centralization more attractive as:


                                               ∂∆Π
                                                   = P (u)(1 − α) > 0.                                            (6)
                                                ∂k

   There is, however, also much evidence (summarized in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten and

Terry, 2016) that negative macro shocks are usually associated with greater turbulence and uncertainty (i.e.

a higher   u).   This makes centralization   less   attractive, since:



                                              ∂∆Π
                                                  = (1 − α)kP 0 (u) ≤ 0                                           (7)
                                               ∂u

   If the level of turbulence does not change after the occurrence of a bad shock, the overall eect of a bad

shock is to make centralization unambiguously more attractive. However, if uncertainty increases with a bad

shock and    k   does not change, the bad shock makes centralization become less attractive. Hence, the impact

of a bad shock is theoretically ambiguous. We will investigate empirically which eect dominates, and then

return to the theory to help inform potential mechanisms.




                                                               7
3     Data Description and Measurement
We start by describing in some detail our decentralization data since this involved an extensive new survey

process. We then describe the accounting and administrative data matched with the survey-based measures

of decentralization and the proxies measuring the severity of the Great Recession. We describe our measures

of turbulence in Section 5 when we discuss theoretical mechanisms. More details on the data are in online

Appendix A.




3.1 Decentralization
Cross-country data: World Management Survey (WMS)                                Our international decentralization data

was collected in the context of the World Management Survey (WMS), a large scale project aimed at

collecting high quality data on management and organizational design across rms around the world. The

survey is conducted through an interview with a plant manager in medium sized manufacturing rms.

    We asked four questions on decentralization from the central headquarters to the local plant manager.

First, we asked how much capital investment a plant manager could undertake without prior authorization

from the corporate headquarters.          This is a continuous variable enumerated in national currency that we

convert into dollars using PPPs.
                                11 We also inquired on where decisions were eectively made in three other

dimensions: (a) the introduction of a new product, (b) sales and marketing decisions and (c) hiring a new

full-time permanent shop oor employee. These more qualitative variables were scaled from a score of 1,

dened as all decisions taken at the corporate headquarters, to a score of 5 dened as complete power (real

authority) of the plant manager.          In Appendix Table A1 we detail the individual questions in the same

order as they appeared in the survey. Since the scaling may vary across all these questions, we standardized

the scores from the four decentralization questions to z-scores by normalizing each question to mean zero

and standard deviation one. We then average across all four z-scores and then z-score the average again to

have our primary measure of overall decentralization. In the same survey we collected a large amount of

additional data to use as controls, including management practice information following the methodology of

Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and human resource information (e.g. the proportion of the workforce with

college degrees, average hours worked, the gender and age breakdown within the rm).

    We attempt to achieve unbiased survey responses to our questions by taking a range of steps. First, the

survey was conducted by telephone without telling the managers they were being scored on organizational

or management practices.         This enabled scoring to be based on the interviewer's evaluation of the rm's

actual practices, rather than their aspirations, the manager's perceptions or the interviewer's impressions.

To run this blind scoring we used open questions (i.e. To introduce a new product, what agreement would

 11 One   reason that the main regressions control for size is that the value of this question might be mechanically greater for
larger rms and plants.




                                                               8
your plant need from corporate headquarters?), rather than closed questions (e.g. Can you introduce new

products without authority from corporate headquarters?               [yes/no]) (see question in Table A1). Second,

the interviewers did not know anything about the rm's nancial information or performance in advance

of the interview.
                     12 Consequently, the survey tool is double blind - managers do not know they are being

scored and interviewers do not know the performance of the rm. These manufacturing rms (the median

size was 250 employees) are mostly privately held and too small to attract coverage from the business media.

Third, each interviewer ran 85 interviews on average, allowing us to remove interviewer xed eects from

all empirical specications.       This helps to address concerns over inconsistent interpretation of responses.

Fourth, we collected information on the interview process itself (duration, day-of-the-week), on the manager

(seniority, job tenure and location), and on the interviewer (for removing analyst xed eects and subjective

reliability score). These survey metrics are used as noise controls to help reduce residual variation.

    We decided to focus on the manufacturing sector where productivity is easier to measure than in the

non-manufacturing sector. We also focused on medium sized rms, selecting a sampling frame of rms with

between 50 and 5,000 workers. Very small rms have little publicly available data. Very large rms are likely

to be more heterogeneous across plants. We drew a sampling frame from each country to be representative

of medium sized manufacturing rms and then randomly chose the order of which rms to contact.

    Each interview took an average of 48 minutes and the main wave was run in the summer of 2006. We

achieved a 45% response rate, which is very high for company surveys, because (i) the interview did not

discuss rm's nances (we obtained these externally); (ii) we had the written endorsement of many ocial

institutions like the Bundesbank, Treasury and World Bank, and (iii) we hired high quality MBA-type

students. We also ran some follow up surveys in 2009 and 2010 following the same rms sampled in 2006 to

form a panel which we use to look at changes in decentralization.



U.S. Census data: Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS)                                   The 2010 Man-

agement and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS) was jointly funded by the Census Bureau and the

National Science Foundation as a supplement to the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The design

was based on the World Management Survey and was mailed to the establishment plant manager (see Bryn-

jolfsson and McElheran 2016 and Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen,

2016). The survey contained six questions on decentralization with four of these covering the same domain

as WMSplant manager autonomy over (a) capital investments, (b) hiring of full time employees, (c) prod-

uct introduction and (d)        sales and marketingwith two additional question on e) pay increases of at least

10%, and (f ) product pricing decisions. For each question, respondents were asked to choose among three

options capturing where the specic decisions were made: only at this establishment (coded as 3), only at

  12 This   was achieved by selecting medium sized manufacturing rms and by providing only rm names and contact details to
the interviewers (but no nancial details).




                                                              9
headquarters (coded as 1), or both at this establishment and at headquarters (coded as 2). There were

ve choices for the question on autonomy in capital investments, starting with Under $1,000 (coded as 1)

up until  $1 million or more (coded as 5). Each of these six questions was then z-scored, and then averaged,

and then z-scored again.           The survey also included management practice questions and some background

questions on the establishment and respondent.
                                                           13 The respondent was asked about conditions in 2010 and

2005.

    The MOPS survey was sent to all ASM establishments in the ASM mail-out sample.                       Overall, 49,782

MOPS surveys were successfully delivered, and 37,177 responses were received, yielding a response rate of

78%.    The Organization Module of MOPS is only for plants where headquarters is o site - plants with

headquarters on site are told to skip this section - which takes the sample to about 20,000 plants. We further

require the sample to match to the 2006 ASM and 2009 ASM to calculate the main dependent variable

(growth in sales) which brings the sample down to 8,774 plants.
                                                                           14 Table A2 shows how our various samples

are derived from the universe of establishments.




3.2 Accounting data
Cross-country WMS data                   We build rm level measures of sales, employment, capital, prots and

materials using accounting data extracted from Bureau Van Dijk's ORBIS. These are digitized versions of

company accounts covering very large samples (close to the population in most of our countries) of private

and publicly listed rms. In our baseline specications we estimate in three-year (annualized) growth rates.

We are able to build rm level measure of sales growth for at least one year for 1,330 out of the 2,351 rms

with decentralization data in 2006.



U.S. MOPS data             In addition to our decentralization data, we also use data from other Census and non-

Census data sets to create our measures of performance (growth in sales, productivity, and protability).

We use establishment level data on sales, value-added and labor inputs from the ASM to create measures of

growth and labor productivity. As described in more detail in Appendix A, we also combined the plant-level

capital stock data from the Census of Manufactures with investment data from the ASM and applied the

perpetual inventory method to construct annual capital stocks. Finally, we measure plant protability using

prots as a percent of capital stock, with plant-level prots dened as sales less total salaries and wages,

material costs, and rental expenses.

  13 The    full   questionnaire    is   available   on   http://www.census.gov/mcd/mops/how_the_data_are_collected/MP-
10002_16NOV10.pdf.
  14 The   ASM is a stratied randomly sampled rotating 4 year panel, so many plants are not included across panels, which
accounts for over 90% of this drop in sample size




                                                                10
3.3 Measuring the Great Recession
Our baseline measure of the intensity of impact of the Great Recession (SHOCK) at an industry by country

cell level comes from the UN COMTRADE database of world trade. This is an international database of

six-digit product level information on all bilateral imports and exports between any given pairs of countries.

We aggregate COMTRADE                 data from its original six-digit product level to three-digit US SIC-1987 level

using the Pierce and Schott (2010) concordance. We deate the industry and country specic export value

series by a country and year specic CPI from the OECD to measure real exports.
                                                                                                       15

    For the U.S. MOPS data we are able to construct a more detailed SHOCK variable which varies at

the establishment level. Specically, we use pre-recession product level revenue data from the 2006 ASM

to measure each establishment's distribution of sales across 7 digit NAICS products before the onset of the

Great Recession. We then aggregate the Longitudinal Firm Trade Transactions Database (LFTTD), which

contains the universe of import and export transactions for U.S. rms, to the product-year level. By matching

each establishment's pre-recession distribution of sales across products to product level export growth, we

are able to obtain a more precise measure of the intensity of the Great Recession which measures export

growth in the       products   which the establishment produces. All results from the U.S. MOPS data use this

establishment specic formulation of the SHOCK measure.
                                                                            16 The plant-specic shock is advantageous in

that it addresses an important potential bias arising from mismeasurement of the relevant economic shock

for diversied plants. To the extent that diversication of product mix is correlated with decentralization,

using an industry level shock introduces non-random measurement error and may bias the results.                               Our

plant-specic shock built from plant-product data addresses this concern.

    Figure A1 shows the evolution of annualized export growth in the years preceding and during Great

Recession using industry level data for all countries (for a total of 5,641 manufacturing sector by country

cells). Exports were growing by about 13% in 2007 and 9% in 2008, and experienced a dramatic fall (-20%)

in 2009 compared to 2008. Industry sales fell even faster than exports in 2008 and 2009. In the empirical

analysis, we build empirical proxies for the Great Recession by averaging 2007 and 2006 (pre-recession)

and 2009 and 2008 (in-recession) levels and calculate log dierences between the two sub-periods for each

three-digit industry by country cell.
                                             17

    Since recessions typically have a greater impact on reducing the expenditure on durable versus non-

durable goods (e.g. King and Rebelo, 1999), we use as an alternative variable to capture the intensity of

the Great Recession shock the average durability of the goods produced in the industry, drawn from Ramey

  15 We    nd similar results using other measures of the shock (such as industry sales derived from aggregating rm level data in
ORBIS), but trade data is attractive as it has a large external component driven by demand in world markets and is available
at a detailed level for every country and industry in our sample.
  16 All   of the MOPS results are robust to using the same three-digit SIC SHOCK variable which is used in the cross-country
WMS analysis.
  17 We    also run robustness checks using discrete measure of   SHOCK ,   in which we code an industry-country cell to be unity
if exports fell over this period and zero otherwise.




                                                                  11
and Nekarda (2013). As a cross-sectional measure this is simply used at the 4-digit industry level, and is a

continuous measure.
                           18



3.4 Descriptive Statistics
Panel A of Table 1 contains some descriptive statistics from the WMS. The median (average) rm has 250

(574) employees and $67m ($184m) in sales. Firm sales declined by about 6% per year over this time period

(2011-2006). Panel B has the equivalent information from MOPS. Despite being a quite dierent sample, the

values look broadly comparable - MOPS              rms   are a little larger in terms of jobs (423 vs 250 at the median).

MOPS plants shrank by 7% a year, similar to the WMS average. Exports fell in 51% of the industries in

the sample. While the median growth rate of real exports across the whole sample is about -0.4% and -0.8%

in the WMS and MOPS samples, respectively, the data shows considerable variation both within and across

countries.




4         Main results
4.1 Descriptive analysis of the main result
Our main empirical nding is illustrated in Figure 1, in which Panel A refers to the results using the cross

country WMS data, and Panel B uses the US MOPS data. Panel A shows the annualized average three-year

growth rate in sales for all rms included in the WMS decentralization sample computed using data ending

in the years 2011, 2010 and 2009 (hence, averaging across three dierent growth periods: 2011-08, 2010-07

and 2009-06).
                    19 These are all years involving the Great Recession.20 Panel B shows sales growth for all

plants in the MOPS decentralization sample (2009-06 growth rate). We exclude the 2011-08 and 2010-07

periods from the MOPS sample because the recession was over in the US in 2010.
                                                                                                    21

    The sample in Figure 1 Panel A is subdivided in four categories of rms. First, we split rms according to

whether they experienced a drop in exports in an industry by country cell in the main Great Recession years

(the 2008 and 2009 average) compared to the latest pre-recession years (2006 and 2007 average).
                                                                                                                     22 Second,

we split rms by above/below the mean level of decentralization measured before the advent of the Great

Recession. Not surprisingly, all our groupings of rms experienced a drop in average sales and furthermore,

  18 We     also consider a discrete version using a dummy equal to 1 if the durability in the industry is greater than the median
(and zero otherwise).
  19 We     use long dierences to smooth over some of the transitory measurement error.      The results are robust to choosing
alternative methods of long dierencing.
  20 We     also test the robustness of the results to dropping the 2008-2011 period, in which the Recession was starting to taper
o in Europe.
  21 In   Europe (where most of our WMS data is from) the crisis persisted due to the Eurozone currency crisis and scal austerity
policies.
  22 To   be precise we rst divide the value of nominal exports by a country and time specic CPI. We then construct average
real exports in (i) 2009 and 2008 and (ii) 2007 and 2007. We then take the log dierence between these two periods.




                                                                 12
the drop in sales is clearly (and signicantly) larger for rms classied in industries experiencing a negative

export shock (compare the two bars on the right with the two on the left). However, within the group of rms

experiencing a negative shock (those on the right of the gure), the decline in sales was signicantly larger for

rms that were more centralized prior to the recession. In the WMS sample, for rms in an industry-country

pair hit by a greater negative shock, decentralized rms had a 8.2% fall in sales compared to about 11.8% in

the centralized rms, for a dierence of 3.6 percentage points which is signicant at the 5% level (compared

to an insignicant dierence of -0.1% in industries that did not experienced a shock). Panel B of Figure 1

performs the analogous exercise on the MOPS sample of US establishments. The dierence in dierences is

very similar at 3.5 percentage points, also signicant at the 5% level.

    The performance dierential between decentralized and centralized rms appears conned to the crisis

period. Using the same four categories as in Figure 1, Figure 2 plots the dierence in sales growth between

decentralized and centralized rms (or plants), again distinguishing between those which experienced a drop

in exports in an industry by country cell during the Great Recession years, including the years before and

after the Great Recession. As before, the y-axis is the annualized three year growth rate in sales, with the

year 2010, for example, corresponding to the 2010-07 growth rate. In both the WMS sample in Panel A and

the MOPS sample in Panel B, decentralized rms (plants) and centralized rms (plants) have similar sales

growth rates in the pre-recession periods (before 2008), regardless of whether they subsequently experienced

a decline in exports during the Great Recession (to see this, note that the two lines in each panel do not

diverge until 2007). The performance dierentials between decentralized and centralized rms (plants) in

industries hit by the Great Recession start to emerge in 2008, and converge in both datasets after roughly

ve years.
              23

    The basic nding emerging from the raw data is that decentralization was associated with relatively better

performance for rms or establishments facing the toughest environment during the crisis. Moreover, the

improved performance associated with decentralization is unique to the crisis period, as these rms (plants)

did not outperform their peers before the crisis, and temporary, as these rms (plants) do not appear to be

systematically outperforming their centralized counterparts after the crisis.
                                                                                             24

    We now turn to more formal tests of this basic result using alternative measurement strategies and

controls for many other possible confounders.

  23 In   the US MOPS data, although not in the cross-country WMS, centralized plants in 2012 experience a more rapid recovery
in the industries most aected by the Great Recession.
  24 One   might ask why should centralized rms not systematically   outperform   their decentralized counterparts in good times?
One reason related to the model of Section 2 is that although turbulence/uncertainty spikes in deep recessions (albeit to dierent
degrees in dierent industries) it does not so in other times (see Bloom et al, 2016, especially Table 2). A second reason is
that, although the Great Recession is a plausibly unexpected shock to which a rm's optimal decentralization did not reect
pre-recession, industry growth trends were less unusual in the pre-crisis period so rm decentralization had already been chosen
endogenously to reect these trends.




                                                               13
4.2 Baseline regression equation
Our baseline specication is:



              ∆ ln Yijct = αDECi0 + β(DECi0 ∗ SHOCKjc ) + γSHOCKjc + δxi0 + θc + φj + τt + εijct                                   (8)



where       ∆ ln Yijct   is the sales growth rate: the three year annualized change in ln(real sales) for rm (or plant)

i   in industry    j   in country   c   in end-year   t.25 DECi0     is rm (or plant)   i's   level of decentralization (measured

in the initial year of 2006 for WMS and 2005 for MOPS);                     SHOCKjk       is our measure of the severity of the

shock of recession in the industry-country cell;             xi0    is a set of controls also measured pre-recession (rm and

plant size, survey noise and the proportion of college-educated employees);                       θc   are country dummies,   φj   are

industry dummies,           τt   are year dummies and       εicjt   and is an error term.       Standard errors are clustered at

the industry by country level, or just industry level depending on the variables used to proxy for the Great

Recession and the specic sample used.                  When we use export growth as a measure of the shock the key

hypothesis we examine is whether               β < 0,     i.e. whether decentralized rms and plants do relatively better

in bad times. When we use product durability as a measure of the magnitude of the shock the equivalent

hypothesis is that        β > 0, as the more durable goods industries are expected to have (and do have) the largest
fall in demand.

      Our underlying identication assumption in equation (8) is that in the pre-Great Recession period rms

were in an initial equilibrium where they had adopted their optimal degree of decentralization (                         DECi0       )

based on their current and expected environment.
                                                26 The                     SHOCKjk        associated with the Great Recession

was largely unexpected and, since organizational form is likely subject to large adjustment costs, rms could

not immediately respond by changing to the optimal form of organization (i.e. becoming more decentralized)

in the new environment. Thus,              DECi0      can be considered weakly exogenous in equation (8). We investigate

the adjustment costs assumption by using repeat observations on decentralization for the same rms or

plants over time.          We nd decentralization to be highly persistent over the time in both the WMS                           and

MOPS samples.
             27 We also consider potential violations of these assumptions below (sub-section 4.4), such

as the presence of other unobservables correlated with                    DECi0   that could generate rm-level performance

dierentials in bad times.
    25 As   discussed above, for the long dierences we are using the three overlapping time periods for WMS, but for MOPS we
can only use one of these long dierences, 2009-2006.
    26 Formally, we do not need to assume fully optimizing behavior in the pre-period, only that DEC is weakly exogenous.
                                                                                                     i0
    27 We estimate that the annual AR(1) coecient on decentralization as 0.965 in MOPS and 0.707 in WMS. The true persistence
parameter is likely to lie between these as MOPS estimate is likely to be an over-estimate because of recall bias and the WMS
is likely to be an underestimate because of classical measurement error. See Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2016) for more
structural estimation of adjustment costs in WMS also showing high degrees of persistence of organizational form.




                                                                     14
4.3 Baseline results
Column (1) of Table 2 shows the results from estimating a simple specication including export growth

as our recession shock indicator and a full set of country, year and three-digit industry dummies.                         A one

percent increase in industry exports is associated with a signicant 0.07 percentage point increase in sales

growth. We also nd a positive and weakly signicant association between sales growth and lagged initial

decentralization (in 2006).        A one standard deviation increase in our decentralization index is associated

with a 0.58 percentage point increase in sales growth (e.g. growth increases from say 2.0% a year to 2.6%

a year).
            28 In column (2) we introduce an interaction term between decentralization and the export shock

variable.     The interaction term is negative and signicant (0.042 with a standard error of 0.013), which

indicates that decentralized rms shrank much less than their centralized counterparts when they were hit

by a negative export shock.          Note that the coecient on the linear decentralization term is insignicant

when the interaction term is added to the specication, which indicates that decentralized rms did not

grow signicantly faster or slower in those sectors that had zero export growth.

    The magnitudes of the coecients are non-trivial. Consider a macro shock causing a 1% fall in exports.

The coecients in column (2) of Table 2 suggests that the sales of an average rm (with mean decentralization

score of zero) will shrink three times as much as those of a decentralized rm (with a score one standard

deviation above the mean).
                                  29 Panel A of Figure 3 shows the implied marginal eect of decentralization on

sales growth as a function of export growth.              These plots are obtained using the coecients reported in

column (2) of Table 2. According to these estimates, decentralization has a positive association with sales

growth in all industries experiencing country-industry export growth below 8%. This corresponds to two-

thirds of the WMS         sample in the post recession period, but only 12% of rms in the pre-recession periods

(this is shown in Panel B of Figure 3). In other words, the positive association between decentralization and

rm growth appear to be contingent on the wider demand conditions in the aggregate environment facing

the rm, which in turn may be one of the possible reasons for the heterogeneous levels of decentralization

observed in 2006. It is important to emphasize that we are not claiming that decentralization is always the

optimal form of rm organizationit is very much contingent on the dierent conditions that rms face.
                                                                                                                              30

    The recession shock measure is industry and country specic. Therefore, in column (3) of Table 2 we

include a full set of industry dummies interacted with country dummies, as well as a set of other rm

controls (measured in 2006). The linear export shock is absorbed by the industry by country dummies, but

  28 Note   that the growth rates of both rm sales and industry exports used throughout all regressions are multiplied by 100
(i.e 1% is 1 not 0.01)
  29 Assuming   the eects were causal for illustrative purposes, the average rm will see a drop in sales of 0.062% (the coecient
on export growth) whereas the decentralized rm will see a fall in sales of just 0.020% (0.062 minus 0.042, the coecient on
the interaction).
  30 In other work done using the WMS decentralization    data (Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen, 2012) we discuss other inuences
on rm decentralization such as scale, human capital, complexity and culture. We exploit one source of this variation (trust)
in an instrumental variable approach discussed below.




                                                                15
we can still identify the interaction of the shock with initial rm decentralization. Even in this demanding

specication, the interaction between decentralization and the shock remains negative and signicant.
                                                                                                                        31

    A possible concern with the estimates is that the         SHOCK        variable uses information dated over the same

period as the dependent variable, which may give raise to an endogeneity bias. Consequently, we test for

the robustness of the main results using as a proxy for the intensity of the Great Recession a measure of

the durability of the products in the four-digit industry calculated prior to the recession. We include a full

set of four-digit industry dummies to absorb the linear eects in column (4).                  Consistent with the earlier

results, the interaction between decentralization and the           SHOCK       is positive (since more durable industries

experienced greater drops in demand during the recession) and signicant.
                                                                                        32

    An alternative exogenous shifter of the shock measure to durability is to construct a Bartik style IV

where we predict the change in exports from an industry-country pair. We constructed this for every HS

six digit commodity in a country by interacting the lagged (i.e., built using 2006/2007 data) export share

of the commodity from country           r   to a partner country    p   with the partner country's growth in imports (of

that commodity) between 2006/07 and 2008/09 from all countries except country                        r.   Summing this across

all partner countries and then aggregating to the three digit industry level gives an IV for the export shock.

The results from using this Bartik IV are very similar to those shown in Table 2.
                                                                                                33

    Columns (5) and (6) of Table 2 repeat the specications of columns (3) and (4) using the MOPS sample.
                                                                                                                             34

Remarkably, although drawn from a distinct dataset, a single country (US) and dierent survey methodology,

the results in this larger sample of plants are extremely similar to the ones reported using the cross country

WMS data. The coecients on the interaction terms are of the same sign, statistically signicant and of a

broadly comparable magnitude.

    The results discussed so far suggest the presence of a positive relationship between rm and establishment

sales growth and decentralization in the industries most aected by the Great Recession.                       In Table 3 we

explore whether this relationship persists even when we examine Total Factor Productivity (TFP), i.e. we

estimate the most general econometric model of Table 2, column (3) but also control for increases in other

inputs such as employment, capital and materials on the right hand side of the equation. As discussed in

the introduction, some have argued that rms need to centralize during crises, so tough cost controls and

eciency-enhancing measures can be driven down throughout the company. This would imply that, although

  31 Other   measures of the demand shock give similar qualitative results to using exports. For example, using industry output
built from aggregating the ORBIS population data in the same way as exports (across the three digit industry by country cell
between the 2009-08 and 2007-06 periods) generates a coecient (standard error) on the interaction term of 0.060 (0.015).
  32 The    specication in column (4) can be regarded as the reduced form of an IV regression where we use durability
as an instrumental variable for the shock.      When we use decentralization*durability to instrument for SHOCK*durability
in an IV specication on the sample in column (3),         we obtain a coecient (standard error)of -0.165 (0.052) on the
decentralization* SHOCK interaction.
  33 For   example, the IV coecient(standard error) on the interaction of export growth and decentralization is -0.065(0.029)
using the Bartik IV. This is similar with the OLS estimate of -0.047(0.018) in column (3) of Table 2. The rst stage is strong
with an F-statistic of 29.5.
  34 Note   that the linear export shock in column (5) is not absorbed by the industry xed eects as the MOPS export shock
varies at the plant level.




                                                               16
decentralized rms (or plants) may fare better on protecting sales revenue during downturns, they will do

worse in terms of productivity.

    Column (1) of Table 3 reports the baseline results for sales growth on the subsample of rms with data on

factor inputs, while column (2) reports the productivity results.
                                                                               35 Decentralization is also signicantly and

positively associated with an increase in TFP during a crisis.
                                                                            36 Column (3) uses the growth of protability

(Earnings Before Interest and Tax divided by the capital stock) as the dependent variable and also nds

a negative coecient on the interaction although it is not signicant at conventional levels.                        Column (4)

investigates whether the positive association also extends to the extensive margin of adjustment, using an

exit regression. The dependent variable is a dummy taking the value of one if the rm exited to bankruptcy

between 2007 and 2011 and zero otherwise (the regression is a Linear Probability Model, and the reported

coecients are multiplied by 100 for readability).                This shows that more decentralized rms also had a

signicantly lower probability of exit in industries that were worse hit by the crisis. Columns (5) though

(7) repeat the analysis using the MOPS data, and again nds a negative and signicant coecient on the

interaction term between decentralization and the shock for sales, productivity and prots growth.
                                                                                                                        37



4.4 Identication and robustness
A concern with the results is that our decentralization interaction is simply picking up longer term trends

or proxying for some unobserved variable. To address these issues we took several steps.



Placebo test in a pre-crisis period                 First, we address the concern that the       Decentralization∗SHOCK
interaction may simply be picking up some other time-invariant industry characteristic associated with the

magnitude of the recession and rm decentralization. As shown in Figure 2, the raw data suggest that the

dierentials in performance between decentralized and centralized rms are conned to the Great Recession.

To further probe this result, we examine the relationship between sales growth and the                      Decentralization ∗
SHOCK          interaction in a sample including years         preceding    the Great Recession in Table 4.         Finding the

same results in this period would raise the concern that the              SHOCK       dummy captures unobserved industry

heterogeneity unrelated to the Great Recession such that decentralized rms always did better in certain

sectors. Thus, we regard this as a placebo test. We look again at three year dierences in growth but instead

pool across the 3-year dierences 2008-05, 2007-04, 2006-03 and 2005-02 to dene the pre-recession growth

  35 The    sample for the TFP regression is smaller due to missing data on some of the additional inputs needed for the production
functions specication (in many countries revenues are a mandatory item on company accounts, but other inputs such as capital
are not).
  36 The    sum of the unreported coecients on employment, capital and materials growth is about 0.9 suggesting decreasing
returns to scale (and/or market power). Measurement error may also be responsible for attenuating the coecients on factor
inputs towards zero.     Note that if we calculate TFP as a residual using cost shares as weights on the factor inputs and use
this as the dependent variable (dropping the factor shares from the right hand side) are results are similar to those from the
estimated production function.
  37 We    have no exit data for MOPS as the survey was run in 2011 after the Great Recession, with our main results using the
recall question on decentralization in 2005.




                                                                 17
rates (in column (1) labeled (year<=2005), and 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06 (as in the earlier tables) to

dene the post-recession years (column (2)). Column (1) shows that the coecient on                        Decentralization ∗
SHOCK       is actually positive, although insignicant, in the years preceding the Great Recession. Column

(2) repeats the results of the specication of Table 2, column (3).                 Column (3) repeats the regression on

the pooled pre-crisis and post-crisis samples of the rst two columns, and includes a full set of interactions

with a dummy indicator taking a value of one for all crisis years (the three year dierences from 2009-06

and later) to estimate a dierences in dierences in dierences               specication. The coecient on the triple

interaction     P OST 2006 ∗ Decentralization ∗ SHOCK                interaction is negative and signicant, which implies

that the eect of decentralization in industries hit by the Great Recession is arising entirely from the Great

Recession years. We repeated the same analysis on productivity with very similar results in the last three

columns.



Observable factors correlated with decentralization                       We investigated whether the       Decentralization∗
SHOCK       interaction actually reects other rm level characteristics correlated with decentralization exploit-

ing the very rich data we have compiled.
                                                38 Specically in Tables 5 and 6 we augment the baseline specication

of column (3) in Table 2 with interactions terms between the Great Recession indicator and a series of ad-

ditional rm and plant controls. First, we include interactions with human capital of the workers as well as

the overall management quality of the rm (in the WMS measured as in Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007) or

the plant (in the MOPS). To control for the fact that centralization might reect rms in low prot margin

market segments who always do badly in downturns (e.g. because their products are relatively homogeneous)

we include interactions with pre-recession prot margins.                We also tried including measures of scale (size

of the plant and/or the rm), decentralization from the plant manager to production workers, technology

adoption (data-driven decision making), union strength and plant manager characteristics (age, immigrant

status and gender). Throughout these experiments the coecient on our key                      Decentralization ∗ SHOCK
interaction remained signicant.
                                       39

    In the MOPS data we can implement a particularly tough test. Since we measure decentralization in

multiple plants     within   the same rm, for multi-plant rms we are able to include an interaction between

  38 Ideally, we we would have an instrumental variable for decentralization, but there is no obvious candidate that credibly meets
the exclusion restriction. For example, regional variation in generalized trust in the population around the rm's headquarters
is strongly correlated with decentralization (see Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen 2012). We found that rms in high trust areas
outperform others in downturnsan interaction between regional trust and our export shock variable is signicantly negative in
the performance regressions of Table 2. This reduced form is consistent with a mechanism whereby trust causes greater rm
decentralization and therefore fosters resilience in bad times.   However, there may also be other mechanisms through which
higher trust helps rms outperform others during downturns, so trust cannot be reliably excluded from the second stage.
  39 Although   the additional variables were usually insignicant, there are exceptions. In Table 5, decentralization from plant
manager to workers exhibits a similar pattern to our main decentralization measure of power between the central headquarters
and plant manager. This suggests that decentralizing decision-making throughout the hierarchy is benecial during times of
crisis. The management interaction is also weakly signicant, although in this case the coecient is positive. In other words,
well managed rms perform relatively better in good times than in bad times.




                                                                18
the Great Recession indicator and average           rm   decentralization.
                                                                             40 This means that the coecient on the

Decentralization ∗ SHOCK            interaction is identied solely o dierences in decentralization across plants

within the same rm. Remarkably, the results remain signicant even in the presence of the rm level of

decentralization and its interaction with export growth (coecient of -0.023 and standard error of 0.010).

    A further concern is that the       SHOCK       measure could be reecting other industry characteristics rather

than the demand fall.         In Appendix Table A3 we show that our key interaction is robust to including

interactions of decentralization with a number of other industry characteristics such as asset tangibility,

inventories, dependency on external nance and labor costs.



Validity of exports as a shock measure                 We have argued that trade changes are an attractive indicator

of the Great Recession shock, as they are more likely to reect what is happening to demand in world markets

than being a reection of country and industry specic supply factors. Furthermore, we have also shown

above that our results are robust to alternative indicators of the shock such as the industry-specic durability

measure, a Bartik style IV for exports or using industry output instead of exports. As a further check we

estimated our models separately for exporting establishments vs.                non-exporting establishments using the

MOPS data (export data is not an item required in the company accounts data). As expected, the results

are driven by the exporting plants who are most directly exposed to trade shocks.
                                                                                                 41



Asymmetries            We investigated whether a negative shock diered from a positive shock by allowing dierent

coecients on positive than negative shocks (dened either as positive export growth or export growth

above/below the median value). In all cases we found we could not reject symmetry. This is unsurprising

since in the Great Recession period most rms were experiencing various degrees of a negative shock.




4.5 The role of co-ordination costs
When there are large externalities between dierent plants belonging to the same rm, decentralization is

likely to be more costly (Alonso et al, 2008). For example, coordinating prices and product decisions from

the central headquarters is important if the sales of one plant's products cannibalize those of other plants.

This may be less plausible in the case of WMS since these rms are medium sized (typically containing only

two plants and 233 employees). Nonetheless, to examine whether our results may reect the importance of

dierences in coordination in bad times, in Tables 7 and 8 we included interactions with many measurable

characteristics reecting environments where coordination costs should be more important. These included

rm and/or plant size and whether a rm was multi-plant (so more need for coordination) and, if so,

  40 Bloom,   Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten and Van Reenen (2016) show there is considerable variation
in organization within rms across plants at a point in time.
  41 For   example, using the baseline MOPS specication in Table 2 column (5) we estimate a coecient(standard error) of
-0.036(0.012) on the   Decentralization*SHOCK    variable for the exporters (4,200 observations) and -0.011(0.012) for the non-
exporters. These results are shown in Appendix Table A7.




                                                                19
whether these plants are located in dierent countries or dierent states. Similarly, we looked at whether

a rm was producing goods across multiple sectors (diversication dummy) or whether it was part of a

foreign multinational enterprise. We also considered the degree of outsourcing (a direct question in WMS)

and alternatively as measured by the ratio of intermediate goods inputs to total sales.

    In all cases the main interaction between decentralization and export growth remained signicant, and

in only one of the 16 cases was one of the other interactions signicant at the 5% level.
                                                                                                               42 Although co-

ordination costs matter in general for centralization, they do not seem to account for the better performance

of decentralized rms during downturns.




5     Extensions: Understanding the Mechanism
5.1 Turbulence: Product churn and stock market volatility
Our empirical ndings strongly suggest that decentralization becomes more valuable in bad times.                              The

simple model in Section 2 suggested that one reason for this was that negative shocks may be associated

with greater turbulence (a higher           u ), which increase the benets of local information (see equation (2)).           We

now turn to study whether there is any direct evidence to support this idea.



Product Churn            Our main measure of turbulence is changes in product churn in recession versus non

recession years as a proxy.        Product churn is measured using data from the US Census of Manufactures

(CM). The CM, which is conducted in years ending in 2 and 7, asks manufacturing plants to list the value of

annual shipments by 10-digit product code. Plants receive a list of all the product codes typically produced

in their industry, along with corresponding descriptions of each code. Plants which produce products not

listed on the form are instructed to write in the appropriate product code.
                                                                                           43 We then measure the amount of

product churn at the plant level as the number of products added or dropped between the previous Census

and the current Census, divided by the average number of products produced in both Censuses. That is,

product churn for establishment         i   in year   t   is dened as:



                                                  #Products Added i,t + #Products Dropped i,t
                      Product Churn i,t       =                                               ∈ [0, 2]                         (9)
                                                     0.5 (# Products i,t + #Products i,t−5 )

Our measure of industry product churn is the average plant level product churn amongst all plants within

an industry (three digit US SIC-1987) which produce at least 3 products. We restrict attention to plants

 42 This is the materials share in column (9) in the WMS regressions of Table 7.   Two other interactions with decentralizationthe
number of plants and the number of manufacturing industries in columns (4) and (8) of the MOPS regressions in Table 8are
signicant at the 10% level.   This could be taken as (weak) evidence that rms with more co-ordination issues with supply
chains, scale or industry diversication do worse during downturns when presumably lack of co-ordination becomes more costly.
 43 The   ASM also has a 10-digit product trailer, but the question is formulated in a way that results in less detailed responses
than the 5-yearly CMF question, so we use the CMF to measure churn.




                                                                   20
with at least 3 products in order to reduce measurement error from product code misreporting.
                                                                                                                   44 Finally,

in order to measure the        change   in product churn by industry during the Great Recession, we calculate the

change in product churn from 2007 to 2012 as industry-level product churn in 2012 minus industry-level

product churn in 2007 (constructed from the 2007 and 2002 Censuses).
                                                                                      45

    Before examining the relationship between sales growth, decentralization and turbulence (as measured by

product churn), we rst examined whether decentralization really was greater in industries where turbulence

was higher. Figure A2 shows that this is indeed the case: plants in the top quintile of product churn industries

had a decentralization index about 0.2 of a standard deviation higher than those in the bottom quintile.

More formally, Table A4 nds a positive and signicant relationship between decentralization (the dependent

variable) and product churn, particularly for decentralization of decisions regarding product introduction

and sales and marketing, as the theory would suggest. Furthermore, we checked whether product churn had

indeed increased more in industries that experienced a larger drop in exports during the Great Recession.

This is also the case in the data, as shown in Figure A3.

    To investigate the empirical validity of the turbulence-based theoretical mechanism, we extend our basic

equation (8) to include both the change in          CHU RN      and also its interaction with decentralization




                   ∆ ln Yij    = αDECi0 + β(DECi0 ∗ SHOCKj ) + γSHOCKj                                                     (10)


                                   +η∆CHU RNj + µ (DECi0 ∗ ∆CHU RNj ) + δxi0 + φj + τt + εij


    where      ∆CHU RNj       is the change in churn in industry      j   (since we estimate this regression model only in

the US MOPS sample we omit the country sub-script). According to the model                    µ>0,     since churn increases

the value of decentralization. Moreover, to the extent that our export shock variable is proxying for rising

turbulence during recessions, we would also expect             β    to drop in magnitude in equation (10) compared to

equation (8).

    Table 9 shows the results of this exercise.
                                                       46 In column (1) we estimate the specication in column (4)

of Table 2 for the subset of establishments for which an industry level measure of product churn could

be built.      This has similar results to the overall sample, i.e.           the coecient on the interaction       DECi0 ∗
SHOCKj          is negative and statistically signicant. Column (2) includes the          DECio ∗ ∆CHU RNj        interaction

  44 Establishments    which produce the same portfolio of products in consecutive Censuses but misreport a product code in
one year will be incorrectly measured as having switched products. Product code misreporting is particularly problematic for
establishments with 1 or 2 products, for whom a single reporting mistake would result in very high measured product churn.
Our results are robust to using industries with plants with a lower cut-o of 2 or more products or a higher cut-o of 5 or more
products.
  45 Note    that the measure is based on plants who survived between Census years. We also constructed an alternative measure
that included plants which died and entered between Census years in the construction of equation (9). This broader measure
led to similar results.
  46 Since   we are measuring churn 2012-2007 (our Census of Manufactures years) we use as our dependent variable the change
in ln(sales) between 2007 and 2012 which is why the sample is slightly smaller.




                                                               21
instead of the     DECi0 ∗ SHOCKj           interaction.   In line with the model's prediction, the coecient on the

interaction with changes in product churn is positive and signicant, i.e.                 sales growth appears to have a

positive association with decentralization in industries that experienced a greater increase in turbulence, as

proxied by product churn. Column (3) includes both interactions. The coecient on the interaction between

decentralization and product churn remains positive and signicant, while the coecient on the interaction

between decentralization and growth in industry exports drops by a quarter in magnitude compared to

column (1) and is statistically insignicant. Columns (4) to (6) repeat the same specications, this time using

durability as an alternative industry level proxy for the Great Recession. The coecient on the interaction

between decentralization and product churn is positive and signicant, and its inclusion again reduces the

magnitude of the coecient on the interaction between decentralization and durability to insignicance.



Stock Market volatility              We also use as an alternative proxy for the increase in market turbulence a

measure derived from the uncertainty literature. We measure the standard deviation in monthly rm-level

stock market returns in an industry by year cell over the population of publicly listed rms in each country.

The stock returns measure of uncertainty is the most standard rm-level measure and similar to those used

by Leahy and Whited (1996) for example. In a stochastic volatility model based on Dixit and Pindyck (1994)

the variance of stock returns will be a good predictor of the underlying level of uncertainty. These measures

are then used in changes as an alternative proxy for the increase in turbulence. In the US we pool at the

three digit SIC level as there are about 2,000 publicly listed rms. In the other OECD countries there are

fewer publicly listed rms so we construct the measure at the SIC 2 digit level. An advantage of this measure

is that it is available for the WMS as well as MOPS, but a disadvantage is that it is constructed only from

rms listed on the stock market (in the same industry).

    Table 10 shows the results.         In column (1) we reproduce the specication in column (2) of Table 2.
                                                                                                                              47

In column (2) we use the interaction between decentralization and the change in the standard deviation of

stock market returns instead of our usual interaction. As expected from the theory, the coecient is positive

and signicant suggesting that decentralized rms outperform their centralized counterparts in industries

where stock market volatility has increased by most. In column (3) we include both interactions. The stock

market volatility interaction remains positive and signicant whereas the coecient on the export growth

interaction falls by a third in magnitude and is now only signicant at the 10% level. The next three columns

reproduce the same specications using the MOPS data showing a qualitatively similar pattern.



Summary on Turbulence                  Taking Tables 9 and 10 together, it appears that decentralized rms did

relatively better in industries where turbulence increased.              At least part of the reason why decentralized

  47 The   only dierence is that we are using two-digit dummies instead of three-digit dummies to match the level of aggregation
for the stock market volatility measures.




                                                                22
rms do better in bad times appears to be because the industries worse hit by the Great Recession were also

those where turbulence also increased, consistent with our simple model.




5.2 Types of decentralization
As a related experiment to shed light on the model we looked at the dierent sub-questions which form

the overall decentralization index, as shown in Table 11.                        Since the Great Recession was associated with

a decrease in output demand, we would expect that decentralization capturing managerial discretion over

outputs (sales and new products) would be more important than delegation over inputs (like labor and

capital).     We start in column (1) by showing the baseline result of Table 2, column (3).                              In columns (2)

and (3) we repeat the estimation using as the decentralization index a z-scored average of the two questions

capturing plant manager decentralization for hiring and investment decisions in column (2), and for sales

and marketing and product introduction in column (3). In columns (4) to (6) we repeat the same exercise

for the U.S. MOPS sample.
                                      48

    In both cases, the positive eect of decentralization in a crisis is primarily driven by the output related

questions. This nding provides additional insight on the possible mechanism through which decentralization

may positively aect performance during a downturn, namely the ability to better adapt to more turbulent

demand conditions.
                         49

    One concern with these ndings is the belief that in practice plant managers do not have meaningful

autonomy in decisions regarding sales and marketing and product introduction, and that these decisions

are typically undertaken in the marketing department of rm headquarters. It is worth recalling that while

this may be the case in business-to-consumer rms which sell their goods to households directly or through

retail establishments, it is less obvious in business-to-business rms which sell their manufacturing output

to other rms. The latter scenario encompasses a signicant share of US and EU manufacturing activity.
                                                                                                                                            50

Moreover, our rms are not so largea median of 250 employees in WMS and 423 in MOPS so few of them

are likely to have standalone marketing divisions.




5.3 Do bad times reduce the costs of decentralization?
Our theory suggested that congruence could fall in recessions (the centralist view) leading to an increase

in the value of centralization. Our main result rejected this as decentralized rms performed better in bad

  48 In   the U.S. sample we have 3 questions capturing plant manager decentralization for hiring and investment decisions in
column (5) and 3 capturing plant manager decentralization for sales and marketing and product introduction in column (6).
  49 Consistent   with the previous sub-section Appendix Table A5 shows that the positive interaction between decentralization
and product churn is driven primarily by the sales and marketing and product introduction questions.
  50 According    the   Bureau   of     Economic   Analysis,   over   90   percent   of   US   manufacturing   output   goes   to   the   man-
ufacturing    sector,   which    will    be   primarily   business-to-business    transactions:     https://www.bea.gov/industry/xls/io-
annual/IOMake_Before_Redenitions_1997-2015_Sector.xlsx. This will be similar in Europe, which like the US has a higher-
end manufacturing sector focused more at business consumers (Chinese manufacturing output, in contrast, is more consumer
focused).




                                                                      23
times. There may, however, be alternative rationalizations of these results. Imagine, for example, that bad

times reduce the      costs   of decentralization because the plant manager fears that performing the non-prot

maximizing action might cause the rm to go bankrupt, and this will be                  more   costly to the manager than

CEO, as he will take a larger hit to their income (e.g. through longer unemployment). To test this idea

we examine environments where the rm-specic risk of bankruptcy rose rapidly in the Great Recession.

We constructed several indicators of increased bankruptcy risk.                 In particular, we used the measures of

exogenous increases in exposure to nancial crisis exploited by Chodorow-Reich (2014) such as exposure

to mortgage-backed securities (aected by the sub-prime crisis) and a rm's pre-existing relationship with

Lehman Brothers or similar at-risk banks. These are pre-Great Recession conditions relating to the supply

of nance rather than product demand. We also used more conventional measures such as leverage ratios.

    We found that these measures do predict negative performance in sales and other outcomes (see Ap-

pendix Table A6), as in Chodorow-Reich (2014). However, in no case did including these bankruptcy risk

variables (and their interactions with        SHOCK       or other covariates) materially alter the coecient on the

key interaction of     Decentralization ∗ SHOCK           when included in equation (8).
                                                                                                51 This led us to conclude

that the crisis was not leading to greater decentralization by fostering greater alignment between the central

headquarters and plant manager.




5.4 Changes in decentralization over time
Recall that our identication assumption is that pre-recession decentralization is weakly exogenous and that

there are some adjustment costs which mean that after the Great Recession shock rms do not immediately

adopt the new optimal (more decentralized) organizational form. A corollary of our theory, however, is that

rms will start moving to a more decentralized form (to the extent that they believe the shock is likely to be

long-lasting). Hence, we should expect to see some increase in decentralization for rms and establishments

more exposed to the shock. Table A8 examines this by using the change in decentralization as a dependent

variable. This is a demanding specication, especially for WMS where the panel element of decentralization

is limited (we have data in 2009 and 2010 for a sub-sample of the 2006 wave). Nevertheless, in both WMS

and MOPS we do see a signicant and positive relationship between the size of the negative shock and

decentralization.
  51 The   coecients on the Lehman Brothers variable cannot be reported due to Census disclosure rules. Note, because of the
need to match our data with the Chodorow-Reich (2014) data our sample size falls to 2,000 observations, so many of our results
are not statistically signicant, but point estimates are similar and unaected by the controls for nancial conditions.




                                                               24
6    Conclusion
When does decentralizing power from the central headquarters to plant managers increase rm growth? We

formalized a simple model where the CEO considers decentralizing product-related decisions to the plant

manager. The increased turbulence that comes with bad times has theoretically ambiguous eects on rm

performance. On the one hand, it may reduce the congruence between the CEO and the plant manager, thus

increasing the benet of centralization. On the other hand, it makes the plant manager's local information

more valuable, and so implies that decentralized rms will perform relatively better in unexpected downturns.

    To empirically investigate these issues we collected new data on a panel of rms in 10 OECD countries

(WMS), and plants in the US (MOPS) and exploited the negative shock of the Great Recession which

reduced demand across industries and countries in heterogeneous ways.       Using our pre-recession data on

decentralization we nd that negative shocks hurt growth in centralized rms and establishments signicantly

more than in their decentralized counterparts. This is true whether we use export shocks which vary at the

industry by country (WMS) or establishment (MOPS) level, or exogenous predictors of these negative shocks

like product durability. Further, as the localist model suggests, this eect is driven by the industries which

experienced a greater increase in the turbulence (as measured by product churn and stock market volatility)

that accompanied the crisis.

    As discussed above, the eects are not trivial in size at the micro level, but we can also perform some

very rough calculations at the macro level (see Appendix B and Table A9 for details).       We estimate how

much of the post crisis dierences in GDP growth performance across countries are related to the dierent

levels of pre-crisis decentralization. Under this view, the fact that the US had relatively more decentralized

(and therefore exible) rms meant that it could weather the global economic storm better than many more

centralized countries. Assuming the nancial crisis was a common cross country negative shock, we can trace

out the implied post shock growth performance depending on each nation's average decentralization. We

calculate that greater decentralization in the US could account for about 15% of the US 's superior GDP

growth post 2012-2007 compared to the other OECD countries in our sample.

    We see our paper as a rst attempt to unravel the relationship between growth and the internal orga-

nization of rms using micro data with observable measures of decentralization. There are many directions

to take the research.   First, we need to look at the ways in which, in the longer-run, rms change their

organizational forms. For example, as the eects of the Great Recession recede, how will the growth eects

and degree of decentralization change? Second, we would like to go deeper into the relation between the debt

structure of companies (and so their bankruptcy risk) and the incentives for rms to change. Finally, it would

be valuable to examine the macro-economic implications of our modeling framework in more detail. Do the

eects we identify matter in terms of thinking about business cycles and how economies and companies can

be resilient to these adverse events?




                                                     25
References

Acemoglu, D. P. Aghion, C. Lelarge, J. Van Reenen and F. Zilibotti (2007), Technology, Information, and
the Decentralization of the Firm,   Quarterly Journal of Economics,       122 (4), 1759-1799.


Aghion, P. and J.Tirole (1997), Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,      Journal of Political Economy,
105(1) 1-29.


Aghion, P., N. Bloom and J. Van Reenen (2014) Incomplete contracts and the internal organization of
rms,   Journal of Law, Economics and Organization        30(1), 37-64.


Aghion, P; P. Askenazy, N. Berman, G. Cette and L. Eymard (2012) Credit Constraints and the Cyclicality
of R&D Investment: Evidence from France,       Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 1001-1024.
Alfaro, L. and M. Chen (2012) Surviving the Global Financial Crisis: Foreign Ownership and Establishment
Performance.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy         4(3), 3055


Alonso, R., W. Dessein and N. Matouschek (2008) When Does Coordination Require Centralization?
American Economic Review, 98(1):      145-79.


Bernard, A. and O. Toshihiro (2015) Product switching and the business cycle, CEP Discussion Paper
1432.


Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007), Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
Countries,   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1341-1408.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, R and J. Van Reenen (2012) The Organization of Firms Across Countries,         Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1663-1705.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun and J. Van Reenen (2016) Management as a Technology, NBER Working Paper
22327.


Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten and S. Terry (2016) Really Uncertain Business
Cycles, Stanford mimeo


Bloom, N., E. Brynjolfsson, L. Foster, R. Jarmin, M. P., I. Saporta-Eksten and J. Van Reenen (2017) What
drives Management Practices? Center for Economic Performance Discussion Paper 1470



Blundell, R., D.A. Green and W. Jin (2016), The UK Wage Premium Puzzle: How did a large increase in
university graduates leave the education premium unchanged?, Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper
16/01.


Bradley W., H. Aldrich, D. A. Shepherd and J. Wiklund (2011), Resources, Environmental Change, and
Survival: Asymmetric Paths of Young Independent and Subsidiary Organizations,            Strategic Management
Journal, 32:   486-509.


Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt, (2002) Information Technology, Workplace Organization, and
the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (1), 339-376.
Brynjolfsson, E. and K. McElheran (2016) The rapid rise of data-driven decision making         American Eco-
nomic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 106       (5), 133-139.


Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2010) Product creation and destruction: Evidence and price implications
American Economic Review, 100, 691-723.


                                                      26
Caroli, E., and J. Van Reenen (2001) Skill Biased Organizational Change",      Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116(4), 1449-1492.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014) The employment eects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence from
the 2008-09 nancial crisis     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 1-59.
D'Aurizio, L., T. Oliviero and L. Romano (2015) Family rms, soft information and bank lending in a
nancial crisis   Journal of Corporate Finance   33(3) 279-292

Dessein, W. (2002) Authority and Communication in Organizations,           Review of Economic Studies, 69 (4),
811.

Dixit, A. and R. Pindyck (1994)       Investment under uncertainty,   Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Garicano, L. and L. Rayo (2016) Why Organizations Fail: Models and Cases              Journal of Economic Liter-
ature,   54 (1), 137-192.

Gibbons, R., N. Matouschek and J. Roberts (2013) Decisions in Organizations Chapter 10 373- 431 in R.
Gibbons and J. Roberts (eds)        Handbook of Organizational Economics.
Gibbons, R. and J. Roberts (2013)      Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton:       Princeton University
Press

Grossman, S., and O. Hart (1986) The Costs and Benets of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral
Integration,   Journal of Political Economy, 691-719.
Guadalupe, M. and J. Wulf (2010) The Flattening Firm and Product Market Competition: The Eect of
Trade Liberalization on Corporate Hierarchies,      American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,           2 (4),
105127.

Hart, O., and J. Moore (2005) On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination versus Specialization,          Journal
of Political Economy,       113(4) 675-702.

King, R.G. and S.T. Rebelo (1999) Resuscitating Real Business Cycles, in            Handbook of Macroeconomics,
John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.), Elsevier.

Lafontaine, F. and M. Slade (2007) Vertical Integration and Firm boundaries,           Journal of Economic Lit-
erature, 45(3) 629-685
Lange, O. (1936) On the Economic Theory of Socialism        Review of Economic Studies, 4(1) 53-71.
Leahy, J. and T. Whited (1996), The Eects of Uncertainty on Investment: Some Stylized Facts",            Journal
of Money Credit and Banking, 28, 64-83.
Pierce, J. and P. Schott (2009) A Concordance between Ten-Digit U.S. Harmonized System Codes and
SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries, Mimeo, Yale University.

Pierce, J. and P. Schott (2010) Concording US Harmonized System Codes Over Time, Mimeo, Yale
University.

Prendergast, C. (2002) The Tenuous Trade-O between Risk and Incentives             Journal of Political Economy,
110(5) 1071-1102

Ramey, V. and C. Nekarda (2013) The cyclical behavior of the price-cost markup" UC San Diego mimeo.

Rajan, R.G. and J. Wulf (2006) The attening rm: Evidence from panel data on the changing nature of
corporate hierarchies,     Review of Economics and Statistics, 88    (4), 759773.

Von Hayek, F. (1945) The Use of Knowledge in Society       American Economic Review, 35(4) 519-53.

                                                       27
                             Figure 1: Changes in Sales by Shock and Decentralization
                            Panel A - WMS Data
                                                                                   0




                                     Annualized average sales growth (2011-06)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WMS C
                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Export

                                                                                  -4                                                                                                         Below Mean
                                                                                                                                                                       beta                    -2.831201
                                                                                  -6                                                                                   1.96*sigma (95% CI)     0.933251

                                                                                  -8

                                                                                 -10

                                                                                 -12

                                                                                 -14
                                                                                       Below Mean Above Mean                  Below Mean Above Mean
                                                                                                     Decentralization Score

                                                                                                     Export Shock=0       Export Shock=1

                            Panel B - MOPS Data
                                                                                  0                                                                                                               MOPS
                                                                                                                                                                                           Export Shock=
                                 Annualized average sales growth (2009-06)




                                                                                  -2                                                                                                        Below Mean
                                                                                                                                                                       beta                         -5.81
                                                                                                                                                                       1.96*sigma (95% CI)           0.58
                                                                                  -4

                                                                                  -6

                                                                                  -8

                                                                                 -10

                                                                                 -12

                                                                                 -14
                                                                                       Below Mean Above Mean                  Below Mean Above Mean
                                                                                                     Decentralization Score

                                                                                                    Export Shock=0        Export Shock=1

Notes: Panel A uses WMS rm data from 10 OECD countries.                                                              In Panel A the bars plot annualized average of three-year

rm-level change in ln(sales) over 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06. 95% condence interval bands reported. Export Shock is

whether rms were in a country-industry cell that experienced a drop in the average level of exports in 2008 and 2009 (the

main Great Recession years) compared to the average level in 2006 and 2007 (the latest pre-Recession years). Right hand side

bars are industry-country cells were the shock was worst. Firms are split into whether they are decentralized (above the overall

mean of decentralization in 2006) or centralized. Sample size in each bar in Panel A (from left to right) is (1) 695 observation

over 296 rms; (2) 863 obs, 352 rms; (3) 736 obs, 316 rms; (4) 857 obs, 367 rms. Panel B is the same as Panel A except we

just use one 2009-06 long dierence for plant sales growth and decentralization dated in 2005. The sample in Panel B includes

8,774 US plants in 3,147 rms.




                                                                                                                 28
       Figure 2: Changes in Sales
                          Figure 1 - by Shock,
                                     Change       Dierence
                                            in Sales            between Decentralized
                                                     by Shock, Decentralized minus Centralized minus Centralized Firms
                                   Panel A - WMS data




                                                             4
                                            Decentralized - Centralized firms
                                               -2           0          2




                                                                                2004   2006    2008          2010             2012   2014
                                                                                              Year of accounts data

                                                                                               No Shock               Shock



                                   Panel B - MOPS data
                                                        4
                                     Decentralized - Centralized firms
                                       -2          0    -4    2




                                                                           2004        2006   2008         2010               2012   2014
                                                                                                Year of accounts data

                                                                                                 No Shock                 Shock

Notes: Panel A uses WMS rm data from 10 OECD countries. In Panel A, the lines plot annualized average three-year rm-
                               Notes: Panel Arms
level change in ln(sales) for decentralized   used WMS
                                                   minusfirm data from average
                                                          annualized   10 OECDthree-year
                                                                               countries. Inchange
                                                                                             Panel Aintheln(sales)
                                                                                                           lines plotfor centralized rms,
                                annualized average of three-year firm-level change in ln(sales) for decentralized firms minus
distinguishing between rms that experienced an export shock during the Great Recessions, versus those that did not. Growth
                                annualized average three-year change in ln(sales) for centralized firms. Growth rates are
rates are shown for each year starting with the 2005-02 growth rate through the 2014-11 growth rate. "Shock" is whether rms
                                shown for each year starting with the 2005-02 growth rate through the 2014-11 growth rate.
were in a country-industry cell"Shock"
                                 that experienced       a drop
                                         is whether firms   werein
                                                                 in exports   in 2008 cell
                                                                    a country-industry  andthat
                                                                                             2009   (the main
                                                                                                experienced       Great
                                                                                                              a drop      Recession
                                                                                                                     in exports in   years) compared

to 2006 and 2007 (the latest 2008
                                pre-Recession     years).
                                      and 2009 (the          Panel
                                                      main Great      B usesyears)
                                                                  Recession    MOPS      plant to
                                                                                    compared    data
                                                                                                  2006from     the (the
                                                                                                        and 2007    U.S.   In pre-
                                                                                                                        latest Panel B, the lines plot
                                Recession years).
annualized average three-year plant-level          Panel
                                              change    in B used MOPS
                                                           ln(sales)       plant data from plants
                                                                       for decentralized    the U.S.minus
                                                                                                      In Panel   B the linesaverage
                                                                                                             annualized       plot  three-year change
                                annualized average of three-year plant-level change in ln(sales) for decentralized plants minus
in ln(sales) for centralized plants, distinguishing between plants that experienced an export shock during the Great Recessions,
                                annualized average three-year change in ln(sales) for centralized plants, and growth rates are
versus those that did not. Growth rates are shown for each year starting with the 2004-01 growth rate through the 2015-12
                                shown for each year starting with the 2004-01 growth rate through the 2015-12 growth rate.
growth rate. "Shock" is whether      plants
                                "Shock"       produced
                                         is whether  plantsproducts     (measured
                                                            produced products        before
                                                                                (measured     the the
                                                                                            before crisis)  which
                                                                                                       crisis) whichononaverage
                                                                                                                          average experienced a drop
in exports in 2008 and 2009 (the    main Great
                                experienced         Recession
                                             a drop in exports in years)
                                                                  2008 andcompared     to 2006
                                                                            2009 (the main  Greatand   2007 years)
                                                                                                   Recession   (the latest   pre-Recession
                                                                                                                      compared   to        years).
                                2006 and 2007 (the latest pre-Recession years).




                                                                                                      29
                          Figure 2 - Effect of increase in decentralization on sales growth
                          Figure 3: Eect of Increase in Decentralization on Sales Growth

                          Panel A




                            Effect of increase in decentralization on sales growth
                            -4            -2          0             2            4




                                                                                     -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5   0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
                                                                                                                      Export growth


                          Panel B
                            .03
                            .02
                            .01
                            0




                                                                 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0                     5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

                                                                                             Export growth pre Recession         Export growth post Recession
Notes: WMS Data. Panel A plots the implied marginal eect of decentralization on rm sales growth using the coecients in

Table 2 column (2) as a function of the shock (export growth in cell). Panel B shows the distribution of rms in industry-country
                          Notes: Panel A plots the implied marginal effect of decentralization on firm
cells with dierent levels in cell). Panel B shows the distribution of rms in industry-country cells with dierent levels of export
                          sales growth using the coefficients in Table 2 column (2) as a function of the
growth before and after   the Great Recession.
                          shock (export growth in cell). Panel B shows the distribution of firms in
                          industry-country cells with different levels in cell). Panel B shows the
                          distribution of firms in industry-country cells with different levels of export
                          growth before and after the Recession.




                                                                                                                       30
                                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics


       Panel A World Management Survey
                                                                                                                                                Standard
       Variable                                                                                               Mean              Median
                                                                                                                                                Deviation
       Sales Levels ($Millions)                                                                              184.14             67.07            513.41
       Sales Growth (3 years annualized log change)                                                           -6.38              -5.81            13.31
       Employment (firm)                                                                                     574.39             250.00          2,144.77
       Employment (plant)                                                                                    232.93             150.00           254.36
       % Employees with a College Degree                                                                     16.32              10.00             17.51
       Decentralization Score                                                                                 0.00               -0.04             1.00
       Exports (continuous, % change in sector/country export in 08/09 relative to 06/07)                     -1.96              -0.43            20.96
       Durability (continuous, median years of service of goods produced in the industry)                    13.03              10.00             19.50




31
       Panel B U.S. Census Data - MOPS
                                                                                                                                                Standard
       Variable                                                                                               Mean              Median
                                                                                                                                                Deviation
       Sales Levels (2009) ($Millions)                                                                       137.40             50.50            403.60
       Sales Growth (3 years annualized log change)                                                           -7.09              -6.06            18.44
       Employment (firm)                                                                                     1,354              423.3             2,812
       Employment (plant)                                                                                    249.81             135.00           481.91
       % Employees with a College Degree                                                                      11.84              7.28             11.69
       Decentralization Score                                                                                  0.00              -0.17             1.00
       Exports (continuous, % change in product exports in 08/09 relative to 06/07)                           -1.51              2.83             29.94
       Durability (continuous, median years of service of goods produced in the industry)                    12.98              12.20             13.17

     Notes: These are the regression samples used in Table 2. Panel A contains descriptive statistics from the WMS and Panel B from the MOPS.
                                         Table
        Table 2 - Decentralization and Sales   2: Decentralization
                                             Growth                 and Sales Growth - Main results
                                                       - Main Results
                                                     (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)                                              (5)          (6)
        Dependent Variable = Sales Growth               World Management Survey (WMS)                                                       U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
        Decentralization                           0.579*          0.363         0.041        -0.460                                          0.583**       -0.182
                                                  (0.302)         (0.302)       (0.417)       (0.572)                                          (0.230)     (0.234)
        EXPORT Growth                             0.069**        0.062**                                                                        0.027
                                                   (0.029)        (0.029)                                                                      (0.021)
        Decent.*EXPORT Growth                                  -0.042***       -0.047**                                                       -0.023**
                                                                  (0.013)       (0.018)                                                        (0.009)
        Decent.*DURABILITY                                                                   0.502**                                                      0.381***
                                                                                              (0.194)                                                      (0.091)
        Firms                                       1,330          1,330         1,330         1,330                                            3,147        3,147




32
        Observations                                3,151          3,151         3,151         3,151                                            8,774        8,774
        Controls
        Industry by country dummies                                               Yes                                                            Yes                 Yes
        Firm & plant employment, skills                                           Yes           Yes                                              Yes                 Yes
        Cluster                                  SIC3*Cty SIC3*Cty SIC3*Cty                    SIC3                                              SIC3                SIC3
         Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level in columns (1)-
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level in columns (1)-(3) and

     just industry in columns (4)-(6).
         (3) and just industry in columnsThe     dependent
                                             (4)-(6).         variable is
                                                      The dependent       the annualized
                                                                        variable  is the annualized
                                                                                           three-yearthree-year   rm ln(sales).
                                                                                                       change of change           2011-08, 2010-07
                                                                                                                         of firm ln(sales).         and
                                                                                                                                             2011-08, 2010-07
                                                                                                                                                        2009-06and    pooled in WMS
                                                                                                                                                                  are2009-06

     (columns   (1)-(4))
         are pooled      and just
                     in WMS   (columns      in MOPS
                                  2009-06(1)-(4))   and(columns    (5) and
                                                         just 2009-06       (6)). Decentralization
                                                                         in MOPS    (columns (5) andmeasured
                                                                                                        (6)). Decentralization   and 2005 for
                                                                                                               in 2006 for WMSmeasured          MOPS.
                                                                                                                                            in 2006 for"EXPORT
                                                                                                                                                        WMS and Growth"
                                                                                                                                                                    2005 for is change
     in ln(exports)  in country
         MOPS. "EXPORT        Growth"     digit
                                by three is     industry
                                             change        cell between
                                                      in ln(exports)   inthe  2008 and
                                                                          country       2009 average
                                                                                    by three          (the main
                                                                                             digit industry   cellGreat Recession
                                                                                                                   between        years)
                                                                                                                            the 2008  andcompared  to the 2006
                                                                                                                                            2009 average   (the and
                                                                                                                                                                 main2007 average (the
                                                                                                                                                                       Great
     latest pre-Recession years) in columns (1)-(4), and is the average change (2008/2009 average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the
         Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years) in columns (1)-(4), and is the average change (2008/2009
     products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006 for column (5). All columns include three digit industry (four digit in column (4)), country and
         average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in
     year dummies and "noise controls" (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration, WMS also
         2006 for column (5). All columns include three digit industry (four digit in column (4)), country and year dummies and "noise controls" (plant
     includes analyst dummies and MOPS whether the survey was answered online or by mail). Firm and plant size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(% of employees
         manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration, WMS also includes analyst dummies
     with a college degree).
                                                     Table 3: Alternative Firm Level Outcomes
         Table 3 - Alternative Firm Performance outcomes
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)                                     (5)            (6)        (7)
                                                    World Management Survey (WMS)                                                   U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
         Dependent Variable              Sales growth TFP growth           Profit     Survival                               Sales growth       TFP       Profit
                                                                          growth                                                              growth     growth
         Decentralization                    -0.017        -0.263          -0.396        1.33                                  0.583**         -0.358     -0.027
                                            (0.400)        (0.357)        (1.597)      (0.913)                                  (0.230)       (0.508)    (0.761)
         Decent.*EXPORT Growth            -0.048***       -0.033**         -0.068      -0.086*                                 -0.023**      -0.054**   -0.064**
                                            (0.017)        (0.013)        (0.065)      (0.047)                                  (0.009)       (0.022)    (0.031)
         Firms                                1,211         1,211          1,192        2,663                                    3,147          3,147      3,147




33
         Observations                         2,839         2,839          2,712        2,663                                    8,774          8,774      8,774
         Cluster                          SIC3*Cty       SIC3*Cty       SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty                                   SIC3           SIC3       SIC3
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level in columns (1)-(3) and just
          Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level
     industry in columns (5)-(7). Sales growth is the annualized three-year change of rm ln(sales). TFP growth is the same as sales growth except we include the growth
          in columns (1)-(3) and just industry in columns (5)-(7). Sales growth is the annualized three-year change of firm ln(sales). TFP growth
     of employment, capital and materials on the right hand side of the regression. Prot growth is EBIT/capital for WMS and gross prots/capital for MOPS (prots

     measured
          is theassame
                    plantas sales
                          sales    growth
                                - wage        except we
                                       bill - materials     include
                                                        - rental     the growth
                                                                 expenses). For all of employment,
                                                                                    these               capital
                                                                                          dependent variable   we and
                                                                                                                  pool materials
                                                                                                                       the long dierence right hand
                                                                                                                                  on the 2011-08, 2010-07
                                                                                                                                                       sideand  the regression.
                                                                                                                                                             of 2009-06 in WMS and

           2009-2006
     just Profit      in MOPS).    Survival  is equal to 1 if the rm survived after  2008 and 0 if it exited to bankruptcy.  The  coecient on
                  growth is EBIT/capital for WMS and gross profits/capital for MOPS (profits measured as plant sales - wage bill - materials -  the exit regression are multiplied by

     100 for readability. Decentralization measured in 2006 for WMS and 2005 for MOPS."EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell
          rental expenses). For all these dependent variable we pool the long difference 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06 in WMS and just 2009-
     between the 2008 and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years) in columns (1)-(4), and is
          2006 in MOPS). Survival is equal to 1 if the firm survived after 2008 and 0 if it exited to bankruptcy. Decentralization measured in
     the average change (2008/2009 average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great
          2006 for WMS and 2005 for MOPS."EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell between the
     Recession in 2006 in columns (5)-(7). All columns include three digit industry by country and year dummies and controls for rm and plant size, skills and "noise"

     controls.
          2008 and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years) in
          columns (1)-(4), and is the average change (2008/2009 average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for
          the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006 in columns (5)-(7). All columns include three digit industry
          by country and year dummies and controls for firm and plant size, skills and "noise" controls.
        Table 4 - Placebo Tests                                             Table 4: Placebo Test

                                                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)             (5)                   (6)
        Dependent Variable:                                                     Sales Growth                                             TFP Growth
        Sample                                                Year<=2005         Year>=2006               All          Year<=2005         Year>=2006              All

        Decentralization                                          0.221              0.041             0.365               -0.117             -0.263             0.038
                                                                 (0.334)            (0.417)           (0.310)             (0.306)            (0.357)            (0.262)
        Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                            0.005            -0.047**            0.004               0.004            -0.033**             0.004
                                                                 (0.017)            (0.018)           (0.015)             (0.015)            (0.013)            (0.012)
        POST*EXPORT Growth                                                                           0.089***                                                  0.115***
                                                                                                      (0.024)                                                   (0.021)
        POST*Decentralization                                                                          -0.389                                                    -0.387




34
                                                                                                      (0.427)                                                   (0.350)
        POST*Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                                          -0.052***                                                 -0.036**
                                                                                                      (0.019)                                                   (0.016)
        Firms                                                     1,080              1,330             1,330                991               1,211               1,211
        Observations                                              3,664              3,151             6,815               3,265              2,839              6,104

        Cluster                                                  SIC3*Cty           SIC3*Cty          SIC3*Cty          SIC3*Cty          SIC3*Cty             SIC3*Cty
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level. Sales growth is the annualized
        Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level.
     three-year change of rm ln(sales). TFP growth is the same as sales growth except we include the growth of employment, capital and materials on the right hand side
        Sales growth is the annualized three-year change of firm ln(sales). TFP growth is the same as sales growth except we include the growth
     of the regression. For columns (2) and (5) we use long dierences 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06 and in columns (1) and (4) we use long dierences 2008-05, 2007-04,
        of employment, capital and materials on the right hand side of the regression. For columns (2) and (5) we use long differences 2011-08,
     2006-03 and 2005-02. Columns (3) and (6) pool all these long dierences together. "POST" is a dummy taking value 1 in all years after 2006 included. Firm and plant

     employment
        2010-07 areandmeasured
                         2009-06in and
                                   2006."EXPORT
                                        in columnsGrowth"
                                                     (1) andis(4)    we use
                                                                  change      long differences
                                                                         in ln(exports) in country2008-05,    2007-04,
                                                                                                   by three digit        2006-03
                                                                                                                  industry         and 2005-02.
                                                                                                                           cell between the 2008 andColumns      (3) and
                                                                                                                                                       2009 average   (the (6)
                                                                                                                                                                            main

     Great  Recession  years) compared to the 2006 and  2007   average (the latest pre-Recession years). All columns include dummies
        pool all these long differences together. "POST" is a dummy taking value 1 in all years after 2006 included. Firm and plantby for year and  for three digit industry

     country pairs, and controls for rm and plant size, skills and "noise" (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the
        employment are measured in 2006."EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell between the 2008
     week and duration and analyst dummies).
        and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years). All
        columns include dummies for year and for three digit industry by country pairs, and controls for firm and plant size, skills and "noise"
        (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration and analyst
        dummies).
                      Table A4 - Robustness
                            Table           WMS
                                    5: Robustness of results to interactions of export growth with other rm-level variables in WMS data

                                                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)
                      Dependent Variable: Sales Growth

                      Decentralization                                                0.041         0.026         -0.098        0.050        0.046       -0.241        0.044       -0.078
                                                                                     (0.417)       (0.416)       (0.423)       (0.440)      (0.431)      (0.451)      (0.417)      (0.424)
                      Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                -0.047**      -0.046**      -0.054***     -0.043**     -0.043**     -0.049**     -0.047**     -0.049**
                                                                                     (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.020)      (0.018)      (0.019)
                      Log(% employees with a college degree)                          0.470         0.506         0.439         0.312        0.419        0.486        0.483        0.423
                                                                                     (0.330)       (0.333)       (0.329)       (0.346)      (0.336)      (0.356)      (0.334)      (0.340)
                      Log(% employees with a college degree)*EXPORT Growth                          0.023
                                                                                                   (0.038)
                      Management                                                                                  0.977
                                                                                                                 (0.664)
                      Management*EXPORT Growth                                                                   0.042*
                                                                                                                 (0.025)
                      Profit Margin (pre recession)                                                                             7.643
                                                                                                                               (4.833)
                      Profit Margin (pre recession)*EXPORT Growth                                                               0.117
                                                                                                                               (0.208)
                      Workers' decentralization                                                                                              -0.038
                                                                                                                                            (1.015)




35
                      Workers' decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                                                               -0.074*
                                                                                                                                            (0.040)
                      Foreign Plant Manager                                                                                                               0.478
                                                                                                                                                         (2.293)
                      Foreign Plant Manager *EXPORT Growth                                                                                              0.182***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.069)
                      Male Plant Manager                                                                                                                               -0.392
                                                                                                                                                                      (1.662)
                      Male Plant Manager*EXPORT Growth                                                                                                                 0.046
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.052)
                      Plant Manager Age                                                                                                                                            -3.687
                                                                                                                                                                                  (2.966)
                      Plant Manager Age*Export Growth                                                                                                                              -0.104
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.093)
                      Observations                                                   3151           3151          3151          2905         3097        2784         3151          3125
                      Cluster                                                      SIC3*Cty       SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty     SIC3*Cty    SIC3*Cty     SIC3*Cty     SIC3*Cty

     Notes: WMS Data.   *significant at 10%;
                 Notes: *signicant          ** 5%;
                                        at 10%;   *****
                                                     5%;    Estimated
                                                        1%.***        by OLS
                                                                1% level.    with standard
                                                                           Estimated    byerrors
                                                                                            OLS  clustered
                                                                                                   with standard          industry
                                                                                                           at three-digiterrors  clustered    level
                                                                                                                                   by countryat     in all columns.
                                                                                                                                                 three-digit        Specifications
                                                                                                                                                                industry    by country level in all columns.
                   are the
     Specications are  thesame as Table
                             same        2 column
                                   as Table       (3) except
                                               2 column   (3)augmented
                                                               except augmented        variables
                                                                       with additionalwith       from the WMS
                                                                                            additional    variables    and interacted
                                                                                                               (linearfrom  the WMS        export growth).
                                                                                                                                      with(linear          Management
                                                                                                                                                   and interacted  with      z-
                                                                                                                                                                      is theexport growth). Management
                      scored average of 18 z-scored management questions (see Bloom and Van Reenen 2007 for details). "Log(% employees with a college degree)" is the natural
     is the z-scored average of 18 z-scored management questions (see Bloom and Van Reenen 2007 for details). Log(percentage of employees with a college degree) is
                      logarithm of the percent of employees with a bachelors degree. Worker decentralization is the z-scored average of 2 questions on worker autonomy. Foreign/Male
     the natural   logarithm
                      plant manager=1
                                of theifpercent    of employees
                                          plant manager is from a foreign  a bachelors
                                                                     withcountry           degree. Prot margin is the pre-recession level of prot over sales. Worker
                                                                                 or male, respectively.                                                                                decentralization is the

     z-scored average of 2 questions on worker autonomy. Foreign/Male plant manager=1 if plant manager is from a foreign country or male, respectively.
                        Robustness
              Table A5 -Table      in the U.S. Census
                              6: Robustness           Data
                                                 of results   to interactions of export growth with other rm-level variables in MOPS data
                                                                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
              Dependent Variable: Sales Growth

              Decentralization                                              0.583**       0.573**       0.524**       0.566***     0.587***     0.565***      0.597*
                                                                              (0.23)       (0.228)       (0.227)       (0.229)        (0.23)       (0.23)     (0.309)
              Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                               -0.0230**     -0.0232**     -0.0235**     -0.0226**     -0.0229**    -0.0227**   -0.0231**
                                                                             (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.01)
              Management                                                                    -0.242
                                                                                           (0.229)
              Management*Export Shock                                                        0.007
                                                                                           (0.006)
              Profit margin (pre-recession)                                                            -7.458***
                                                                                                         (1.153)
              Profit margin (pre-recession)*Export Shock                                                  -0.051
                                                                                                         (0.048)
              Data-Driven Decision-Making                                                                               -0.345
                                                                                                                       (0.206)
              Data-Driven Decision-Making*Export Shock                                                                   0.003




36
                                                                                                                       (0.006)
              Log(% employees with a college degree)*EXPORT Growth                                                                   0.001
                                                                                                                                    (0.001)
              Union                                                                                                                             -1.237**
                                                                                                                                                 (0.667)
              Union*Export Shock                                                                                                                  0.001
                                                                                                                                                 (0.026)
              Firm Decentralization                                                                                                                                      -0.0188
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.461)
               Firm Decentralization*Export Shock                                                                                                                        0.0013
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.0149)
               Firms                                                             3,147           3,147          3,147          3,147          3,147        3,147          3,147
               Observations                                                      8,774           8,774          8,774          8,774          8,774        8,774          8,774
               Cluster                                                           SIC3             SIC3          SIC3           SIC3            SIC3        SIC3           SIC3
               Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level in all columns. The specification is the
     Notes: MOPS Data. *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level in all columns. Specications
               same as Table 2 column (5) except augmented with additional variables from the MOPS (linear and interacted with export growth). Management is the z-scored
     are the same as Table 2 column (5) except augmented with additional variables from the MOPS (linear and interacted with export growth). Management is the z-scored
               average of 18 z-scored management questions (see Bloom et al. 2013 for details). "Data-Driven Decision-Making" is the z-scored average of 2 questions on the use
     average of 18 z-scored management questions (see Bloom et al. 2013 for details). Prot margin is the pre-recession level of prot over sales. Data-Driven Decision-
               and availability of data in decision-making. "Log(% employees with a college degree)" is the natural logarithm of the percent of employees with a bachelors degree.
     Making is the z-scored average of 2 questions on the use and availability of data in decision-making. Log(percentage of employees with a college degree) is the natural
               "Union" is the percent of employees that are members of a labor union.
     logarithm of the percent of employees with a bachelors degree. Union is the percentage of employees that are members of a labor union.
                Table 9A - Is decentralization proxying Table    7: Is Decentralization
                                                        for co-ordination? WMS Data       Proxying for Coordination? WMS Data
                                                                             (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)                               (7)          (8)          (9)
                Dependent Variable: Sales Growth

                Decentralization                                             0.041        0.050        0.062        0.115       0.046         0.067       0.127        -0.013       0.361
                                                                            (0.417)      (0.418)      (0.417)      (0.422)     (0.413)       (0.419)     (0.413)      (0.448)      (0.983)
                Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                             -0.047**     -0.047**     -0.045**     -0.046**    -0.047***     -0.047**    -0.050***    -0.046**     -0.094**
                                                                            (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)       (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.047)
                Ln(employees)*EXPORT Growth                                               -0.940
                                                                                         (0.816)
                Ln(plant employees)                                                                    -0.228
                                                                                                      (0.513)
                Ln(plant employees)*EXPORT Growth                                                      0.008
                                                                                                      (0.021)
                No. of production sites                                                                             -0.003
                                                                                                                   (0.027)
                No. of production sites*EXPORT Growth                                                               0.003
                                                                                                                   (0.002)
                Diversification                                                                                                  1.302
                                                                                                                                (0.898)
                Diversification*EXPORT Growth                                                                                    0.027
                                                                                                                                (0.055)




37
                Multinational                                                                                                               -2.478*
                                                                                                                                            (1.384)
                Multinational*EXPORT Growth                                                                                                  1.691
                                                                                                                                            (1.730)
                Foreign Multinational dummy                                                                                                              -1.820**
                                                                                                                                                          (0.833)
                Foreign Multinational*EXPORT Growth                                                                                                        0.016
                                                                                                                                                          (0.039)
                Ln(share outsourced production)                                                                                                                        -0.090
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.281)
                Ln(share outsourced production)*EXPORT Growth                                                                                                          0.001
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.012)
                Materials Share                                                                                                                                                                 -6.991
                                                                                                                                                                                               (7.065)
               Materials Share*EXPORT Growth                                                                                                                                                  0.817**
                                                                                                                                                                                               (0.357)
               Observations                                                     3,151         3,151       3,105          3,127         3,151         3,151        3,151         3,029           1,201
               Cluster                                                        SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty    SIC3*Cty       SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty     SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty      SIC3*Cty       SIC3*Cty
               Notes: Specifications are the same as Table 2 column (3) except augmented with additional variables (linear and interacted with export growth). Multinational =1 if the plant belongs to a
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Specications are the same as Table 2 column (3) except augmented with additional variables (linear and interacted
               foreign or domestic multinational. Diversified =1 if the firm has multiple primary SIC4 codes. Share of outsourced production is a question in the WMS survey. Materials share is the
     with export growth). Multinational =1 if the plant belongs to a foreign or domestic multinational. Diversied =1 if the rm has multiple primary SIC4 codes. Share
               fraction of sales that are intermediate goods inputs (from ORBIS).
     of outsourced production is a question in the WMS survey. Materials share is the fraction of sales that are intermediate goods inputs (from ORBIS).
                 Table 9B - Is decentralization proxying Table    8: Is Decentralization
                                                         for co-ordination? MOPS data     Proxying for Coordination? MOPS Data
                                                                                (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)                                             (7)           (8)           (9)
                 Dependent Variable: Sales Growth

                 Decentralization                                                  0.583**       0.611***      0.583**         -0.885        0.115         0.376       0.636**         0.345       0.856***
                                                                                     (0.23)       (0.228)        (0.23)       (0.798)       (0.329)       (0.267)       (0.281)       (0.267)       (0.266)
                 Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                    -0.023**     -0.0232**      -0.023**      -0.022**      -0.024**      -0.023**      -0.023**      -0.022**      -0.023**
                                                                                    (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)
                 Multiproduct                                                                    -1.060**
                                                                                                  (0.495)
                 Multiproduct*EXPORT Growth                                                       0.0164
                                                                                                 (0.0185)
                 Ln(plant employment)*EXPORT Growth                                                              0.003
                                                                                                                (0.006)
                 Ln(firm employment)*EXPORT Growth                                                               0.000
                                                                                                                (0.000)
                 Ln(firm employment)*Decentralization                                                                         0.198*
                                                                                                                              (0.118)
                 Ln(No. of plants)                                                                                                          -0.557*
                                                                                                                                            (0.327)
                 Ln(No. of plants)*Decentralization                                                                                          0.196
                                                                                                                                            (0.139)




38
                 Ln(No. of states w/ plants)                                                                                                               -0.022
                                                                                                                                                          (0.030)
                 Ln(No. of states w/ plants)*Decentralization                                                                                              0.020
                                                                                                                                                          (0.016)
                 Plant is in same state as largest plant                                                                                                                1.013*
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.554)
                 Same state as largest plant*Decentralization                                                                                                            -0.148
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.349)
                 Ln(No. of manufacturing industries)                                                                                                                                   -0.047
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.029)
                 Ln(No. of manufacturing industries)*Decentralization                                                                                                                 0.362*
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.020)
                 Plant is in same industry as largest plant                                                                                                                                             0.762
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.512)
               Same industry as largest plant*Decentralization                                                                                                                                          -0.498
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.374)
               Observations                                                            8,774          8,774          8,774        8,774        8,774         8,774         8,774          8,774         8,774
               Cluster                                                                 SIC3           SIC3           SIC3         SIC3         SIC3          SIC3          SIC3           SIC3           SIC3
               Notes: Specification
     Notes: **signicant      at 10%; are**    same
                                           the5%;   ***as 1%     2 column
                                                          Tablelevel.       (5). "Multiproduct"
                                                                      Specication       are theequals
                                                                                                    same 1as if Table
                                                                                                                a plant 2produced
                                                                                                                           columnat(5).   two products (7-digit
                                                                                                                                    least"Multiproduct"         NAICS)
                                                                                                                                                             equals  1 ifina 2009
                                                                                                                                                                              plantand  0 otherwise.
                                                                                                                                                                                     produced      at "Ln(No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      least two of products
               manufacturing industries)" is the log of the number of unique primary industry codes (6-Digit NAICS) assigned to the firm's manufacturing establishments in 2009. "Plant is in same state
     (7-digit NAICS) in 2009 and 0 otherwise. "Ln(No. of manufacturing industries)" is the log of the number of unique primary industry codes (6-Digit NAICS) assigned
               as largest plant" equals 1 if plant is in the same U.S. state as the firm's largest plant by employment in 2009, and 0 otherwise. "Plant is in same industry as largest plant" is defined similarly
     to the rm's
               with manufacturing
                     an industry defined establishments
                                         as 6-digit NAICS code.in 2009. "Plant is in same state as largest plant" equals 1 if plant is in the same U.S. state as the rm's largest plant by

     employment in 2009, and 0 otherwise. "Plant is in same industry as largest plant" is dened similarly with an industry dened as 6-digit NAICS code.
                                     Table
         Table 7 - Decentralization and    9: Decentralization
                                        Product Churn                     and Turbulence (as measured by Product Churn)

                                                                          (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)              (5)              (6)

                                                                                      Exports                                              Durability

         Dependent Variable: Sales growth ('07-'12)

         Decentralization                                               1.026          1.524**        1.854***               -0.004         0.491***           0.322
                                                                       (0.713)          (0.681)        (0.686)               (0.209)         (0.130)          (0.201)
         Decentralization*Change in Product Churn                                     4.722***        4.330***                              0.994***         0.930***
                                                                                         (1.43)        (1.524)                               (0.300)          (0.298)




39
         Decentralization*Export Growth ('07-'12)                      -0.040**                         -0.031
                                                                        (0.019)                        (0.019)
         Decentralization*Durability                                                                                         0.147*                            0.082
                                                                                                                             (0.086)                          (0.081)

          Observations                                                  8,243           8,243           8,243                  8,243            8,243           8,243
     Notes:  *signicant  at 10%; ** 5%;  *** 1%  level. Estimated   by OLS   with standard  errors clustered  at three-digit industry level.  The dependent
          Notes: MOPS data. *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level. Theis the      variable

     annualized three-year change of rm ln(sales) 2012-07 Decentralization measured in 2005. "EXPORT Growth" is average change (2008/2009 average compared to
          dependent variable is the annualized three-year change of firm ln(sales) 2012-07 Decentralization measured in 2005. "EXPORT Growth" is
     2006/2007 average) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006. All columns include three
          average change (2008/2009 average compared to 2006/2007 average) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant
     digit industry dummies, rm and plant size, skills and "noise controls" (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of
          produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006. All columns include three digit industry dummies, firm and plant size, skills and "noise
     the week and duration, and whether the survey was answered online or by mail). "PRODUCT CHURN" is the three digit industry-level value of the average change in
          controls"
     the (number  of (plant  manager's
                      products added between
                                       tenuret and  hierarchical
                                               and t-5            seniority
                                                       plus the number  products  the interview's
                                                                             and dropped   between reliability  score, day
                                                                                                    t and t-5)/(average      of the
                                                                                                                         number  of week   and
                                                                                                                                    products    duration,
                                                                                                                                              between     and
                                                                                                                                                      t and    whether
                                                                                                                                                            t-5).

          the survey was answered online or by mail). "PRODUCT CHURN" is the three digit industry of value of the average change in the (number
          of products added between t and t-5 plus the number products dropped between t and t-5)/(average number of products between t and t-5).
         Table 8 - Decentralization and Uncertainty
                                          Table 10: Decentralization and Turbulence (as measured by Stock Market Volatility)


                                                                          (1)             (2)           (3)                                 (4)              (5)          (6)
                                                                                World Management Survey                                           U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
         Dependent Variable = Sales Growth
         Decentralization                                               0.208                0.421               0.289                  0.583**               0.3179               0.283
                                                                       (0.331)              (0.329)             (0.321)                  (0.230)              (0.216)             (0.206)
         EXPORT Growth                                                0.088***                                 0.090***                   0.027                                    1.190
                                                                       (0.032)                                  (0.027)                  (0.021)                                  (1.633)
         Decent*EXPORT Growth                                         -0.034**                                  -0.024*                 -0.023**                                 -0.019***
                                                                       (0.017)                                  (0.014)                  (0.009)                                  (0.007)
         Decent.*Change in SD(stock returns)                                               7.142***            6.304***                                      1.208***            1.285***
                                                                                            (1.341)             (2.354)                                       (0.402)             (0.374)
         Firms                                                          1,330                1,330               1,330                    3,147                3,147               3,147




40
         Observations                                                   3,151                3,151               3,151                    8,774                8,774               8,774
         Controls
         Industry dummies                                            Yes (SIC2)          Yes (SIC2)           Yes (SIC2)                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes
         Firm & plant employment, skills                                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes
         Cluster                                                     SIC2*Cty            SIC2*Cty             SIC2*Cty                     SIC3                SIC3                SIC3

     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. The dependent variable is the annualized three-year change of rm ln(sales) in 2009-06. "EXPORT Growth" is change
         Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level. The dependent variable is the annualized three-year
     in ln(exports)
         change of firm
                      in ln(sales) by
                          country in   three digit
                                     2009-06.      industry cell
                                              Decentralization   between
                                                               measured     the 2008
                                                                        in 2005.     and 2009
                                                                                 "EXPORT      average
                                                                                          Growth" is change
                                                                                                        (theinmain
                                                                                                               ln(exports)
                                                                                                                    GreatinRecession
                                                                                                                            country byyears)  compared
                                                                                                                                       three digit industryto the
                                                                                                                                                            cell   2006 and
                                                                                                                                                                 between      2007
                                                                                                                                                                         the 2008   average
                                                                                                                                                                                  and
     (the2009 average
          latest      (the main Great
                 pre-Recession  years)Recession years)
                                       in columns      compared
                                                   (1)-(3), and to
                                                                 is the
                                                                     the2006 and 2007
                                                                         average      average
                                                                                 change       (the latest
                                                                                         (2008/2009       pre-Recession
                                                                                                       average  comparedyears)
                                                                                                                            to in columns (1)-(3),
                                                                                                                               2006/2007)          and is the average
                                                                                                                                            in ln(exports)            change (2008/2009
                                                                                                                                                              at the product  level (HS7) for
         average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006 in columns (4)-(6). "Change
     the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006 in columns (4)-(6). Columns (1)-(3): estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at
         in SD(stock returns)" is the change in standard deviation of stock returns in three digit industry cell between 2008 and 2009 average compared to 2006. "Change in Log(SD(stock
     two-digit industry by country level. "Change in SD(stock returns)" is the change in standard deviation of stock returns in two digit industry by country cell between
         returns))" is defined analgously using the log of the standard deviation. All columns include three digit industry dummies and "noise controls" (plant manager's tenure and
     2008hierarchical
           and 2009seniority
                        averageandcompared      to 2006.
                                      the interview's  reliability columns
                                                            Thesescore, day ofinclude  two
                                                                                the week  anddigit industry
                                                                                               duration,      by country
                                                                                                         and whether       dummies.
                                                                                                                     the survey       Columns
                                                                                                                                was answered    (4)-(6)
                                                                                                                                             online or byestimated
                                                                                                                                                          mail). Firmby
                                                                                                                                                                      andOLS
                                                                                                                                                                          plantwith  standard errors
                                                                                                                                                                                size are
     clustered  at three-digit
         ln(employment)          industry
                           are skills is the ln(%
                                             level.of"Change       SD(stock
                                                      employeesinwith a collegereturns)"
                                                                                  degree). is the change in standard deviation of stock returns in three digit industry cell between 2008 and
     2009 average compared to 2006. These columns include three digit industry dummies. All columns include the same set of noise and rm controls used in Table 2.
       Table 6 - Differences across decentralization questions
                                                          Table 11: Dierences Across Decentralization Questions

                                                                                      (1)        (2)           (3)                         (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                                                     World Management Survey (WMS)                          U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
       Dependent Variable: Sales Growth

       Decentralization                                                              0.041                                             0.583**
                                                                                    (0.417)                                             (0.230)
       Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                              -0.047**                                            -0.023**
                                                                                    (0.018)                                             (0.009)
       Decentralization - Hiring & Investment                                                          0.063                                          0.808***
                                                                                                     (0.396)                                           (0.236)
       Decentralization - Hiring & Investment*EXPORT Growth                                           -0.002                                            -0.013
                                                                                                     (0.019)                                           (0.008)
       Decentralization - Sales & New Products                                                                           -0.135                                          0.171
                                                                                                                        (0.379)                                         (0.218)




41
       Decentralization - Sales & New Products                                                                        -0.060***                                       -0.025***
       *EXPORT Growth                                                                                                   (0.017)                                         (0.010)
       Firms                                                                              1,330            1,330              1,330          3,147          3,147        3,147
       Observations                                                                       3,151            3,151              3,151          8,774          8,774        8,774
       Cluster                                                                     SIC3*Cty         SIC3*Cty          SIC3*Cty           SIC3            SIC3           SIC3

     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level. The dependent variable is

        Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level in columns (1)-(3)
     the annualized three-year change of rm ln(sales). 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06 are pooled in WMS (columns (1)-(3)) and just 2009-2006 in MOPS (columns (4) to

     (6)). Decentralization measured in 2006 for WMS and 2005 for MOPS. "EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell between the
        and just industry in columns (4)-(6). The dependent variable is the annualized three-year change of firm ln(sales). 2011-08, 2010-07 and 2009-06 are
     2008  and 2009
        pooled      average
                in WMS       (the main
                          (columns     (1)-(4)) Recession
                                         Great and         years) compared
                                                     just 2009-2006         to the
                                                                      in MOPS    (columns    2007
                                                                                   2006 and (5)    average
                                                                                                 and        (the latest pre-Recession
                                                                                                      (6)). Decentralization          years)
                                                                                                                               measured   in in  columns
                                                                                                                                              2006         (1)-(3),
                                                                                                                                                     for WMS      and
                                                                                                                                                                    and2005    average
                                                                                                                                                                        is thefor

     change  (2008/2009  average   compared   to 2006/2007)  in ln(exports) at the product level  (HS7) for  the products  the plant produced   just
        MOPS. "EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell between the 2008 and 2009 average (the main Great in  prior  to the  Great Recession

     2006 in columns (4)-(6). All columns include three digit industry, country and year dummies and "noise controls" (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority
        Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years) in columns (1)-(3), and is the average change (2008/2009
     and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration, WMS also includes analyst dummies and MOPS whether the survey was answered online or by mail).
        average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006
     Firm and plant size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(% of employees with a college degree). "Decentralization - Hiring & Investment" is the z-scored average
        in columns (4)-(6). All columns include three digit industry, country and year dummies and "noise controls" (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical
     of the z-scored measures of plant manager autonomy in hiring and capital investments (and also pay increases in the MOPS data). "Decentralization - Sales & New
        seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration, WMS also includes analyst dummies and MOPS whether the survey was
     Products" is average for product introduction and marketing.
        answered online or by mail). Firm and plant size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(% of employees with a college degree). "Decentralization -
        Hiring & Investment" is the z-scored average of the z-scored measures of plant manager autonomy in hiring and capital investments (and also pay
        increases in the MOPS data). "Decentralization - Sales & New Products" is average for product introduction and marketing.
Web Appendices - Not Intended for Publication

A        Data Appendix
A.1 Industry-level variables
Exports

We measure changes in exports in an industry by country cell using the UN COMTRADE database of world trade. This is

an international database of six-digit product level information on all bilateral imports and exports between any given pairs

of countries. We rst aggregate the COMTRADE value of export data (in US dollars)from its original six-digit product level

to three-digit US SIC-1987 level using the Pierce and Schott (2010) concordance. We deate the industry and country specic

export value series by a country and year specic CPI from the World Bank (2010 base year) to measure real exports. The

Export growth variable is dened as the logarithmic change in exports in 2008-09 (the average in a cell across these two Great

Recession years) relative to 2006-07 (the average across the two years immediately prior to the Great Recession).                              The real

export growth variable is winsorized at the 5th and the 95th percentile.




Durability

Data on the average durability of the goods produced in the industry are drawn from Ramey and Nekarda (2013). This is a

continuous cross-sectional measure at the 4-digit industry level.




Bartik Instrument

The Bartik IV for export growth in a country-industry cell is constructed as the change in world import demand (WID) for

commodity    m   in country   r   between time and   t   (2008 and 2009) and       t−1   (2006 and 2007), is dened as:


                                                               X
                                                4zmr,t =            smpr,t−1 ∗ 4W IDmpr0 ,t
                                                                p

where   smpr,t−1   denotes the share of exports of commodity         m    from country    r   to partner country    p   at time   t − 1; W IDmpr0 ,t   is

the log change in total imports of commodity         c   in partner country    p   between    t   and   t−1   from all countries   excluding   country

r   (hence the r' sub-script). Consider, for example, the Bartik IV for changes in US exports of anti-ulcer drugs. For a given

partner, like the UK, we calculate the share of all American anti-ulcer drugs exported that were exported to the UK in                           t−1    ,

sdrugs,U K,U S,07−06 , and then multiply this by the change in the imports of anti-ulcer drugs into the UK from every country
(except the US), 4W IDdrugs,U K,U S 0 ,09−08 . This is a prediction of what the demand for US exports to the UK will be

coming from exogenous world demand (rather than US specic factors). We repeat this for every country in the world (not just

the UK) and then sum over all the US partner countries in the world.

      Commodity    m   is measured at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS).

Commodity level measures are then mapped into Industry               j   three-digit Standard Industry Classication (SIC) codes using the

Pierce and Schott (2010) concordance.




                                                                          42
A.2 World Management Survey (WMS) International Data
Firm-level Accounting Databases

Our sampling frame was based on the Bureau van Dijk (BVD) ORBIS which is composed of the BVD Amadeus dataset for

Europe (France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Poland, Portugal, and the United Kingdom); BVD Icarus for the United States, BVD

Oriana for Japan.   These databases all provide sucient information on companies to conduct a stratied telephone survey

(company name, address, and a size indicator). These databases also typically have accounting information on employment,

sales and assets. Apart from size, we did not insist on having accounting information to form the sampling population, however.

Amadeus are constructed from a range of sources, primarily the National registries of companies (such as Companies House in

the United Kingdom). Icarus is constructed from the Dun & Bradstreet database, which is a private database of over 5 million

U.S. trading locations built up from credit records, business telephone directories, and direct research. Oriana is constructed

from the Teikoku Database in Japan.The full WMS consists of 34 countries but because we need decentralization data in 2006

we are restricted to the 12 countries surveyed in the 2006 wave. Because we wanted to focus on mature economies we dropped

China and India which left us with 10 OECD countries (France, Great Britain, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal,

Sweden and the US).




The Organizational Survey

In every country the sampling frame for the organization survey was all rms with a manufacturing primary industry code

with between 50 and 5,000 employees on average over the most recent three years of data.           Interviewers were each given a

randomly selected list of rms from the sampling frame. More details are available in Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2012)

where we compare the sampling frame with Census demographic data from each country and show that the sample is broadly

representative of medium sized manufacturing rms.        We also analyzed sample selection - the response rate was 45% and

respondents appear random with respect to company performance, although larger rms where slightly more likely to respond.

We collected a detailed set of information on the interview process itself (number and type of prior contacts before obtaining

the interviews, duration, local time-of-day, date and day-of-the-week), on the manager (gender, seniority, nationality, company

and job tenure, internal and external employment experience, and location), and on the interviewer (we can include individual

analyst xed eects, time-of-day, and subjective reliability score). We used a subset of these noise controls (see text) to help

reduce residual variation.

    In analyzing organizational surveys across countries we also have to be extremely careful to ensure comparability of responses.

One step was the team all operated from two large survey rooms in the London School of Economics. Every interviewer also

had the same initial three days of interview training, which provided three calibration     exercises, where the group would all

score a role-played interview and then discuss scoring together of each question. This continued throughout the survey, with

one calibration exercise every Friday afternoon as part of the weekly group training sessions. Finally, the analysts interviewed

rms in multiple countries since they all spoke their native language plus English, so interviewers were able to interview rms

from their own country plus the UK and US, enabling us to remove interviewer xed eects.

    The construction of the degree of decentralization measures (from Central Headquarters to Plant Manager) is discussed in

some detail in the text. The questions are addressed to the plant manager. We only keep observations where at least two of

the four decentralization questions were answered (and we include a control for the number of non-missing questions in the set

of noise controls). We drop observations where the plant manager is also the CEO (5% of rms). In cases were the Central

Headquarters is on the same site as the plant we interviewed we add a dummy variable to indicate this (one of the noise controls)

to reect potentially greater monitoring. We use the data from the 2006 wave in all cases except when we analyze changes in

decentralization as an outcome where we exploit the fact that we ran another wave in 2009 and 2010 for a sub-sample of rms.




                                                                43
    As a check of potential survey bias and measurement error we performed repeat interviews on 72 rms in 2006, contacting

dierent managers in dierent plants at the same rm, using dierent interviewers.      To the extent that our organizational

measure is truly picking up company-wide practices these two scores should be correlated, while to the extent the measure is

driven by noise the measures should be independent. The correlation of the rst interview against the second interviews was

0.513 (p-value of 0.000), with no obvious (or statistically signicant) relationship between the degree of measurement error and

the decentralization score. That is to say, rms that reported very low or high decentralization scores in one plant appeared to

be genuinely very centralized or decentralized in their other plants, rather than extreme draws of sampling measurement error.




Firm-level variables

Our rm accounting data on sales, employment, capital (xed assets), prots and intermediate inputs came from BVD ORBIS.

Whether the variable is reported depends on the accounting standards in dierent countries.       Sales are deated by a three

digit industry producer price index.   BVD has extensive information on ownership structure, so we can use this to identify

whether the rm was part of a multinational enterprise. We also asked specic questions on the multinational status of the

rm (whether it owned plants aboard and the country where the parent company is headquartered) to be able to distinguish

domestic multinationals from foreign multinationals.

    We collected many other variables through our survey including information on plant size, skills, organization, etc.     as

described in the main text.   We also collected management practices data in the survey.      These were scored following the

methodology of Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), with practices grouped into four areas: operations (three practices), monitor-

ing (ve practices), targets (ve practices), and incentives (ve practices). The shop-oor operations section focuses on the

introduction of lean manufacturing techniques, the documentation of processes improvements, and the rationale behind intro-

ductions of improvements. The monitoring section focuses on the tracking of performance of individuals, reviewing performance,

and consequence management. The targets section examines the type of targets, the realism of the targets, the transparency

of targets, and the range and interconnection of targets. Finally, the incentives section includes promotion criteria, pay and

bonuses, and xing or ring bad performers, where best practice is deemed the approach that gives strong rewards for those

with both ability and eort. Our management measure uses the unweighted average of the z-scores of all 18 dimensions.

    Our basic industry code is the U.S. SIC (1997) three digit levelwhich is our common industry denition in all countries.

We allocate each rm to its main three digit sector (based on sales).




A.3 U.S. Census Bureau Data: MOPS
Sample

Table A2 shows how our sample is derived from the universe of U.S. business establishments. The U.S. Census Bureau data on

decentralization comes from the 2010 Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS), which was a supplement to

the 2010 Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The MOPS survey was sent to all ASM establishments in the ASM mail-out

sample. Overall, 49,782 MOPS surveys were successfully delivered, and 37,177 responses were received, yielding a response rate

of 78%.

    The MOPS contains 36 multiple choice questions, split into 3 modules: management practices (16 questions), organization

(13 questions), and background characteristics (7 questions). Decentralization measures come from the Organization module

of the MOPS. Only establishments with headquarters located o-site are instructed to answer questions in the organization

module.   This reduces the sample to about 20,000 establishments.       We also require matches to the 2006 and 2009 ASM in

order to calculate the growth rates used in the analysis. This reduces the sample size substantially for two reasons. First, all

of the establishments in our sample must have been operating in both 2006 and 2009.        The second reason is related to the




                                                              44
ASM sample design. The ASM is a rotating 5-year panel which samples large establishments with certainty but also includes

a random sample of smaller establishments. The ASM sample is refreshed every ve years, most recently in 2009, thus we lose

establishments which were in the 2009 and 2010 ASM samples and responded to the MOPS, but were not in the 2006 ASM

sample. Finally, we require that respondents answer all 6 of the questions about decentralization (described below) and have

positive value added and imputed capital in 2010. The nal sample contains 8,774 establishments and 3,147 rms.




Decentralization

Our measure of decentralization is constructed from 6 questions on the MOPS (questions 18 through 23), which measure the

allocation of real decision making rights between manufacturing plant managers and their central headquarters. Respondents

are asked whether decisions about hiring, pay increases, product introductions, pricing, and advertising are conducted at the

establishment, headquarters or both, and about the largest capital expenditure plant managers can make without authorization

from headquarters. The survey asks about organizational practices in 2005 and 2010. We use information on decentralization in

2005 in the main analysis because rms may endogenously respond to the crisis in 2010 by changing organizational structures.

    Each of the 6 decentralization questions is normalized on a scale from zero to one, with one being most decentralized and

zero being least decentralized. For example, question 18 reads In 2005 and 2010, where were decisions on hiring permanent

full-time employees made? There are three possible responses: Only at this establishment which is assigned the value one;

Both at this establishment and at headquarters which is assigned a value of one-half; Only at headquarters which is assigned

a value of zero. We then standardize each question to have a mean equal to zero and standard deviation equal to one, take

the mean over all six standardized questions, and then standardize this mean so that it has a mean equal to zero and standard

deviation equal to one.




Exports

Our proxy for the Great Recession is a plant-specic export shock constructed by matching the product les of the 2006 ASM

which disaggregate establishment revenues by product class to the Longitudinal Firm Trade Transactions (LFTTD) data which

contain the universe of export shipments at the rm-product level.      To construct our measure, we rst match the product

categories from LFTTD (ten-digit Harmonized System categories, or HS10) to the 7-digit NAICS product classes contained in

the ASM using the Pierce and Schott (2009) concordance. Next, we aggregate exports to the 7-digit NAICS level and calculate

the change in exports in each product over the Recession, dened as the logarithmic change in exports in 2008-09 (the average

in a cell across these two Great Recession years) relative to 2006-07 (the average across the two years immediately prior to the

Great Recession). Finally, we construct our plant-specic export shock as the weighted average of product export growth in the

crisis, where fore each plant, the weights assigned to each product category is that plant's share of sales revenue in the product

as measured before the crisis in the 2006 ASM.




Product Churn

Product churn is constructed using data come from the US Census Bureau's Census of Manufactures (CM). The CM asks

establishments to list the dollar value of annual shipments by 10-digit product code. Establishments receive a list of all the

product codes typically produced by establishments in their industry, along with corresponding descriptions of each code.

    We start by calculating the total number of 10-digit products by each establishment in a given year, as well as the number

of added products and the number of dropped products for each establishment compared to the previous CM 5 years earlier.

This of course restricts the sample to manufacturing establishments which were alive ve years earlier. We further restrict the

sample by dropping establishments producing fewer than 3 products in both Censuses. Product churn at the establishment




                                                               45
level is measured as the number of products added or dropped between the previous Census and the current Census, divided by

the average number of products produced in both Censuses. That is, product churn for establishment         i   in year   t   is dened as:



                                                         Products Added i,t   + Products Dropped i,t
                             Product Churn i,t       =
                                                          0.5 (#   Products i,t+ # Products i,t−5 )
    Industry product churn in year   t   is the average establishment-level product churn amongst establishments within an industry

(three digit US SIC-1987).   To calculate industry-level change in product churn, we simply subtract product churn in 2007

(constructed from the product data in the 2002 and 2007 Censuses) from product churn in 2012.




ASM variables

Directly from the ASM we obtain material inputs, shipments (deated by a three digit price deator) as our sales measure and

the headcount of employees for labor. Real capital stocks are constructed using the perpetual inventory method, following the

methodology in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten and Terry (2016). In particular, we combine detailed data on the

book value of assets every 5 years from the CM with annual investment data from the ASM. We rst convert CM capital stocks

from book to market value using BEA xed asset tables. We then deate capital stocks and investment using industry-year

price indices from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. Finally, we apply the perpetual inventory method, using

the formula   Kt = (1 − δt )Kt−1 + It     .   This procedure is done separately for structures and for equipment.        However, since

the ASM contains investment broken down into investment in equipment and investment in structures, but the CM does not

break down capital stocks into these two components, we must apportion plant capital stocks into each component. We do this

by assigning the share of capital stock to equipment and structures which matches the share of investment in equipment and

structures.




                                                                   46
B      Magnitudes
In Table A9 we consider some simple calculations of cross-country magnitudes.      Our thought experiment is to consider the

Great Recession as a global shock as reected by a fall in trade. We use the US value of the shock from COMTRADE of a

fall in exports of 7.7 percent. This is the empirical dierence between 2009-08 vs. 2007-06 that we use as our industry-country

specic shock measure elsewhere in the paper.

    We take the 2006 average levels of cross-country decentralization by country (column (1) of Table A9) and the empirical

estimates in column (2) of Table 2 to estimate the average annual implied eect of GDP of the shock (column (2) of Table A9).

We express this relative to the US in column (3). For all countries except Sweden there is a negative relative implied eect

because decentralization in the US is greater than every other country except Sweden. Column (4) displays the actual annual

change in GDP growth since the start of the global nancial crisis (from World Bank data) for each of our countries and then

again expresses these relative to the US base in column (5). Every country except Poland (which is still in a strong catch-up

phase of development) experienced a slower growth performance than the US over this period, averaging just over a third of a

percentage point (base of column). Column (6) divides the column (3) into column (5) which is the fraction of relative economic

performance accounted for by decentralization (note that since we are assuming a common shock, none of this dierence is due

to the magnitude of the crisis being worse in some countries than others).

    Overall, column (6) of Table A9 suggests that an average of 15% of the post-crisis growth experience between countries

is accounted for by decentralization. This is non-trivial as mentioned in the text, but it is worth noting that there is a large

degree of heterogeneity between countries underneath this average. Almost all of the dierential growth experience of France

and Japan compared to the US can be accounted for by decentralization (96% and 95% respectively), whereas decentralization

accounts for virtually none of the UK's performance. In particular, as noted above, because Sweden is more decentralized than

the US we should expect it to have outperformed the US, whereas it grew about half a percentage point more slowly. If we

drop Sweden, the importance of decentralization doubles to accounting for almost a third of the dierence (32%). Note that

the contribution is also negative for Poland, because although Poland is more centralized than the US, it grew more quickly

over this time period.




                                                              47
Figure A1 - Changes in Industry/Country Exports and Sales before and after the Great Recession

                  Figure A1: Change in Industry/Country Exports and Sales before and after the Great Recession

                        10


                         5
   YOY Log Change - %




                         0


                         -5


                        -10


                        -15
                                2007                  2008                 2009

                                            Exports     Sales
Notes: Each bar plots the yearly percentage change in real manufacturing exports. The countries included in the sample are

France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, UK and US.


Notes: Each bar plots the yearly percentage change in real manufacturing
exports. The countries included in the sample are France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, UK and US.



                                        CHART DATA




                                                                48
Figure A2 - Average Decentralization Z-score by Quintile of Product Churn
                                            Figure A2: Average Decentralization Z-score by Quintile of Product Churn

                                    0.25


                                     0.2
    Avg. decentralization z-score




                                    0.15


                                     0.1


                                    0.05


                                       0
                                              1            2            3            4            5

                                    -0.05


                                     -0.1
                                                           Quintile of product churn
Notes: MOPS data. Industry product churn is the average of plant product churn. Plant product churn = (# products added

from '02 to '07 + # products dropped from '02 and '07)/(0.5*# products produced in '02 + 0.5*# products produced in '07).



Notes: MOPS data. Industry product churn is the average of plant product churn.
Plant product churn = (# products added from '02 to '07 + # products dropped from
'02 and '07)/(0.5*# products produced in '02 + 0.5*# products produced in '07).




                                                                              49
Figure A3 - Export Growth and Change in Industry Product Churn
                       Figure A3: Change in Industry Product Churn and Export Growth
                 .2         0
     Change in Product Churn
   -.4         -.2
                 -.6




                                -20       0                   20                          40                     60
                                                       Export Growth
Notes: MOPS data. Change in product churn is industry product churn in 2012 minus industry product churn in 2007. Exports

growth is the change in ln(exports) from 2007 to 2012.            Both variables are winzorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles and

Notes: Change
measured   at thein product
                    level of churn is industryindustry.
                              the three-digit   product churn   in 2012
                                                          Vingtiles      minus industry product churn in 2007.
                                                                      plotted.
Exports growth is the change in ln(exports) from 2007 to 2012. Both variables are winzorized at the 5th and
95th percentiles and measured at the level of the three-digit industry. Vingtiles plotted.




                                                                      50
     Table A1 - Decentralization questions                                           Table A1: Decentralization questions

     For Questions D1, D3, and D4 any score can be given, but the scoring guide is only provided for scores of 1, 3, and 5.


     Question D1: “To hire a FULL-TIME PERMANENT SHOPFLOOR worker what agreement would your plant need from CHQ (Central Head Quarters)?”


     Probe until you can accurately score the question—for example if they say “It is my decision, but I need sign-off from corporate HQ.” ask “How often would sign-off be given?”

                                                                                  Score 1                                               Score 3                                           Score 5



                                                                                                                 Requires sign-off from CHQ based on the business
                                       Scoring grid:        No authority—even for replacement hires              case. Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of Complete authority—it is my decision entirely
                                                                                                                 the time).




     Question D2: “What is the largest CAPITAL INVESTMENT your plant could make without prior authorization from CHQ?”
     Notes: (a) Ignore form-filling
            (b) Please cross check any zero response by asking “What about buying a new computer—would that be possible?” and then probe….

            (c) Challenge any very large numbers (e.g. >$¼m in US) by asking “To confirm your plant could spend $X on a new piece of equipment without prior clearance from CHQ?”

            (d) Use the national currency and do not omit zeros (i.e. for a U.S. firm twenty thousand dollars would be 20000).




51
     Question D3: “Where are decisions taken on new product introductions—at the plant, at the CHQ or both”?

     Probe until you can accurately score the question—for example if they say “It is complex, we both play a role,” ask “Could you talk me through the process for a recent product innovation?”

                                                                                  Score 1                                               Score 3                                           Score 5


                                                            All new product introduction decisions are taken at New product introductions are jointly determined     All new product introduction decisions taken at the
                                       Scoring grid:
                                                            the CHQ                                             by the plant and CHQ                                 plant level



     Question D4: “How much of sales and marketing is carried out at the plant level (rather than at the CHQ)”?

     Probe until you can accurately score the question. Also take an average score for sales and marketing if they are taken at different levels.
                                                                                  Score 1                                               Score 3                                           Score 5


                                                                                                                 Sales and marketing decisions are split between the
                                       Scoring grid:        None—sales and marketing is all run by CHQ                                                               The plant runs all sales and marketing
                                                                                                                 plant and CHQ



     Question D5: “Is the CHQ on the site being interviewed”?

     Notes: The electronic survey, training materials and survey video footage are available on www.worldmanagementsurvey.com
     Table A2 -MOPS Sampling                             Table A2: MOPS Sampling

                                                                                                          Number of      Total
                                                                                                                                        Average
     Sample                              Source                      Sample Criteria                      establishments employment
                                                                                                                                        employment
                                                                                                          (in thousands) (in thousands)


     (1) Universe of establishments      LBD      None                                                        7,041        134,637            19.1

     (2) Manufacturing                   LBD      NAICS 31-33                                                  298          12,027            40.4

                                                  NAICS 31-33, and either over 500 employees, or in
                                                  ASM random sample. Positive employment and sales,




52
     (3) Annual Survey of Manufactures   ASM      and tabbed                                                   51           7,387            143.5

     (4) MOPS respondents                MOPS     As in (3), also responded to MOPS                            36           5,629            155.8

                                                  As in (4), and responded to any of MOPS questions 18-
     (5) ORG module respondents          MOPS     23                                                           20           3,580            178.4



                                                  As in (5), responded to all ORG "recall" questions,
                                                  match to ASM 2006 and ASM 2009, positive value
     (6) Regression sample               MOPS     added and imputed capital in ASM 2010                         9           2,135            243.3
                       Table A3: Robustness
        Table A6 - Decentralization         of results
                                    and Growth         to interactions
                                               - Robustness            of Decentralization
                                                              to controlling for other industry
                                                                                           with level  industry-level
                                                                                                 otherinteractions                              variables

                                                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)                                                (4)
        Dependent Variable                                                                       Sales Growth

        Decentralization                                                               -0.920                   0.222                    0.386                    -0.030
                                                                                      (1.788)                  (2.482)                  (0.603)                  (1.485)
        Decentralization*EXPORT Growth                                              -0.050***                 -0.047**                -0.052***                 -0.046**
                                                                                      (0.019)                  (0.020)                  (0.019)                  (0.019)
        Decentralization*Asset tangibility                                              3.404
                                                                                      (6.019)
        Decentralization*Inventory/Sales                                                                       -1.107
                                                                                                              (15.510)




53
        Decentralization*External finance dependency                                                                                     -1.185
                                                                                                                                        (1.604)
        Decentralization*Labor costs                                                                                                                             0.381
                                                                                                                                                                (7.916)
         Firms                                                                      1,330                     1,330                    1,330                     1,330
         Observations                                                               3,151                     3,151                    3,151                     3,151
         Cluster                                                                 SIC3*Cty                 SIC3*Cty                  SIC3*Cty                  SIC3*Cty
         Notes:
     Notes: WMS*significant    at 10%;
                   Data. *signicant     ** 5%;
                                     at 10%;  ** 5%;
                                                   ******1%.
                                                           1%Estimated    by OLS
                                                              level. Estimated by OLS    standard
                                                                                   withwith        errors
                                                                                             standard      clustered
                                                                                                       errors clusteredat
                                                                                                                        atthree-digit
                                                                                                                           three-digit industry       country
                                                                                                                                       industrybybycountry       level
                                                                                                                                                             level           all
                                                                                                                                                                    in allincolumns.

     Specications
         columns. are  the same as Table
                    Specifications  are the2 same
                                             columnas(3)  except
                                                       Table   2 augmented
                                                                 column (3)with   additional
                                                                              except         variables.
                                                                                       augmented    with"Asset   Tangibility"
                                                                                                           additional  variables.
                                                                                                                              is the"Asset    tangible assets,
                                                                                                                                     ratio ofTangibility"       i.e. net
                                                                                                                                                            is the    ratioproperty,
                                                                                                                                                                             of
     plant and equipment, to total assets for the corresponding industry in the US over the period 1980-1989, computed at the ISIC 3 rev 1 level (inverse measure of credit
         tangible assets, i.e. net property, plant and equipment, to total assets for the corresponding industry in the US over the period 1980-1989,
     constraints). "Inventory/Sales" is measured as the inventories to total sales for the corresponding industry in the US over the period 1980-1989 (measure of liquidity
         computed at the ISIC 3 rev 1 level (inverse measure of credit constraints). "Inventory/Sales" is measured as the inventories to total sales for the
     dependence). "External nance dependency" is measured as capital expenditures minus cash ow divided by cash ow for the corresponding industry in the US over
         corresponding industry in the US over the period 1980-1989 (measure of liquidity dependence). "External finance dependency" is measured as
     the period 1980-1989 (measure of credit constraint). "Labor costs" is measured as the total labor costs to total sales for the corresponding industry in the US over the
         capital expenditures minus cash flow divided by cash flow for the corresponding industry in the US over the period 1980-1989 (measure of
     period 1980-1989 (another measure of liquidity dependence).
         credit constraint). "Labor costs" is measured as the total labour costs to total sales for the corresponding industry in the US over the period
         1980-1989 (another measure of liquidity dependence).
               Table A9 - Decentralization and Product Churn
                                                            Table A4: Decentralization and Product Churn

                                                                                  (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)               (5)           (6)
                                                                                                    U.S. Census Data - MOPS
               Dependent Variable: Decentralization z-score

                                                                                                                                        Product Introductions
                                                                                                            Capital Expenditure,
               Decentralization Questions                                                 All                                              and Sales and
                                                                                                             Hiring, and Raises
                                                                                                                                             Marketing
               Product Churn                                                   0.016***         0.016***      0.004        0.008**      0.020***      0.017***
                                                                                (0.004)          (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
               Management                                                                       -0.010***                   0.005                     -0.019***
                                                                                                 (0.004)                   (0.004)                     (0.004)
               Log(% employees with a college degree)                                           0.057***                  0.044***                    0.049***
                                                                                                 (0.004)                   (0.004)                     (0.004)
               Log(plant employment)                                                            0.035***                  0.056***                      0.006*




54
                                                                                                 (0.004)                   (0.004)                     (0.004)
               log(firm employment)                                                             -0.012***                   -0.002                    -0.016***
                                                                                                 (0.002)                   (0.002)                     (0.002)


               Observations                                                      8,774            8,774       8,774         8,774         8,774         8,774
               Controls
               Industry (SIC3)                                                                     Yes                       Yes                         Yes
               Noise                                                                               Yes                       Yes                         Yes
               Cluster                                                           SIC3             SIC3        SIC3          SIC3          SIC3          SIC3

     Notes: MOPS Data. *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level. The dependent variable in
               Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level. The dependent
     columns (1) and (2) is overall decentralization z-score. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the z-scored average of the z-scored measures of plant manager
               variable  in columns (1) and (2) is overall decentralization z-score. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the z-scored average of
     autonomy in hiring, capital investments, and pay raises. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the z-scored average for product introduction and marketing
               the z-scored  measures of plant manager autonomy in hiring, capital investments, and pay raises. The dependent variable in columns (5) and
     questions. "Product Churn" is the three digit industry level value of the average change in the (number of products added between t and t-5 plus the number products
               (6) is the
     dropped between      z-scored
                       t and  t-5)/(average for product
                                    averagenumber        introduction
                                                   of products between and  marketing
                                                                         t and t-5).   questions. "Product Churn" is the three digit industry level value of the
               average change in the (number of products added between t and t-5 plus the number products dropped between t and t-5)/(average number
               of products between t and t-5).
                    Table A10 - Decentralization and Product Churn, By Type of Decentralization
                                                                                           (1)                                             (2)                        (3)

                                                 Table A5: Decentralization and Product Churn, by type of Decentralization
                                                                                                                                       Exports

                    Panel A: Decentralization of Sales, Marketing, and New Products

                    Dependent Variable: Sales growth ('12-'07)

                    Decentralization                                                                          0.171                      0.191                     0.304*
                                                                                                             (0.218)                   (0.1518)                   (0.1622)
                    Decent*Change in Product Churn                                                                                     1.859***                   1.587**
                                                                                                                                        (0.370)                    (0.396)
                    Decent*Export Growth ('12-'07)                                                          -0.025**                                                -0.011
                                                                                                             (0.010)                                               (0.008)
                    Decent*Durability



                    Firms                                                                                     3,004                      3,004                      3,004
                    Observations                                                                              8,243                      8,243                      8,243

                    Panel A: Decentralization of Hiring & Investment

                    Dependent Variable: Sales growth ('12-'07)




55
                    Decentralization                                                                        0.808***                   0.692***                   0.743***
                                                                                                             (0.236)                    (0.157)                    (0.166)
                    Decent*Change in Product Churn                                                                                      0.604*                      0.541
                                                                                                                                        (0.330)                    (0.351)
                    Decent*Export Growth ('12-'07)                                                            -0.013                                                -0.004
                                                                                                             (0.008)                                               (0.008)
                    Decent*Durability



                   Firms                                                                                    3,004                         3,004                       3,004
                   Observations                                                                             8,243                         8,243                       8,243
                   Cluster                                                                                   SIC3                         SIC3                         SIC3
                   Notes:  *significant   at 10%;   **  5%;  ***  1%.   Estimated   by   OLS   with standard  errors   clustered   at three-digit industry    level.  The  dependent
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry level. The dependent variable is the annualized
                   variable  is the  annualized   five-year  change   of firm  ln(sales),  2012-2007.   The  dependent     variable   in Panel  A is  the z-scored
     ve-year change of rm ln(sales), 2012-2007. The dependent variable in Panel A is the z-scored average of the z-scored measures of plant manager autonomy        average   of the     in hiring,
                   z-scored
     capital investments,  andmeasures    of plant
                                 pay raises.        manager autonomy
                                              The dependent     variable in   hiring,
                                                                           inPanel  B capital  investments,
                                                                                       is the z-scored  average
                                                                                                              andforpay
                                                                                                                     product      The dependent
                                                                                                                         raises.introduction   and variable
                                                                                                                                                    marketing   in questions.
                                                                                                                                                                    Panel B isThe   z-
                                                                                                                                                                                the variable Change

     in Product Churn"
                   scoredisaverage
                             measured forbyproduct   introduction
                                             subtracting   2007-2002     marketing
                                                                   andindustry        questions.
                                                                                 product           The variable
                                                                                            churn from   2012-2007Change
                                                                                                                     industryin product
                                                                                                                                 Product churn.      is measured
                                                                                                                                           Churn""EXPORT              by subtracting
                                                                                                                                                                  Growth"    is 2012-2007 change in

     ln(exports) at2007-2002
                    the product  industry   product
                                   level (HS7)        churn
                                                 for the    from 2012-2007
                                                         products   the plant produced      product
                                                                                industry just   priorchurn.
                                                                                                      to the"EXPORT       Growth"
                                                                                                             Great Recession      in 2006.   20012-2007
                                                                                                                                      is theAll columns include        in ln(exports)
                                                                                                                                                             changethree    digit industry dummies

     and controls by
                   for three
                        rm digit   industry
                             and plant        cell.
                                          size, skills  columns
                                                    Alland        include
                                                            "noise"  (plantthree  digit industry
                                                                             manager's            dummies
                                                                                           tenure and        and controls
                                                                                                       hierarchical   seniority
                                                                                                                             for and
                                                                                                                                  firm the   plant size, skills
                                                                                                                                        and interview's           and "noise"
                                                                                                                                                          reliability           (plant
                                                                                                                                                                       score, day   of the week and

     duration, whether   the survey
                   manager's    tenurewas
                                        andanswered    online
                                              hierarchical    or by mail).
                                                             seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and duration, whether the survey was
                   answered online or by mail).
                                         Financial
        Table A11 - Decentralization andTable      Constraints
                                              A6: Decentralization,                          Agency Costs and Financial Constraints


                                                                             (1)               (2)               (3)         (4)         (5)                         (6)                 (7)
        Dependent Variable = Sales Growth                                                                          U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
        Decentralization                                                   0.2651            0.3506           1.3797       0.1752      0.0764                     0.349**             0.2570
                                                                          (0.4770)           (0.76)          (2.3903)      (0.401)    (1.2689)                    (0.1585)           (0.4831)
        EXPORT Growth                                                     -3.1877                             -3.1550                  -2.8774                                        -3.2104
                                                                          (3.1895)                           (3.2298)                 (3.2005)                                       (3.1932)
        Decent*EXPORT Growth                                              -0.0392                            -0.0407*                  -0.0394                                        -0.0392
                                                                          (0.0241)                           (0.0244)                 (0.0241)                                       (0.0240)
        ABX exposure                                                                       -0.4003*           -0.9120
                                                                                           (0.2374)          (0.8330)
        Decent.*ABX exposure                                                                -0.0031           -0.2883
                                                                                           (0.2042)          (0.6164)
        Lehman exposure                                                                                                       x           x
                                                                                                                              x           x
        Decent.*Lehman exposure                                                                                               x           x
                                                                                                                              x           x




56
        Lender health                                                                                                                                              -0.0019            -0.2730
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.4597)           (1.2942)
        Decent*Lender health                                                                                                                                       0.0001             -0.0212
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.3407)           (1.0111)

        Observations                                                        2000              2000             2000              2000             2000              2000               2000
        Controls
        Firm & plant employment, skills                                    Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes
        Cluster                                                           Lender            Lender            Lender           Lender           Lender            Lender              Lender
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level.              Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered by the rm's primary lender.                      The dependent variable is the
        Notes: *significant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1%. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered by the firm's primary lender. The dependent variable is the annualized
     annualized three-year change of rm ln(sales) from 2009-06. Decentralization is measured in 2005. "EXPORT Growth" is average change (2008/2009 average compared
        three-year change of firm ln(sales) from 2009-06. Decentralization is measured in 2005. "EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) by three digit industry cell
     to 2006/2007 average) in ln(exports) at the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006. "Lender exposure to
        between the 2008 and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years). "Lender exposure to
     housing bubble" is the . "ABX exposure" is the correlation of the rm's lender's daily stock returns with the return on the ABX AAA 2006-H1 index, which follows the
        housing bubble" is the . "ABX exposure" is the correlation of the firm's lender's daily stock returns with the return on the ABX AAA 2006-H1 index, which follows the
     price mortgage-backed
        price mortgage-backed   securities  issued
                                   securities issuedwith
                                                       witha aAAA
                                                               AAArating.
                                                                      rating. "Lender     health"
                                                                               "Lenderhealth"    is is
                                                                                                    anan   aggregation
                                                                                                        aggregation       of lender
                                                                                                                      of lender      balance
                                                                                                                                 balance  sheetsheet variables
                                                                                                                                                variables      including
                                                                                                                                                          including        trading
                                                                                                                                                                     trading       account
                                                                                                                                                                             account  losses,losses,
                                                                                                                                                                                              real real
     estate charge-os,
        estate            and
               charge-offs,  andthe
                                  thedeposits
                                      depositstoto liabilities
                                                    liabilities ratio.
                                                                ratio. We
                                                                        We combine
                                                                             combinethese      variables
                                                                                        thesevariables     into
                                                                                                         into   one
                                                                                                              one     lender
                                                                                                                   lender      health
                                                                                                                           health     measure
                                                                                                                                  measure        by normalizing
                                                                                                                                            by normalizing   each each
                                                                                                                                                                  to have  have mean
                                                                                                                                                                        to mean         0 and standard
                                                                                                                                                                                 0 and standard
        deviation
     deviation  1, 1,
                   taking
                      takingananaverage,
                                 average,and    then normalizing
                                           and then    normalizingthis thisaverage
                                                                            average     have
                                                                                     toto    mean
                                                                                           have mean 0 and  standard
                                                                                                         0 and         deviation
                                                                                                                 standard    deviation
                                                                                                                                  1. All1.columns
                                                                                                                                            All columns    "noise controls"
                                                                                                                                                   includeinclude            (plant manager's
                                                                                                                                                                   "noise controls"   (plant manager's
        tenure
     tenure  andand  hierarchical
                  hierarchical   seniority
                                    seniorityand
                                              andthe    interview's reliability
                                                   theinterview's     reliability score,
                                                                                   score,day
                                                                                          dayofofthe
                                                                                                   the week
                                                                                                         weekand
                                                                                                               andduration,  whether
                                                                                                                     duration,        the survey
                                                                                                                                 whether          was answered
                                                                                                                                           the survey  was answered      or by mail).
                                                                                                                                                                 onlineonline  or by Firm
                                                                                                                                                                                      mail).
                                                                                                                                                                                           andFirm
                                                                                                                                                                                                plantand
        size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(% of employees with a college degree).
     plant size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(percentage of employees with a college degree).
                     Table A7 - Decentralization and sales growth, by export status
                                                  Table A7:     Decentralization and Sales Growth, by Export Status


                                                                                       (1)                                           (2)
                                                                                                U.S. Census Data (MOPS)
                     Dependent Variable = Sales Growth

                     Sample                                                        Exporters                                  Non-exporters

                     Decentralization                                               0.4452                                        0.5524*




57
                                                                                    0.2769                                         0.3245
                     Decent.*EXPORT Growth                                        -0.0358***                                      -0.0105
                                                                                    0.0115                                         0.0117

                     Observations                                                    4,200                                         4,600
                     Cluster                                                       SIC3*Cty                                      SIC3*Cty
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry. Sales growth is the annualized three-year
                      Notes: *significant
     change of rm ln(sales).  "EXPORT Growth"
                                             at 10%;is**the5%; *** 1%.
                                                            average       Estimated
                                                                     change (2008/2009  OLS with
                                                                                     byaverage      standard
                                                                                               compared        errors clustered
                                                                                                           to 2006/2007)          at three-digit
                                                                                                                          in ln(exports)          industry.
                                                                                                                                         at the product  level (HS7) for the

     products the plant  produced
                      Sales       just
                             growth  isprior
                                        the annualized
                                             to the Great three-year   2006. All
                                                          Recession inchange  ofcolumns include three
                                                                                 firm ln(sales).      digit industry
                                                                                                 "EXPORT             dummies
                                                                                                               Growth"         and controls
                                                                                                                         is change          for rm and
                                                                                                                                     in ln(exports)  in plant size, skills and
     "noise" controls.country by three digit industry cell between the 2008 and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared

                      to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years). All columns include three digit industry dummies
                      and controls for firm and plant size, skills and "noise" controls.
                      Table A8 - Changes in Decentralization
                                                     Table A8:                    Changes in Decentralization

                                                                                                 (1)                                        (2)
                                                                                       World Management Survey                       U.S. Census Data

                                                                                                                                        Change in
                                                                                       Change in Decentralization                    Decentralization
                      Dependent Variable                                                  (2010/2009 - 2006)                           (2010-2005)


                      EXPORT Growth                                                                 -0.012**                                -0.0232
                                                                                                     (0.006)                               (0.0204)
                      Observations                                                                     222                                   8,774
                      Controls
                      Country                                                                         Yes




58
                      Year                                                                            Yes
                      Industry (SIC2)                                                                 Yes                                     Yes
                      Log firm and plant employment                                                   Yes                                     Yes
                      Skills                                                                          Yes                                     Yes
                      Noise                                                                           Yes                                     Yes
                      Cluster                                                                      SIC3*Cty                                  SIC3
     Notes: *signicant at 10%; ** 5%; *** 1% level. Estimated by OLS with standard errors clustered at three-digit industry by country level in column (1) and just

     industry in column (2).
                      Notes: *significant
                               The dependentat  variable
                                                  10%; **is the
                                                             5%;2010/2009-2006  change in z-scored
                                                                   *** 1%. Estimated        by OLSdecentralization
                                                                                                       with standard   in errors
                                                                                                                           columnclustered
                                                                                                                                    (1) and theat2010-2005
                                                                                                                                                   three-digitchange in column (2).

     "EXPORT Growth" is change in ln(exports) in country by three digit industry cell between the 2008 and 2009 average (the main Great Recession years) compared
                      industry by country level in column (1) and just industry in column (2). The dependent variable is the
     to the 2006 and 2007 average (the latest pre-Recession years) in column (1), and is the average change (2008/2009 average compared to 2006/2007) in ln(exports) at
                      2010/2009-2006 change in z-scored decentralization in column (1) and the 2010-2005 change in column
     the product level (HS7) for the products the plant produced just prior to the Great Recession in 2006 in column (2). All columns include two digit industry, country

     and year dummies (2). "EXPORT
                         and             Growth"
                             "noise controls"         is change
                                              (plant manager's     in ln(exports)
                                                                tenure and hierarchical
                                                                                    in seniority
                                                                                         countryand     three
                                                                                                   by the      digit industry
                                                                                                           interview's             cell between
                                                                                                                       reliability score, day of the the
                                                                                                                                                     week2008
                                                                                                                                                            and duration, WMS also

                       dummies
     includes analyst and  2009and   MOPS whether
                                  average    (the mainthe Great   was answered
                                                           survey Recession   years)
                                                                                online compared       Firm
                                                                                        or by mail). to  theand
                                                                                                             2006plant
                                                                                                                     and    are ln(employment)
                                                                                                                       size2007    average (theare  latest    is the ln(percentage of
                                                                                                                                                       skillspre-

     employees with a college degree).
                      Recession years). All columns include two digit industry, country and year dummies and "noise controls"
                      (plant manager's tenure and hierarchical seniority and the interview's reliability score, day of the week and
                      duration, WMS also includes analyst dummies and MOPS whether the survey was answered online or by
                      mail). Firm and plant size are ln(employment) are skills is the ln(% of employees with a college degree).
                     Table A12 - Decentralization and Cross Country Growth
                                                       Table A9: Decentralization and Cross-Country Growth


                                      1            2                3                   4                     5                        6
                                Decentrali Implied          Difference in        Actual annual        Difference in
                                                                                                                       % of growth difference
                                 zation     GDP             implied GDP          average GDP           actual GDP
                                                                                                                         accounted for by
                                  Index    Growth          growth relative       growth (2012-      growth relative to
                                                                                                                         Decentralization
                                                                to US                2008)                  US
                     France        -0.357        -0.72          -0.453                0.24                -0.473                 96%
                     GB             0.292        -0.28          -0.007               0.074                 -0.64                 1%
                     Germany        0.134        -0.39          -0.116               0.443                -0.271                 43%
                     Greece        -0.801        -1.03          -0.758              -5.438                -6.152                 12%
                     Italy         -0.242        -0.64          -0.374              -1.243                -1.957                 19%




59
                     Japan         -0.642        -0.92          -0.648               0.029                -0.685                 95%
                     Poland        -0.344        -0.71          -0.444               2.534                  1.82                -24%
                     Portugal      -0.264        -0.66          -0.389               -1.42                -2.134                 18%
                     Sweden         0.544         -0.1           0.166               0.567                -0.147               -113%
                     US             0.303        -0.27                               0.714
                     Average          1         -0.572           -0.336              -0.35                 -1.182                    15%
     Notes: All GDP growth numbers in percentage points. Implied GDP growth in column (2) uses the coecients on the model of column (2) Table 2 combined with the

     value of decentralization from (1) and an assumed shock of 7.7 percent (the empirical fall in aggregate US exports in the Great Recession as in our model). Actual
                      Notes: All GDP growth numbers in percentage points. Implied GDP growth in column (2) uses the coefficients on the
     GDP growth in column (4) is taken from the World Bank market sector GDP series. Relative values in column (3) and (5) are the simple dierences from the US base.
                      model of column (3) Table 2 combined with the value of decentralization from (1) and an assumed shock of 7.7% (the
     Sweden has a negative value in column (6) because it is the only country more decentralized than US, but had a weaker GDP performance. Poland has a negative value
                      empirical fall in aggregate US exports in the Great Recession as in our model). Actual GDP growth in column (4) is
     because it had faster growth than the US despite being more centralized (it is still in a catch up phase of growth).
                      taken from the World Bank market sector GDP series. Relative values in column (3) and (5) are the simple differences
                      from the US base. Sweden has a negative value in column (6) because it is the only country more decentralized than
                      US, but had a weaker GDP performance. Poland has a negative value because it had faster growth than the US despite
                      being more centralized (it is still in a catch up phase of growth).
