NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIES OF DENSITY IN E-COMMERCE:
A STUDY OF AMAZON’S FULFILLMENT CENTER NETWORK
Jean-François Houde
Peter Newberry
Katja Seim
Working Paper 23361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23361

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We thank Josalyn Geiman, Mallick Hossain, Olleskii Khvastunov, Nitin Krishnan, and Xinrong
Zhu for research assistance, and the Dean’s Research Fund for financial support. We have
benefited from conversations with participants at various conferences and seminars, as well as
discussions with John Asker, Alan Collard-Wexler, Paul Grieco, Jin-Hyuk Kim, Brad Larsen,
Robin Lee, Francesca Molinari, Charles Murry, Amedeo Piolatto, Imke Reimers, Fanyin Zheng,
and others. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Communications Commission, the U.S. Government, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jean-François Houde, Peter Newberry, and Katja Seim. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economies of Density in E-Commerce: A Study of Amazon’s Fulfillment Center Network
Jean-François Houde, Peter Newberry, and Katja Seim
NBER Working Paper No. 23361
April 2017
JEL No. H71,L23,L81
ABSTRACT
We examine the economies of density associated with the expansion of Amazon’s distribution
network from 2006 to 2018. We demonstrate that, in placing a fulfillment center in a new state,
Amazon faces a trade-off between the revenue implications of exposing local customers to sales
tax on their purchases and the cost savings from reducing the shipping distance to those
customers. Using detailed data on online transactions, we estimate a model of demand for retail
goods and show that consumers’ online shopping is sensitive to sales taxes. We then use the
demand estimates and the spatial distribution of consumers relative to Amazon’s fulfillment
centers to predict revenues and shipping distances under the observed fulfillment center roll-out
and under counterfactual roll-outs over this time period. Using a moment inequalities approach,
we infer the cost savings from being closer to customers that render the observed network rollout optimal. We find that Amazon saves between $0.17 and $0.47 for every 100 mile reduction in
the distance of shipping goods worth $30. In the context of its distribution network expansion,
this estimate implies that Amazon has reduced its total shipping cost by over 50%and
increased its profit margin by between 5 and 14% since 2006. Separately, we demonstrate
that prices on Amazon have fallen by approximately 40% over the same period, suggesting
that a significant share of the cost savings have been passed on to consumers.
Jean-François Houde
Department of Economics
Cornell University
464 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
and NBER
houde@cornell.edu
Peter Newberry
Department of Economics
Penn State University
510 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802
pwnewberry@psu.edu

Katja Seim
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1458 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
kseim@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction
The Internet might have made it possible for the smallest of businesses to sell their
wares, but the price of delivering cardboard boxes highlights just how powerful an advantage size can be in the Internet economy.1

Online retail has grown substantially over the last decade and makes up nearly 8.5% of all retail
sales as of 2016.2 Amazon.com, henceforth Amazon, is a key contributor of this growth, with
net sales increasing from $10.7 billion in 2006 to $107 billion in 2015.3 Amazon’s rise has been
accompanied by a substantial increase in concentration in online retail, as Figure 1 illustrates. This
trend counters initial expectations that the internet would facilitate highly competitive markets due
to lower search costs, lower fixed costs on the part of sellers whose physical locations are less relevant
to serving customers, and an increasing reliance on an already existing network of distribution and
shipping companies whose services could help to partially replace the offerings of brick-and-mortar
stores. In this paper, we explore the possible sources for the increase in concentration with a focus
on the competitive advantage that comes with the cost savings of a large-scale distribution network.
We investigate the economies of scale in distribution using Amazon as a case study. As Amazon’s
revenue has grown, so has its network of distribution centers, so called fulfillment centers, which
we denote as FCs going forward. The number of FCs has grown from 8 centrally located centers in
2006 to 90 spread out across the US by the end of 2016.4 Amazon will further expand its network
to over 100 facilities by 2018, including “Amazon Now” hubs that provide same-day delivery to
local customers. A larger distribution network has implications for firm profitability on both the
demand and supply sides.
The expansion of the network has the potential to affect consumer willingness-to-pay through
two opposing demand-side forces. First, if consumers value the convenience of receiving packages
faster and expansion leads to shorter delivery times, then such convenience effects constitute a
local quality attribute of Amazon’s service that may in part be responsible for the firm’s increasing
market share. Second, under a 1992 U.S. Supreme Court decision (Quill Corp. vs. North Dakota
504 U.S. 298), a mail-order retailer, such as an online seller, is required to collect sales tax on the
customer’s behalf if the retailer has a physical presence or “nexus”, including a warehouse, in the
customer’s state of residence. Fulfillment center additions, if they entail expansion into a new state,
may thus increase sales tax inclusive prices on Amazon. As earlier literature (Einav et al., 2014;
Baugh et al., 2014) shows, demand is sensitive to sales taxes as they raise the effective price of an
online transaction.
1
See “FedExs Price Rise Is a Blessing in Disguise for Amazon,” New York Times 5/9/2014, http://nyti.ms/
1fUabBh, accessed on 1/17/2017.
2
See www.census.gov/retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf, accessed on 1/12/2017.
3
See annual reports at http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=97664&p=irol-reportsannual.
4
These figures do not include Amazon Fresh FCs or sortation centers. See Section 2 for details on distribution
center types.

1

To limit the revenue implications of exposing customers to new sales tax liabilities, a supply-side
response would thus be not to establish a presence in a high-tax state, especially if it were populous.
In addition, a new fulfillment center adds fixed costs of opening and operating the facility, relative to
a smaller network. Adding a distribution center also makes the existing distribution network more
dispersed, shortening the distance to a subset of customers. This can translate into shipping cost
savings in one of two ways. First, Amazon’s distribution facilities may be closer, on average, to its
shippers’ local sorting facilities, reducing the nodes through which packages travel in the shipment
process. This reduces the shippers’ cost, providing Amazon with bargaining power in negotiations
with shippers over the per-package rates they charge. Second, by being closer to its customers,
Amazon has increasingly been able to enter into the local delivery market itself, replacing traditional
shippers in last-leg deliveries in large urban markets near its distribution centers. These economies
of density significantly affect Amazon’s overall profitability as shipping comprises a large share of
Amazon’s operating costs.5,6 On net, then, the implicit tax-related costs of building a warehouse in
a new state, together with fixed cost differences, offset the benefits of expansion due to proximity
to the consumer.
We empirically quantify this trade-off between higher tax-inclusive prices and fixed costs, on
the one hand, and additional convenience and shipping cost savings on the other, while controlling
for a potential increase in platform quality through, for example, an expansion of the product
assortment. To accomplish this, we combine data on the purchase behavior at Amazon and other
online competitors by a large, representative consumer sample with detailed information on the
location and characteristics of Amazon’s fulfillment centers over time. We take a revealed preference
approach similar to that of Holmes (2011) that uses, as one source of identification, the fact that
expansion of the FC network into a new state results in lost revenue due to new sales tax liabilities.
Therefore, observing such an expansion in the data must mean that it also results in either revenue
offsets due to increased willingness-to-pay for faster deliveries, or a reduction of shipping costs
sufficient to outweigh the tax-driven revenue declines.
The first step in this approach is to estimate a model of demand in order to pin down consumer
tax sensitivity and response to shipping times. We use data on both online and offline purchasing
of retail goods that we construct by combining the comScore Web Behavior database, Forrester
Research surveys, and household spending data from Environmental Systems Research Institute
(ESRI). In the model, a representative consumer in a county chooses her yearly expenditures on four
different modes of shopping: (1) Amazon.com, (2) a taxed online competitor (e.g., walmart.com),
(3) a non-taxed online competitor (e.g., overstock.com), and (4) a taxed offline competitor (e.g.,
5

Amazon’s financial statements report net shipping costs between 3-5% of net sales for the period 2006 to 2015.
These costs totaled over $5 billion in 2015. See annual reports at http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?
c=97664&p=irol-reportsannual.
6
Expansion also affects the distance of “inbound” shipments from the goods suppliers to Amazon’s FCs. As we
discuss below, suppliers are shipping goods to brick and mortar retail outlets all around the country; as a result, we
assume that these costs do not change significantly as Amazon expands its FC network.

2

Wal-Mart). The amount of sales tax charged to the consumer varies both across time and county
due to FC entry and local sales tax laws, implying that variation in spending across these dimensions
identifies the consumers’ sensitivity to sales tax. Shipping times vary separately from sales taxes
due to the variation in the locations of consumers relative to the new FC, allowing for identification
of the convenience effect. Similar to identification in a difference-in-difference approach, we use fixed
effects to control for time varying mode preferences and county-specific determinants of spending.
The results of the demand estimation suggest that consumers are sensitive to taxes and that
their tax elasticity is around −1.4, similar to the estimates from Einav et al. (2014) at −1.8 and
Baugh et al. (2014) at −1.5. The magnitude of this estimate implies that moving from a nontaxed regime to a taxed regime at the average sales tax rate of 6.5%, all else equal, results in
reduction of expenditures at Amazon of 9.3%. We find little evidence that the entrance of a FC
leads to an increase in demand for Amazon due to increased convenience. The lack of effect of
shipping time on demand is likely due to the fact that Amazon’s local shipping options and prices
did not drastically change between 2006 and 2013, with any nationwide changes being accounted
for through the mode-year fixed effects. Importantly, together these estimates imply that overall,
there are negative revenue effects of opening a fulfillment center in a new state, which must be
offset by a decrease in costs. We find that mean preferences for Amazon, relative to the offline
shopping mode, increase steadily from 2006 to 2013, but are relatively constant for the other two
online shopping modes, suggesting that price reductions and/or improvements in platform quality
have made Amazon more attractive over this time period.
In the second step, we quantify the shipping cost savings from the larger FC network. We
specify a profit function where the variable cost of shipping goods to consumers in a county is
proportional to the shipping distance from the FC to that county, scaled by the revenue value of
the shipment. We assume that the observed sequence of fulfillment center placements is optimal so
that the discounted profit stream under the observed network roll-out must be at least as large as
under any alternative sequencing of fulfillment center openings. The network configuration affects
revenue through the sales tax channel, fixed costs through the wages and rents paid in the counties
where Amazon FCs are located, and variable costs through the total shipping distance across
customers. We compute perturbations to the observed network roll-out similar to those of Holmes
(2011): to construct alternative network roll-outs, we rely on swaps of fulfillment center opening
dates that have offsetting effects on profitability through revenue and shipping cost effects. For
example, moving up the opening date of a FC in a low-populated, low-tax state and in turn delaying
the opening of a FC in a more populous, high-tax state implies both higher revenue streams due
to lower exposure to sales tax early on, but longer shipping routes and thus higher cost.
Relying on revealed preference, a profit comparison of the actual and such counterfactual rollouts allows us to impose bounds on the firm’s shipping cost per dollar per mile such that the
observed roll-out dominates its perturbations. We estimate these bounds on the effect of shipping

3

distance on variable cost using a moment inequalities estimator based on the methods of Pakes
et al. (2015) and Andrews and Soares (2010). In doing so, we rely on similar instruments to
Holmes’ (2011), adjusted for the nature of our problem where any measurement error in revenue
affects both the difference in pre-shipping profit and in revenue-scaled shipping distance and thus
total shipping cost under the actual and perturbed FC roll-outs. We use the bounds estimates to
compare cost under the enlarged and original distribution networks, estimating the cost saving of
network expansion without having to solving the dynamic problem that Amazon faces.
Our estimates imply that it costs Amazon between $0.17 and $0.47 to ship $30 of goods, the
median order value in our data, 100 miles, net of shipping revenue. These estimates are robust to
alternative choices of instruments, various proxies for shipping cost, and the inclusion of preferences
for same-day shipping. We use the estimates to perform three exercises. First, we quantify the
effects of the distribution network expansion on revenue, fixed costs, and shipping costs from 2006
to 2018. We find that expansion led to a $9.6 billion ($2.2 billion) decrease in revenue (profit net
of shipping cost) due to consumers’ increased tax exposure and a $3.3 billion increase in the fixed
costs of operating the network of FCs. However, Amazon saved between $5 billion and $13 billion
in net shipping costs by decentralizing its distribution network, implying a net profit increase of
between 500 million and $8 billion over this time period. Second, we investigate the likely long-run
effects of expansion, assessing the effect of shipping cost savings on the firm’s profit margin at the
end of the planned network expansion that we observe in the data. Our results suggest by 2018, the
firm’s margin will be between 5 and 14% higher than what it would have been had the distribution
network remained at its 2006 configuration until that point. Finally, our bounds estimates imply
that the average total net shipping-related cost per order, including both the fixed cost of operating
the distribution center network and the variable shipping costs, decreased from between $2.69 and
$4.67 per order in 2006 to between $1.09 and $2.14 in 2013.
To relate the estimated shipping cost savings to the observed increase in concentration, we
decompose the estimated time-varying aggregate preferences for Amazon into a price component
and a quality component. We find that, while Amazon’s relative quality increased over our sample
period, its relative prices fell by approximately 45%, mirroring the estimated 55% decline in shipping costs. While our model is not formulated to predict the precise price adjustment in response
to a decline in cost – or an increase in quality – this provides suggestive evidence that Amazon’s
expansion has granted the firm a competitive advantage through a more efficient network. Correlating the quality contribution to Amazon’s mean preferences and the variety of product categories
that the platform covers over time further suggests that the increase in Amazon’s quality went
hand-in-hand with an expansion of the variety of goods that the platform sells, which many cite as
an explanation for Amazon’s success.7
This paper is related to several strands of literature. An increasing body of work focuses on the
7

See http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/20/business/20amazon.html, accessed on 1/12/2017.

4

estimation of demand in online retail markets, with the studies focusing on the effects of sales tax
and the gains from variety being the most relevant to our study. Einav et al. (2014) estimate the
demand response to sales tax using eBay data, exploiting the fact that a buyer has the option to
buy from an out-of-state seller who does not charge sales tax. They are also able to estimate the
consumer sensitivity to distance from observing the locations of both buyers and sellers. Baugh
et al. (2014) uses a differences-in-differences approach to estimate the effect of the ‘Amazon tax’, or
changes in various states’ laws between 2013 and 2015 that forced Amazon to collect sales tax. In
estimating the tax sensitivity, neither set of authors is able to fully consider substitution to other
taxed or non-taxed online outlets. We thus contribute to this literature by expanding our analysis
of the tax sensitivity and the estimation of demand for retail goods beyond a single online firm to
a large number of online and offline retailers.
Our focus on product variety as a dimension of Amazon’s quality is motivated by work examining
the gains from variety in e-commerce, including Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) and Quan and Williams
(2016). Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) uses data from online bookstores to demonstrate that consumer
welfare gains from increased product variety far outweigh the also sizable gains due to lower prices
and increased competition. Findings in Quan and Williams (2016) suggest that the extent of such
gains varies significantly across local markets, depending on the availability of competing, localized,
assortment in brick-and-mortar stores. This highlights the importance of controlling for localized
variation in the attractiveness of the offline – and other online – shopping modes in estimating
demand, as we do in assessing the contribution of quality differences across shopping channels to
demand, which we show to largely reflect variation in product variety that provides large online
retailers such as Amazon with a clear advantage over their smaller competitors. To our knowledge,
we are the first to investigate the possible convenience effects associated with a broader distribution
network that reduces delivery times, a quality attribute that consumers may value independently
of variety differences across shopping modes.
Our analysis is also related to recent operations research and economics literature on management of distribution networks for online firms (see Agatz et al. (2008) for an overview) and on
the relationship between a brick-and-mortar retailer’s store location choices and its distribution
network. Zheng (2014) relates the proximity of a rival’s fulfillment center to the chain’s expected
future entry. Building on Barwick (2008) who estimates the scale economies associated with operating multiple stores in close geographic proximity, without decomposing the sources of such
scale economies, Holmes (2011) directly estimates the savings in distribution costs associated with
clustering stores near a fulfillment center. These studies take the configuration of the distribution
network as given and use variation in the distances from a fulfillment center to potential store
locations to identify the parameters of interest. Instead, we study the development of the network
of FCs as a strategic choice for the firm. Little work to date has studied such classic industrial
organization questions as the role of cost differences in affecting firms’ competitive positions in the

5

context of distribution in online markets.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes Amazon’s FC
network and summarizes relevant aspects of sales tax laws. Section 3 introduces the main data
sources and Section 4 presents the demand side analysis and results. Section 5 provides estimates
of distribution cost savings and Section 6 concludes.

2

Amazon’s FC Network and Sales Tax

We obtain information about Amazon’s fulfillment centers from the supply-chain consulting company MWPVL, International (http://www.mwpvl.com/). MWPVL provides information on the
location, size, opening date, and closing date of each FC. Also observable for a subset of the locations is the fulfillment center ‘type’. The type of FC is usually defined by the size of the items
being shipped and/or the speed of delivery. The primary types are centers that focus on large
items that cannot be sent combined with any other products (non-sortable), small items that can
be combined in one package (small sortable) and large items that can be combined into one package (large sortable). Other types of distribution centers include Amazon Fresh FCs, which supply
Amazon’s grocery delivery orders, return centers, redistribution centers for third-party distribution,
and centers for select specialty items such as jewelry. Starting in 2014, Amazon started to build
‘sortation’ centers, which are used to sort packages by zip code areas after they have shipped from
a FC, and ‘Prime Now Hubs’, which handle same-day delivery for select local markets. For the
majority of the analysis, we focus on the three primary types of FCs and Prime Now Hubs, as these
are the centers that ship non-grocery items directly to consumers.
For these types, Amazon has expanded from 8 FCs in 2006 to 90 by the end of 2016 and will
further to over 100 FCs by 2018. Table 1 and Figure 2 demonstrate this expansion. Table 1
displays the number of FCs, the numbers of states that have a FC, the number of taxed states
and associated counties by year, and the average distance between the closest FC to a county,
weighted by county’s population. In Figure 2 illustrates the trends in the table, shading states by
numbers of households and displaying the population-weighted average sales tax in 2013, the last
year of our online demand data. A few aspects of the FC expansion until 2010 are noteworthy.
First, Amazon placed FCs in relatively low population states that were close to highly populated
areas. For example, Amazon opened two FCs in Nevada, both of which were on the California
border close to that state’s major cities. Second, they also placed FCs in states with relatively low
sales tax. For example, the company opened a FC in New Hampshire, in addition to the one it
already operated in Delaware, both of whom are close to major East Coast cities and have zero
sales tax. Such choices of states are also advantageous since sales tax rates are positively correlated
with population (across states, correlation of between 0.35 and 0.4 across 2006 to 2013), so that
entry into a small state near a large state has limited tax implications for only a small population,
while allowing the firm to serve both states’ populations more efficiently. Third, when Amazon did
6

expand to highly populated states, they initially focused on states with a relatively low sales tax
rates (e.g., Pennsylvania with an average tax rate of 6.1% in 2013, compared to 6.9% across the top
20 US states in terms of population and a maximum in those states of 9.5% (TN)). For comparison
purposes, we include in the last panel of Figure 2 a map of Wal-Mart’s distribution centers as of
2014, which are spread across the country more evenly than Amazon’s FCs, at least in the early
years.
These patterns suggest that the early strategy of Amazon’s FC expansion exploited cross-state
variation in sales taxes combined with the fact that legally, e-commerce firms are only obligated to
collect sales tax in certain instances. A 1992 U.S. Supreme Court decision concluded that the U.S.
Constitution’s Commerce Clause “prohibits a State from imposing the duty of use tax collection
and payment upon a seller whose only connection with customers in the State is by common carrier
or by mail.” The court ruled that a mail-order retailer, including an e-commerce firm, does not
have to collect sales tax from consumers unless it has a physical presence, or a ‘nexus’, in that
consumer’s state of residence. In such instances, it is instead the duty of consumers to file a ‘usetax’ return every year, which calculates tax liability on purchases from out-of-state vendors. Few
individuals comply with this rule.8
A large and growing literature examining the effect of sales tax on online purchasing has found
significant consumer responses to sales tax rates using, for example, variation in tax rates across
municipalities (Goolsbee, 2000a; Goolsbee, 2000b). Both Alm and Melnik (2005) and Ballard and
Lee (2007) find small but significant effects of sales tax on the decision of whether or not to shop
online, while Scanlan (2007) finds that this sensitivity is heterogeneous across the level of tax rates.
Ellison and Ellison (2009), Smith and Brynjolfsson (2001), Anderson et al. (2010), and Goolsbee
et al. (2010) all find that online shoppers are sensitive to sales tax, typically focusing on purchases
in a single product category.9
For most online firms, a physical presence would take the form of an office headquarter or a
fulfillment center, implying that these firms likely do not have to collect sales taxes in many states.
As the popularity of e-commerce has grown, policy makers have suggested that the differential tax
collection responsibilities may be giving online firms, and in particular Amazon as the dominant
online retailer, an unfair advantage over their brick-and-mortar competitors. Given the low rates
of out-of-state purchase reporting for use tax compliance by consumers, states are also likely losing
out on millions of dollars of tax revenue (see Bruce et al., 2009).
8
In the 45 states that have a use tax, only about 1.6 percent of taxpayers paid it in 2013. See NPR, “Most People
Are Supposed To Pay This Tax. Almost Nobody Actually Pays It.” April 2013, http://www.npr.org/sections/
money/2013/04/16/177384487/most-people-are-supposed-to-pay-this-tax, accessed on 1/12/2017. This compares to an estimated 60.3 percent of the US population who made online purchases in 2013 according to eMarketer
2016, albeit not necessarily all from out-of-state retailers.
9
There is also evidence on the response of consumers to sales taxes in offline markets, analyzing the substitution
of shopping expenditures across state and country borders (Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, Ho, and Qian, 2013; Asplund,
Friberg, and Wilander, 2007) and over time due to tax holidays (Agarwal, Marwell, and McGranahan, 2013). Chetty,
Looney, and Kroft (2009) estimate how the saliency of tax rates affects consumer demand.

7

As early as 2008, states began passing legislation that expanded the definition of ‘nexus’ to
apply to locations of the firm’s ‘affiliates’, typically websites that allow retailers, such as Amazon,
to advertise on their site. For example, if an Illinois blogger had a link to Amazon on her site,
then Amazon would have to charge sales tax to all Illinois residents. Not surprisingly, Amazon and
other big retailers responded to such laws by shutting down their affiliate programs in the relevant
states.10 Amazon acknowledged in its 2008 annual report, page 16, that “A successful assertion
by one or more states or foreign countries that we should collect sales or other taxes on the sale
of merchandise or services could ... decrease our ability to compete with traditional retailers, and
otherwise harm our business.”
As Amazon grew in scale, however, the network of FCs expanded beyond low-tax low-population
states, presumably to be closer to population hubs despite sales tax implications and higher fixed
costs of warehousing in densely populated areas. For example, by 2014, we see entry into highly
populated states, such as California and Virginia, and high tax states, such as Tennessee (9.5% tax
rate in 2013). Finally, by 2018, Amazon will have added FCs in Georgia, Illinois, North Carolina,
and Ohio. Overall, the pattern of expansion and location choices imply that there exists a trade-off
between being close to customers and charging them sales tax. Our main goal is to empirically
investigate this trade-off.
It is important to note that the opening of a fulfillment center does not necessarily imply that
Amazon begins charging sales tax immediately thereafter. For example, Amazon first built a FC
in Pennsylvania in 2006, but did not begin to charge sales tax until 2011. Such a delay is often
due to legal battles with the state government as to what constitutes a nexus. On the other hand,
sometimes Amazon charges sales tax even when the company does not have a FC in that state. This
can be due to changes in state laws (e.g., New York) or because of legal agreements with the state
to begin charging sales tax ahead of the opening of a FC (e.g., Connecticut). The latter explain
the, at times, significant discrepancy between the number of states where Amazon’s customers pay
sales taxes and the number of states where Amazon has a FC. In our analysis below, we consider
various assumptions on Amazon’s perception of the relationship between FC entry and sales tax
collection when making its network location decisions.11
10

See e.g.,
http://techcrunch.com/2011/06/10/amazon-shuts-down-associates-affiliate-program-inconnecticut-over-online-sales-tax/, and http://www.kansascity.com/news/local/article325412/Amazonshuts-down-Missouri-associates-program-over-sales-tax-dispute.html accessed on 1/12/2017.
11
In addition to negotiating with states over the effectiveness of its tax collection obligation, Amazon at times
receives other forms of government financial assistance when opening a FC in a new locality. The online government
subsidy data base Goodjobfirst.org lists 39 different economic development programs that Amazon benefitted from
during 2006 and 2013. The vast majority consist of ongoing tax credits and training cost reimbursements, which
affect the firm’s variable profit. Six consist of grants or reduced interest loans. Since we do not observe Amazon’s
ultimate take-up of such measures, we incorporate their effect on Amazon’s choice of when to enter a location via a
measurement error component to variable profit.

8

3

Data

Consumer Purchases
The primary data source for the estimation of the demand model is the comScore Web Behavior
Database. ComScore tracks the online purchasing and browsing activity of a random sample
of internet “users”. The users give comScore explicit permission to monitor their browsing and
purchasing activity. Each user is associated with a machine (computer) and any activity on that
machine, including activity from other users, is recorded. Therefore, we assume that each user is
equivalent to a household.
For each purchase transaction, we observe a unique machine identifier, the time of the purchase,
the product category and price for each individual item in the basket, the name of the domain
where the transaction occurred, and a ‘basket total’, or the total cost to the consumer for the
transaction including shipping and taxes. In addition, we observe demographic characteristics for
each household such as age and race of the head of household and household income, together with
the zip code of their residence.12
Below, we use the comScore data to predict revenue that Amazon, and competing online and
offline retailers, derive from each location in the country in each year. We relegate the details
of how we construct household-level expenditures in each location to Appendix A. Here, we only
discuss the primary data patterns that guided our approach.
The comScore sample begins with 86,000 households in 2006, but shrinks over the years to
46,000 in 2013. Nevertheless, every state in the continental US, the District of Columbia, and at
least 78% of US counties are represented in the data each year. See columns 1 and 2 of Table 3.
Because the coverage of finer geographic areas is limited – for example, at most 42% of zip codes
are covered in any given year – we focus on counties as our geographic delineation for the majority
of the analysis.
We construct household-level online and offline expenditures for a representative household in
each county by supplementing the comScore data with survey data from Forrester Research and
data from the US Census. The Forrester data allow us to account for households who have zero
online expenditures (i.e., the extensive margin), while the Census data provide us with weights
to correct for the possibility that the comScore sample is not representative of a given county’s
population.
We consider three online shopping channels, which we denote as ‘modes’: Amazon, taxed online
competitors of Amazon, and non-taxed online competitors of Amazon. We restrict online retail to
12

The comScore data contain a categorical income variable. To simplify the regression analysis below and facilitate
matching the comScore data to auxiliary data sources, we convert the categorical income data to a continuous income
variable. We do so by fitting county-specific log-normal distributions to the categorical income distribution by race
and age of the head of the household from the 2010 US Census. We then use the county, race, and age-specific
fitted income distributions to calculate expected income levels for each comScore income category and assign to each
household the expected income within its reported income bin.

9

product categories that Amazon carries, dropping spending at, for example, dating websites (e.g.,
match.com), travel websites (e.g., orbtiz.com) and food delivery sites (e.g., dominos.com). Within
the resulting universe of competing websites, we define a taxed online competitor as one that has a
large offline presence such as gap.com, walmart.com and target.com, and thus already collects sales
tax in most states, and a non-taxed competitor as one without a national offline presence, such as
overstock.com. We note that neither of these groups are perfectly defined, as some sites that we
classify as having a national offline presence may in fact not have a store in every state and sites
that we classify as not having an offline presence surely have a headquarters and/or a fulfillment
center located in at least one state. Table 2 displays the top ten online stores in each of the taxed
and non-taxed categories. Overall, we classify about 34% of websites as taxed competitors.
When adjusted by the extensive margins in the Forrester data, the average comScore household
spends $250 annually on online retail, rising to $374 by 2013 (see Table A.1). Aggregating across
households to the representative household in each county and making use of the census weights
results in the average household spending of $217 in 2006 and $273 in 2013 (see Table 3). The
differences between this and the average spending reported in Table A.1 are likely due to ComScore
oversampling households that are younger and have higher income. The increase in household
spending on Amazon from $23 in 2006 to $100 in 2013 mirrors the general increase in the household’s
total online expenditures from 2006 to 2013, while spending on the other two modes is relatively
steady throughout.
These spending patterns result in the evolution of market shares for the different shopping
modes that we display in Figure 3. The market shares are based on household-weighted sums of
representative household expenditures in each county. We illustrate that Amazon’s market share of
online expenditures grew from around 10% in 2006 to almost 40% in 2013, eating into the market
shares of both the taxed and non-taxed online competitors.
There are three primary limitations of our constructed sample on consumer spending. First,
comScore does not do not record Amazon Marketplace purchases separately from Amazon purchases. This has implications for both the estimation of tax sensitivity, as we cannot separate out
expenditures at non-taxed Marketplace retailers, and the calculation of Amazon’s total revenue.
Second, many households use their computers at work and/or mobile devices for making some or
all of their online purchases, so that we may miss a non-trivial amount of online activity. Third,
both the comScore sample and the Forrester sample (except for 2006-2007) are drawn from the
pool of consumers who are internet users. While the percentage of US households with internet
access during our sample ranges from 63% to 75%,13 we do not observe internet use by county
and are unable to account for this margin when calculating the expenditures for the representative
household in a county. We may therefore overestimate e-commerce expenditures by assigning to
the representative household in each county the weighted average expenditure of households in the
13

See http://www.census.gov/topics/population/computer-internet/data/tables.ALL.html,
1/17/2017.

10

accessed on

comScore sample. We discuss these issues and how we deal with them in greater detail below.
In order to construct the amount of household spending at offline retailers for the types of goods
in our sample, we use a combination of 2012 county-level data from ESRI and SimplyMap. ESRI
provides a measure of average household spending on all retail goods, including food, while the
SimplyMap provides household expenditures on food. Because we exclude food from our online
sample, we subtract food expenditures from the ESRI total to calculate our measure of total retail
spending. We then subtract the average household’s online expenditures from total retail spending
to calculate the amount of expenditures at offline retailers. The average spending on offline retail
across households is between $17,000 and $18,000 per year. Since the ESRI and SimplyMap data
are only available for one of the years in our sample – 2012 – we flexibly control for spending time
trends in our empirical work below.

Amazon Fulfillment Center Network
We acquire information about each of the FCs from MWPVL, International. Based on the location of the FC, we calculate the great-circle distance between each FC’s street address and the
population-weighted centroid of every county in the US, and exploit the opening dates of the FCs
to calculate the minimum distance by county and year over the set of operating centers in a given
year. This distance serves as a measure of how far Amazon must ship the good between its FCs
and consumers.
It is apparent from Figure 2 that as part of its FC roll-out, Amazon often opens FCs that are
close to an existing FC, possibly to increase capacity at the location or to cluster FCs of different
types near one another. Specifically, nearly 70% of the FCs have at least one other FC that is
within 20 miles. Therefore, we define a FC cluster as a group of FCs whose locations are in the
same state and within 20 miles of each other. In the analysis below, we assume that Amazon
decides where and when to build a cluster of FCs, rather than each individual FC in the cluster
and use the opening date and shipping distance to the first FC built in the cluster, reducing the
number of FC locations from over 100 to 60. This does not affect the demand analysis because any
tax collection obligations are triggered by the first FC built in a state.
A downside to assuming that Amazon serves each customer from the physically closest fulfillment center is that it does not recognize, for example, that access to different modes of transportation across fulfillment centers might mean that it is cheaper for Amazon to service a particular
county location from a fulfillment center other than its closest. We investigate this possibility
by predicting which FC would be the lowest-cost supplier for each county under the assumption
that the per-pound distribution cost for Amazon is proportional to the average per pound cost for
shipments in the Census’ 2012 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS).
Using the CFS data on all individual shipments of commodities in the relevant products categories, together with information from the Department of Transportation on unit shipping cost

11

by mode of transportation, we estimate the realized per-pound cost of a shipment for the average
package between any origin and destination county. Under the assumption that this per-pound
cost is proportional to Amazon’s shipping cost, we use it to identify the lowest-cost fulfillment
center for each county and year. See Appendix A for details. Not surprisingly, the closest FC is
also the lowest-cost, based on this measure, for 73% of county-year observations. If we use the
lowest-cost FC to calculate Amazon’s shipping distance to each county, the household-weighted average shipping distance falls from 301 miles in 2006 to 162 miles by 2018, compared to 297 and 116
miles, respectively, based on assigning each county to the closest FC (see Table 1). The correlation
between the two alternative measures of shipping distance is 0.98, suggesting that the assumption
that Amazon relies on the closest FC does not materially affect our estimated shipping distances
relative to the predicted lowest-cost option.
Because great-circle distance may not be a perfect proxy for shipping speeds, we also obtain the
US Postal Service’s shipping times between each three-digit zip code zone and find the minimum
shipping time between each county and the three-digit zip code zone of each FC.14 The Postal
Service reports shipping times for four different classes of mail: first, priority, standard, and package.
These classes differ slightly in the size and number of packages allowed in the delivery.15 Since the
variation in shipping days is limited, we transform shipping time into a categorical variable – slow
and fast shipping speed, where the definition of slow depends on the class of shipping.16 We were
unable to find shipping times for the other shipping services used by Amazon – UPS and FedEx –
but they are likely very similar to the Postal Service’s.
MWPVL also provides information about the FC size in square feet and, for 30 of the FCs,
the number of employees, which we employ as fixed cost shifters in our analysis below. To fill in
the missing workforce information, we assume that the number of employees per square foot is the
same for FCs of the same type. The last two columns of Table 1 provide the average number of
employees and size for operating FCs in a given year. There is a general pattern of an increase in
average size and employees early in the sample period, followed by a decrease as Amazon began to
build the smaller Prime Now hubs starting in 2014. Note that we do not observe any information
about the FCs for Amazon’s competitors, so we cannot speak to competition among online firms
in terms of their FC network choices.
Finally, we obtain information on the extent to which a given fulfillment center can be used to
satisfy same day shipping orders during our sample period. We rely on various news sources to
identify the counties and the corresponding date of implementation of Amazon’s early version of
14
We choose one three digit zip code per county after verifying that shipping times do not vary significantly within
a given county.
15
For a detailed description, see http://pe.usps.com/BusinessMail101?ViewName=ClassesOfMail, accessed on
1/17/2017. Amazon uses First Class and Priority mail for standard shipments. See https://www.amazon.com/gp/
aw/sp.html?mp=&oid=&s=A1PVXLBETRT7XG&t=shipping, accessed on 1/17/2017.
16
Slow is defined as more than 2 days for “Priority” mail, more than 1 day for “First Class” mail, and more than
3 days for both “Package” and “Standard” mail.

12

same day shipping, ‘Local Express Delivery’. Amazon introduced this service, for which customers
are charged a fee, in select markets as early as October, 2009.

Other Sources of Data
We obtain state, county, and local sales tax rates from Tax Data Systems, now part of Thomas
Reuters. For each year and county, we calculate the average tax rate, as tax rates can vary within
a county and may change mid year. The average sales tax rate is 6.5%, with an average standard
deviation of 1.6% across counties in every year and an average standard deviation of 0.3% across
counties within a state and year. In addition, tax rates vary across time, as between 30 and 65%
of counties experience tax rate changes from year to year and nearly 78% of counties experience at
least one tax rate change over our sample period.
We use county level demographics from the 2010 Census and annual information on the number
brick-and-mortar retailers and the number of large retailers, which we define as those with more
than 50 employees, from 2006-2013 County Business Patterns. Further, we collect county-level
wage information as the average annual wage of a ‘Retail Trade’ employee across the BLS’s 2012
Quarterly Censuses of Employment and Wages. While this is not an exact match to the distribution
and warehousing jobs of Amazon FC employees, we believe retail trade to be the closest match;
the average hourly wage of a ‘Retail Trade’ employee is similar to that of an Amazon Associate as
reported by glassdoor.com.
Next, we obtain a measure of the cost of renting a square foot of warehousing space using data
from SNL Financial’s real estate research. According to Amazon’s 2013 financial statement, more
than 99% of its fulfillment space is leased and not owned, so that the fixed costs of operating the
distribution network include significant rental costs. From SNL, we observe a May 2016 snapshot of
the rent paid and square footage of properties classified as “Warehouses or Distribution Centers”.
Using these, we calculate the average rent per square foot for all counties appearing in the SNL
data. Some Amazon FCs are in counties that do not appear in the SNL data (26 out of 60). We
estimate rent for those counties as follows. For each county represented in SNL, we calculate the
ratio of commercial rent to residential property value and average across counties within a state,
where we obtained residential property values from the 2013 American Community Survey.17 For
the counties not in the SNL data, we then estimate the rent per square foot as their residential
property value times this ratio.
Finally, we rely on Amazon’s annual reports for additional information about Amazon’s finances.
For each year, we observe the North American sales figures in the “Media” and “Electronics and
Other General Merchandise” categories. In order to match the comScore data, we exclude the
“Other” category, which is revenue from “Non-Retail Activity” such as Amazon Web Services. We
also collect information on the cost of goods sold, which includes inbound and outbound shipping
17

The data was compiled by http://metrocosm.com/get-the-data/.

13

costs, and the aggregate outbound shipping cost. This allows us to estimate Amazon’s revenue
margin net of outbound shipping cost, which we discuss in more detail in Section 5.
In summary, the supplementary data that varies over our sample period includes the sales tax
rate and the number of offline retailers, while the demographics, wages, and land rents are observed
at a single point in time.

4

Demand Analysis

In the primary demand analysis below, we estimate the effect of taxes and shipping speed on the
yearly expenditures of the representative consumer in a county. In order to demonstrate preliminary
evidence of the direction and importance of these effects, we begin with the comScore micro-data
and estimate the transaction-level effect of taxes and shipping speed on the likelihood that a
consumer purchases from Amazon. We run the following linear probability regression:
P r(Aohijt = 1) = β0 + α ln(1 + τit 1taxable
) + γdit + β1 Ch + β2 Zit + λijt + ohijt
it
where each observation is a purchase occasion o, from household h, in county i, in year t, for a
product in category j. The dependent variable is an indicator whether the household purchases
the product from Amazon.com. We summarize a household’s tax status in an indicator variable,
1taxable
, that is one if purchases from Amazon by households in county i and year t trigger sales tax
it
collection by Amazon. The tax status variable changes over time due to the entry of a FC and/or
due to the future entry of a FC where the state insisted on collecting sales taxes immediately
following an agreement with Amazon. As a result, the tax rate Amazon exposes the household
to is zero if Amazon does not collect sales tax from households in county i and year t and equal
to the local sales tax rate τit otherwise. The measure of the shipping speed from Amazon to the
household is given by dit , which varies depending on the specification. Also included are controls
for household income and race, Ch , and the number of small and large offline retailers in the
household’s county, Zit . Finally, λijt is a collection of county, year, and product category fixed
effects. We do not include the item’s price because we observe the price only at the website where
the purchase occurs, but not on alternative sites.18 However, the product category and year fixed
effects capture the average price differences across online retailers by category and across time.
When discussing the results, we focus on the effect of taxes and shipping speed and leave the
analysis of the other controls for the main demand specification. The result in the first column
of Table 4, which excludes any measure of shipping speed, indicates that consumers are sensitive
to taxes and that the probability of an Amazon purchase falls by 15 percentage points for a one
percentage point increase in sales tax, a result which is statistically significant at the 5% level.19
18
19

A specification that includes Amazon’s price for Amazon purchases results in similar estimates.
In MN, NJ, PA, RI, and VT, the majority of clothing purchases is sales tax exempt. To verify that such exemptions

14

In columns 2 through 7, we include various proxies of shipping speeds to account for the fact that
consumers may value faster delivery times from Amazon. These are whether or not the county in
which the household lives had access to “local express delivery”, the log of the distance between the
centroid of the household’s county and the closest FC, and whether or not the household’s county
can be serviced with fast delivery times by the Postal Service for each of its four classes of mail.
We find that the tax effect is robust to including the variety of proxies for delivery time. Neither
the local express delivery indicator, the log of the shipping distance, nor the fast shipping speed
indicator across mail classes, have a statistically significant effect on the propensity of purchasing
from Amazon.
There are a number of explanations for the results on the shipping speed coefficients. It could
be that our measures do not accurately reflect shipping times. Another explanation is that consumers simply do not value faster shipping sufficiently to affect purchase probabilities, or have very
heterogeneous preferences for shipping times given Amazon’s recent expansion of same-day shipping. Finally, it could be that the expansion of the network of fulfillment centers did not result in
faster shipping times to local consumers, or if it did, it was a small number of consumers who were
affected. In this scenario, the first order effect of building more FCs is that it results in lower costs
for Amazon to ship packages in a given time-frame (i.e., 2-day shipping). We believe the latter to
be the most plausible explanation.
We now move from the comScore micro-data to our constructed average spending measure. We
provide further evidence of the effect of taxes and shipping speed by estimating a differences-indifferences regression of the annual expenditures on Amazon for the representative household in a
county on the ‘treatment’ variables of whether or not Amazon collects sales tax on its purchases
and the measure of shipping speed. In addition, this exercise demonstrates the intuition behind the
identification of the effect of sales tax and shipping speed in the main demand specification below.
The regression model is given by:
ExpAmit = β0 + σ1taxable
+ γdit + β1 Cit + β2 Zit + λit + it
it
where ExpAmit is the log of Amazon expenditures by the representative household in county i in
year t. The covariates 1taxable
, dit , and Zit are the same as in the transaction level regression. The
it
demographic variables, Cit , are the income of the representative household and the weighted share
of the population in each race group in county i.20 Finally, λit is made up of a county fixed effect
and a year fixed effect. Results in Table 5 suggest that a change in the tax status of a county
do not drive the estimated tax responsiveness, we conduct two robustness checks. Since Amazon’s “Apparel” may not
accurately define products that are sales tax exempt, we first remove households from the six relevant states. Second,
we remove any purchases that fall into the Apparel category. We find that the tax coefficient remains significant and
of similar magnitude as the presented results.
20
We assign to the representative household the Census weighted average of the income and race of the comScore
households in county i and year t.

15

results in somewhere between a 9.6 and 10.8% reduction in expenditures on Amazon, with this
effect being significant at the 10% level for a majority of the specifications. Dividing this effect by
the average tax rate of 6.5% suggests that an increase in the tax of 1 percentage point (an increase
in the tax inclusive price of 1%) leads to a 1.6% reduction in spending on Amazon. This elasticity
is in line with those of Baugh et al. (2014) and Einav et al. (2014). We once again include measures
of shipping speeds in this demand estimation and find little evidence that they significantly affect
the purchasing behavior of consumers.

Empirical Model
A weakness shared by both of the above exercises is that we do not consider the substitution
between Amazon and other taxed and non-taxed shopping options. Because of this, any reduction
in Amazon’s transactions due to higher taxes does not equate directly to a tax elasticity since these
transactions may be substituted towards other taxed outlets (e.g., walmart.com or Wal-Mart).
Therefore, we now specify and estimate a model of demand for retail goods across all modes of
online and offline shopping that allows us to determine the effect on overall transactions of higher
sales taxes. Another advantage of this model is that it is a micro-founded model that allows us to
predict total revenue for Amazon, which we will use in the estimation of the supply side model.
We specify a model where a consumer chooses his retail spending amount on each of four
different modes of shopping. The modes are Amazon, j = 1, taxed online competitors, j = 2,
non-taxed online competitors, j = 3, and offline competitors, j = 0.
We follow Einav et al. (2014) and specify a CES utility function. A representative consumer
from county i solves the following problem in year t:

max

qi0t ,..qi3t

s.t.


3 
X
qijt


j=0
3
X

σ−1
σ

ζijt



σ
σ−1



pijt qijt ≤ wit

j=0

where qijt represents the quantity purchased via shopping mode j in time period t, pijt is the
price of purchasing one unit of retail products via shopping mode j, ζijt is the taste for mode j, and
wit is household i’s budget for retail goods. The elasticity of substitution between the four modes
is given by σ. Solving for the optimal expenditure amount on each online mode, eijt , results in:
eijt =

(pijt ζijt )1−σ
wit ,
Pit1−σ

where Pit denotes a weighted-average price index across all four modes. Dividing this by expenditure

16

on the offline option, j = 0, and taking logs gives:
ln(eijt ) − ln(ei0t ) =(1 − σ)(ln(pijt ) − ln(pi0 )) + (1 − σ)(ln(ζijt ) − ln(ζi0t ))

(1)

where the price of each mode can be written as:
pijt = (1 + τit 1taxable
)p̃ijt ,
ijt
denoting as p̃ijt the tax-exclusive price of buying goods, which may include shipping charges. Note
that the tax liability and hence 1taxable
may vary across shopping modes j as the non-taxed online
ijt
competitor never charges sales tax and Amazon does not charge sales tax in a number of states
and years. With this, Equation (1) becomes:
ln(eijt ) − ln(ei0t ) =(1 − σ)(ln(1 + τit 1taxable
) − ln(1 + τit ))
ijt
+ (1 − σ)(ln(p̃ijt ) − ln(p̃i0t ))

(2)

+ (1 − σ)(ln(ζijt ) − ln(ζi0t ))
We model the taste for the each online mode j ∈ {1, 2, 3} as:
1

ζijt = exp(ξjt + γdit 1Amazon
+ βj Zit + λj Cit + ijt ) 1−σ
j
and assume that the preference for the offline shopping mode equals:
1

ζi0t = exp(∆ξi0t + i0t ) 1−σ
The term ∆ξi0t represents time-varying preferences for online shopping, and we assume that it
consists of a county-level, time-invariant, preference for online shopping, ξi0 , and a time trend that
captures changes in preferences for online shopping at the level of the county’s Census Division,
∆ξr0t , or ∆ξi0t = ξi0 + ∆ξr0t .21
The mode-year effect, ξjt , accounts for time varying preferences for shopping mode j and can
be thought of as the mode’s quality that doesn’t vary across locations. Aspects such as product
variety, return policy, and customer service likely play a major role in determining ξjt . For Amazon
specifically, the availability of its Prime service, which all customers have access to regardless of
location, would be included in ξjt .
We allow mode preferences to reflect observable variation in demographics Cit , such as median
income and the county’s racial makeup, the level of offline competition Zit proxied as the total
number and the number of large retail establishments in the county, and, for Amazon, the above
21
There are nine Census Divisions: Pacific, Mountain, West North Central, West South Central, East North
Central, East South Central, Middle Atlantic, South Atlantic, and New England.

17

measures of shipping speed, dit , with the effects of demographics and competition possibly varying
across shopping modes.
The demand shocks vary at the county, time, and mode level, and we assume that they are
i.i.d. across these delineations. Under these assumptions, Equation (2) becomes:


ln(eijt ) − ln(ei0t ) =(1 − σ) ln(1 + τit 1taxable
)
−
ln(1
+
τ
)
it
ijt
+ γdit 1Amazon
+ (1 − σ) (ln(p̃ijt ) − ln(p̃i0t ))
j

(3)

o
+ βj Zit + λj Cit + ξio + ξrt
+ ξjt + ijt − i0t

We make the assumption that the prices for the online shopping modes do not vary across
counties, or that p̃ijt = p̃jt . While some online firms appear to price discriminate based on a consumer’s location, there is limited evidence that this is widespread.22 Further, Amazon attempted to
implement price discrimination in 2000, and quickly abolished it after a backlash from customers.23
Finally, we assume that the base price of the offline shopping option remains constant over time
(i.e., p̃i0t = p̃i0 ) and that any variation can be captured through Zit . With this, we can re-write
Equation (3):
ln(eijt ) − ln(ei0t ) =(1 − σ) (ln(1 + τit 1taxable
) − ln(1 + τit ))
ijt
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
ẽijt

Price variation (τ̃ijt )

+

γdit 1Amazon
j

+ βj Zit + λj Cit + ξjt + (1 − σ) ln(p̃jt )
|
{z
}

(4)

Mode-year FE (ξ̃jt )

−

∆ξr0t
| {z }

Region-year FE

− ξ¯i0 + (1 − σ) ln(p̃i0 ) + ijt − i0t
|
{z
} | {z }
County FE

Residual

This final estimating equation attributes the difference in expenditures between mode j and the
offline mode to the difference in sales tax between mode j and the offline mode, the convenience
effect due to lower shipping times for mode 1 (Amazon), a time varying mode level effect that
includes the price of mode j, the effect of demographics and local competition on mode j, a regionspecific time trend, a county fixed effect, and an iid demand shock.

Estimation
We estimate Equation (4) using OLS with county, mode/year, and region/time level fixed effects.
The procedure to calculate the expenditures for each mode is detailed in Section 3. Identification of
the tax sensitivity parameter comes from two primary sources of variation. First, there is variation
22

See e.g., http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534, accessed on
1/17/2017.
23
See http://www.bizjournals.com/seattle/stories/2000/09/25/daily21.html and http://news.cnet.com/
2100-1017-240700.html, accessed on 1/17/2017.

18

in tax rates in a county across time due to changes in local laws and/or entry of an Amazon
fulfillment center. Therefore, changes in expenditures between taxed and non-taxed modes as a
result of these changes helps to identify σ. This is similar to the traditional identification argument
in difference-in-differences models. Second, there is variation in tax rates across counties within a
state, which allows us to exploit covariation between the level of the response to changes in the tax
status and the level of the tax rate.
Given this level of variation, we make the assumption that changes in tax rates due to either
Amazon’s expansion and/or local laws are exogenous to unobserved local demand shocks. This
reflects that Amazon’s entry decisions are made at a higher geographic level than the county
and not made purely in response to a local annual demand shock. To investigate the sensitivity
of our results to this assumption and, similarly, to the assumption above that the price of the
offline option does not vary over time, we have also estimated Equation (4) with county/year and
state/year fixed effects. We find similar results, but choose to proceed with the main specification
to avoid identifying the tax effect purely from variation in taxes across modes within a county or
state, since we observe only three modes and at most two tax levels across modes.
As in the reduced form regressions above, we explore whether consumers are sensitive to shipping
speeds. We identify this effect using changes in the distance and shipping times resulting from the
expansion of the FC network. Specifically, the effect of a new FC on shipping times varies both
within and across state borders, as it depends on the location of consumers. Note that we do
not observe the locations of and thus distance to Amazon’s competitors’ fulfillment centers, but
we assume that the time-varying preferences, ξjt , capture any overall effect of changes in shipping
times for a given mode. Therefore, the effects of shipping speeds are Amazon specific.
Finally, a nice feature of the data is that entry of a fulfillment center into a state does not always
lead to Amazon having to charge sales tax (recall the Pennsylvania example from above). Amazon
may also have to charge sales tax in a state without having a fulfillment center. Therefore, even
within a state, we sometimes see variation in shipping distances over time without similar variation
in the county’s tax status and vice versa.
Matching Total Sales
One of the goals of the demand model is to be able to predict Amazon’s total sales under different
configurations of the network. However, because of three data limitations, the model presented
above may not accurately predict total revenue of either Amazon or the online retail segment in
total. First, we are missing sales made through other channels such as mobile devices or second
computers at home or work. This issue exists across all three online modes of shopping, suggesting
that we underestimate revenue for all modes. Second, the comScore sample consist of online
users only. As a result, we potentially overestimate online spending by the average household.
This counters, but unlikely offsets, the underreporting introduced by missing sales due to the

19

increased prevalence of online shopping away from the home computer.24 Third, we cannot separate
Amazon purchases from Amazon Marketplace purchases, implying that our model predicts the sum
of Amazon’s own sales and its sales from the sellers on Marketplace. This issue exists only for
Amazon and results in an overestimate of its sales.
To address these data limitations, we supplement the county-level expenditure data with information on Amazon’s yearly revenue obtained from their financial reports and information on
annual total online revenue from the US Department of Commerce.25 This information allows us
to scale our demand model predictions to match, when summing across modes, overall online retail
expenditures, as well Amazon expenditures in particular. We do so by including two additional sets
of annual ‘multiplier’ parameters in estimation that we identify by matching the model’s aggregate
predictions to these external estimates.
The Amazon specific multipliers, αt1 , are annual parameters that represent the combination
of the missing sales and the extent of Marketplace purchases in the comScore data. For example,
if αt1 = 1.2, it implies that we need to scale up our predictions by 20% in order to match the
revenue reported in the financial statements. The value of the Amazon multipliers may be greater
or less than one depending on the relative impact of missing sales versus Marketplace purchases.
The multipliers that apply to modes 2 and 3 and have a similar interpretation as the Amazon
multipliers. However, because these multipliers represent the missing sales in the comScore data,
they will take values greater than one; we restrict them to be the same for the two modes since we
do not observe aggregate online revenues separately for the two channels, αt2 = αt3 .
We estimate these parameters by iterating over the OLS regression of Equation (4) for different
values of the multipliers until the predicted yearly revenue for Amazon matches the revenue observed
in their financial reports and the yearly total online revenue matches the revenue reported by the
US Department of Commerce. We begin by estimating the model in Equation (4) without any
multipliers. We then predict spending for each of the three modes for the representative household
in each county and, scaled by the number of households, for the county in total. For counties
not covered by the comScore data, we use their attributes to predict spending, assuming that the
county fixed effect takes on the estimated fixed effect of the geographically closest county. These
allow us to create yearly total predicted revenue for each mode and to generate starting values for
24

eMarketer estimates that the share of online shoppers who made at least one purchase on a mobile device increased
from 10.8% in 2010 to 53% by 2013. A FindLaw.com survey finds that 35% of the population shopped online while
at work in 2014. Lastly, Nakono estimates that the average number of desktops and laptops per household increased
from 2.12 in 2006 to 3 in 2012. See http://company.findlaw.com/press-center/2014/thirty-five-percentof-americans-shop-online-while-at-work.html and https://www.nakono.com/tekcarta/databank/personalcomputers-per-household/, accessed on 1/22/2017.
25
Overall online sales are available at https://www.census.gov/retail/ecommerce/historic_releases.html. We
adjust overall sales to represent the total online sales for the relevant product categories only by multiplying online
sales by the annual spending share of these categories in the comScore data. The assumption is that the share of the
relevant product categories for the comScore sample is equal to the share across the population.

20

the multipliers:
αt1 (0) =

R1t (0)
R̄1t

αt2 (0) = αt3 (0) =

(5)
R2t (0) + R3t (0)
R̄2,3t

where Rjt (0) represents the predicted revenue for mode j, R̄1t represents Amazon’s officially reported revenue, and R̄2,3t represents the expenditures on modes 2 and 3 calculated by subtracting
Amazon’s revenues from the total online revenue reported by the Department of Commerce. We
then multiply each representative household’s observed expenditure on mode j in year t by the
value of the corresponding multiplier:
ēijt = αtj (0) × eijt

(6)

and re-estimate the OLS regression model of Equation (4) with the adjusted dependent variable,
ẽijt = ln(ēijt ) − ln(ei0t ). Using the estimates, we again predict the total expenditure for each mode
and calculate updated multipliers according to Equation (5). We iterate over this procedure until
predicted and actual revenue match.26
The implicit assumption in this procedure is that the shares of missing transactions and Amazon
Marketplace expenditures do not vary across counties. Primarily, adjusting expenditures in this way
affects the estimates of the mode-year fixed effects; the other parameters remain largely unchanged
when estimating the model without the multipliers. Importantly, there is very little change in the
estimated tax sensitivity and the convenience effect. We confirm this in Appendix C, which displays
the estimates of the demand model without any multipliers.

Results
Results under six different specifications are presented in Table 6, where each specification uses a
different measure of shipping speed. Specification (1) starts with only sales taxes and demographic
controls; specification (2) adds the indicator of local express delivery availability; specification
(3) instead includes the log of the distance to the closest FC, and specifications (3)-(6) include
indicators for fast shipping speeds in the four different classes of delivery. Since sales tax enters
with a coefficient of (1 − σ) in Equation (4), we display in Table 6 the transformed coefficient that
corresponds only to the elasticity of substitution (−σ) only. The estimated elasticity of substitution
is approximately −1.43 and is significant at the 5% level in all specifications. In CES specifications,
26

In practice, we stop iterating when the multipliers converge:
kα(k) − α(k + 1)k <  = 1.00E − 06

where α(k) is the vector of multipliers in iteration k and k·k is the Euclidian norm.

21

the elasticity of substitution is approximately equal to the price elasticity for mode j when the
spending share for mode j is very small. The expenditure shares are under 0.02 for each of the
online modes, meaning that the elasticity is approximately −1.4. Thus, a one percentage point
increase in the tax rate (i.e., a 1% increase in the price) leads to a decrease in demand of 1.4%.
These effects are similar to the ones reported by both Einav et al. (2014) and Baugh et al. (2014).
An alternative interpretation of the estimates is that going from not charging sales tax to
charging the average sales tax of 6.5% would reduce expenditures on each online mode by 9.1
percent (6.5 × 1.4). That is, if Amazon agrees to charge sales tax in a state through either an
agreement with the state government or because they build a fulfillment center, they can expect
their revenue in the state to decrease by up to 9.1%, all else equal. In 2008, New York state passed
a law that required Amazon to collect sales tax. Given the state average sales tax of 8.5% that
year, our estimates imply that the law reduced Amazon’s revenue in New York by approximately
11.9%.
One possible issue with these estimates is the fact that a consumer in a state where Amazon
itself collects taxes may be able to buy from a Marketplace seller who does not have to charge sales
tax. In that case, our estimate would be a lower bound of the responsiveness to taxes: we would
attribute a lack of a combined Amazon spending response to a low tax sensitivity. Most state laws
dictate that Marketplace vendors collect sales tax from customers in the states where their goods
are stored, and most vendors store their goods in Amazon’s fulfillment centers.27 As a result, their
sales tax obligations are identical to Amazon’s itself.
In line with the above estimates, Table 6 does not provide strong evidence that our measures
of shipping times drive substitution between Amazon and other shopping outlets. This is further
evidence that the expansion of the network did not significantly change the shipping times from
Amazon, or in other words, the convenience effect of expanding the network is approximately zero
over the period of our sample. Going forward, we therefore rely on Specification (1) as our primarily
empirical model.
We present the estimates of βj and λj , the mode-specific spending effects of demographics and
offline competition, for Specification (1) in Table 7. A larger number of offline choices drives down
expenditures for all modes of online shopping, with the effect of large offline competitors (e.g., WalMart or Target) being stronger. However, the effect is only significant at the 5% level for taxed
online competitors, implying that online firms with an offline presence face more competition from
large offline retailers than online only firms. We also find that higher income households spend
more via online channels. Relative expenditures do not correlate in a statistically significant way
with the remaining demographic variables. Note that because we do not have time-varying data
27

See http://www.webretailer.com/lean-commerce/amazon-sellers-survey-2016/, accessed on 1/17/2017, indicating that 79% of all sellers and 88% of sellers with revenue upward of $1 million use Amazon fullfilment centers,
and http://www.avalara.com/learn/whitepapers/fba-sellers-guide-sales-tax/, accessed on 1/17/2017, for an
overview of sales tax collection obligations of such vendors.

22

on the racial makeup of counties, we estimate their effect relative to the offline mode, mode 3.
The estimates of the time varying mode fixed effects are presented in Table 8, with the excluded
effect being mode 3 in 2006. We use them to construct a measure of average mode preferences:
ˆ
ξ¯jt = ξ˜jt + β̂j Z̄t + λ̂j C̄t

(7)

ˆ
where ξ˜jt is the estimated mode fixed effect and Z̄ and C̄ are the averages of the demographic
and competition variables. We display ξ¯ in Figure 4. Not surprisingly, given Amazon’s increase in
market share, mean preferences for Amazon are increasing over time. Mean preferences for both
the taxed online competitors and the non-taxed competitors are also increasing over time, but at
˜ this could be due to a
a slower rate than Amazon’s. Due to the way we specified demand via ξ,
relative decrease in Amazon’s prices and/or a relative increase in its platform quality.
Finally, we turn to the estimates of the multipliers. The Amazon-specific multiplier are increasing over time, from 1.03 in 2006 to 1.69 in 2013.28 This implies that the comScore data understates
0.69
Amazon’s 2013 revenue by about 41% ( 1.69
). The multipliers for modes 2 and 3 are also generally

increasing over time, rising from 1.02 in 2006 to 2.93 in 2013, a number that implies that we are
missing about 66% ( 1.93
2.93 ) of 2013 sales for these modes. The increasing rate is likely due to the
growing prevalence of mobile shopping and at-work-online shopping, as well as multiple desktop
and laptop computers in the home, not all of whom are tracked by comScore (see footnote 24).
Recall that the Amazon multipliers are a combination of missing sales and Marketplace revenue,
so they are equivalent to the product of a Marketplace multiplier (less than 1) and a missing sales
multiplier (greater than 1). If the missing sales multiplier for Amazon were the same as the other
two modes’, then the Marketplace multiplier equals αt1 /αt2 , or 0.57 for 2013. This means that
43% of the revenue that we observe is from Marketplace sellers, a number that is in line with the
estimates of the share of third party sales on Amazon.29

Predicting Total Revenue
In order to estimate the supply side model that follows, we form predictions of Amazon’s total
revenue from 2006-2018 under various assumptions about the FC network rollout and the timing of
tax changes due to the rollout. In this section, we explain this procedure for the observed rollout of
FCs and the observed timing in changes in the tax status, and examine patterns in the estimated
spending across the three modes of online shopping.
We use the demand estimates of specification (1) in Table 6 to predict annual expenditures of
a representative household in county i for each mode over the period 2006-2013. We then scale
28

The multipliers are 1.03, 1.39, 1.50, 1.55, 1.52, 1.50, 1.01, and 1.69 for the years 2006-2013.
In the second quarter of 2013, 40% of overall units shipped through the platform were from third-party sellers
according to https://www.statista.com/statistics/259782/third-party-seller-share-of-amazon-platform/,
accessed on 1/17/2017.
29

23

up the resulting figures by the number of households in each county to derive our estimate of
total revenue for each mode. Results are displayed in the upper panel of Table 9. Recall that
the estimation procedure implies that our predicted revenue for Amazon is exactly equal to the
revenue reported in their financial statements and the total revenue across the three modes is to
exactly equal to the revenue reported by the Department of Commerce. Not surprisingly, the table
indicates general increase in spending across all modes, with Amazon’s sales increasing faster than
the other two modes’. Using these predictions, we also construct the spending share for each online
mode and display them in Figure 5. This differs from Figure 3 for two reasons. First, the shares are
calculated across all modes, including the offline mode, resulting in shares below 0.02 for the three
online modes. Second, the shares are calculated using the predictions of the model, rather than the
raw data. Figure 5 indicates that, while the share of expenditures bought online is increasing over
the sample period, Amazon’s share is growing at a faster rate compared to modes 2 and 3.
We now turn to the projections of revenue for 2014-2018, which requires out-of-sample values
of the mode-specific and region-specific time trends. We predict these by projecting out from the
estimated effects given their growth over 2006 to 2013.30 The lower panel of Table 9 reports the
total predicted revenue from 2014 to 2018. Because we observe Amazon 2014 and 2015 sales from
their financial reports, we can assess how well this procedure predicts sales in these years. We
overpredict revenue by only around 5% in both years (a predicted $53.6 and $65.9 billion versus an
actual $50.8 and $62.9 billion in 2014 and 2015, respectively). We also predict that in aggregate,
mode 2 expenditures rise from $62 billion in 2014 to $80 billion in 2018 and mode 3 expenditures
rise from $49 billion to $61 billion.

5

Quantifying Cost Savings

We now turn to estimating the cost savings of expanding the network of FCs. We posit that these
cost savings arise from the FC network growth leading to a shortening of the outbound shipping
distance to customers from their assigned FC. A shorter shipping distance can benefit Amazon
in two ways. The company relies primarily on shipping companies to carry out its deliveries and
negotiates with shippers over fixed per-package rates. With more localized FCs, the outbound
shipping distance from the FC to the shipping service’s sorting center falls. Second, the expansion
may lead to elimination of the leg from the FC to the sorting facility for some locations, allowing
the shipping service to deliver the package directly from the FC to the customer. Under either
scenario, the shipper’s costs are lower, giving Amazon more bargaining power when negotiating
their per package shipping rates.31
For each mode-specific effect ξ˜jt , j = 1, 2, or 3, and each region trend ∆ξr0t , we perform the following regression:
m̂t = γ0 + γ1 ln(t) + γ2 ln(t)2 + t , where m̂t represents the estimated 2006-2013 time trend under consideration.
Using the estimates of γ, we predict future values of mt .
31
See http://nyti.ms/1fUabBh, accessed on 1/17/2017, for a discussion of Amazon’s bargaining leverage in negotiating with delivery companies.
30

24

Profit Function
To quantify potential economies of density in distribution, we formulate a profit function for Amazon
that depends on the rollout of FCs in a similar manner as the rollout of Wal-Mart stores studied
in Holmes (2011). Relative to Wal-Mart’s sequence of store openings, Amazon’s rollout of FCs
features far fewer openings. We therefore assume a relatively parsimonious structure for Amazon’s
decision process. The profit function represents the expected stream of discounted annual profits
starting from the begging of our sample (2006) and it is made up of three primary components. The
components are the annual variable profit, which depends on the locations of the FCs, the annual
fixed costs necessary to operate the network of FCs, and the one time sunk costs necessary to open
the collection of FCs. We assume that, in 2006, Amazon has perfect foresight in predicting these
components and chooses the rollout that maximizes their expected discounted stream of profits.
We now describe these three components in more detail. We summarize the set of FCs that
Amazon operates across counties in the vector at , with ait = 1 if there is a FC in county i in year t.
The collection of at over time, which we denote as a below, represents the ‘rollout’ of the network
of FCs. We assume that variable profit in year t from county i is given by:
πit (at ; θ) = µRit (at ) − θdit (at )Rit (at )

(8)

where Rit (at ) is the revenue generated in county i, which is a function of at due to sales tax
implications. As we don’t find strong support for convenience effects in Section 4, we assume
that the revenue is independent of any of our measures of shipping speed. In practice, we use the
estimates of Specification 1 of Table 6 as the primitives defining the demand model. The term µ
is the share of revenue that Amazon receives as profit excluding net shipping costs. Largely for
convenience, we assume µ is constant across all periods and set it to 0.23 based on information
obtained from Amazon’s financial reports, as we discuss further in Appendix B.
We denote variable net shipping costs by θdit (at )Rit (at ), where the parameter θ measures the
net shipping cost per mile per dollar of goods sold and dit (at ) is the distance from consumers
in county i to the FC Amazon uses for them. The reason these costs are interpreted as the net
shipping cost is because we allow µ to account for any shipping costs which are recouped through
shipping revenue. Additionally, in our primary specification, we assume that dit is the minimum
of the great-circle distance between the population weighted centroid of county i the network FCs
open in year t.
The annual fixed costs of operating a FC that is Li square feet and employs Ai workers in
county i are given by Fi :
Fi = wi Ai + ri Li

(9)

where wi is the county-level wage obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and ri is rental
rate per square foot calculated from the SNL data. According to our measures, these fixed costs
25

increase from $1.2 billion in 2006 to $3.7 billion in 2013 due leasing more FC space and hiring
additional employees to run the additional FCs.
We assume that there are sunk costs associated with opening a FC in year t, denoted St ,
that do not vary by county. Such sunk costs include machinery and other materials used in the
construction of an FC. Given these three components, the discounted sum of Amazon’s total profit
across counties starting in 2006 is:
Π(a; θ) =

∞
X

β t−2006

t=2006

X

πit (at ; θ) − Fit ait − St (ait − ait−1 )

(10)

i

where β is the discount factor, which we set to 0.95. The profit maximization problem in 2006, in
terms of the network rollout, can then be written as:
max Π(a; θ)
a

(11)

By revealed preference, we know that profit under the observed network rollout (ao ) must be greater
than any alternative rollout (a), or:
Π(ao ; θ) ≥ Π(a; θ)∀a 6= a0

(12)

This allows us to formulate a set of moment inequalities that we use to estimate the value of θ.

Moment Inequalities
As in Holmes (2011), we construct moment inequalities by comparing the discounted profits of the
observed sequence of openings with counter-factual roll-out scenarios. We focus on counter-factual
roll-outs that swap the opening dates of two FC clusters. Each swap consists of moving the opening
date of the earliest FC in the cluster. The total number of unique perturbations, after removing
swaps of FCs that opened in the same year, is 1,575, where we include planned FC openings through
2018, as listed in MWPVL, to maximize the number of possible perturbations.
Relative to perturbations that consider, e.g., alternative locations the company could have
chosen but did not, simply swapping the opening dates of two FCs, t and t0 , has the advantage
that the comparison of the firm’s profit streams under the perturbed and the actual FC roll outs
does not require knowledge of post-sample continuation values. The latter cancel out, allowing us
to impose optimality conditions without observing – or predicting as the equilibrium outcome of
maximizing the profit from network formation in Equation (11) – the complete sequence of future
FC openings. Since we assume that sunk costs vary only over time, but not by location, the firm
incurs the same total sunk costs across FCs in any given year t under the actual network and the
perturbed networks we consider. Sunk costs thus do not affect the relative profit comparison of
alternative network roll outs; our estimation procedure does not identify their magnitudes.
26

Consider two FC opening sequences: observed sequence a0 , and a counter-factual opening
sequence. While the following exposition applies to any alternative network roll-out, we focus on
those alternative sequences we consider in estimation. Thus, denote as aj,k the roll-out of FCs
that results from switching FC j’s opening date with that of FC k, holding fixed the opening
dates of all remaining FCs as observed in the data. We order FCs by their opening date, so that
tj < tj+1 , j = 1, ..., J, denoting as tj the opening date of FC j and as J the total number of
FC cluster openings during our sample period; J = 60. If profits were measured without error,
revealed preference combined with profit maximization implies the following linear profit difference
inequality:

y j,k − xj,k θ ≥ 0, where

y

j,k

=

xj,k =

2018
X
t=2006
2018
X
t=2006

"
β

t−2006

(13)

 

X 
j,k
0
µ Rit (a0t ) − Rit (aj,k
)
−
F
a
−
F
a
it it
it it
t

#

i

i
Xh
j,k
dit (a0t )Rit (a0t ) − dit (aj,k
)R
(a
)
β t−2006
it
t
t
i

where y j,k is the discounted profit differential net of shipping costs and xj,k is the discounted
difference in revenue-weighted shipping distance from comparing the observed opening sequence to
one that has swapped the opening dates of FCs j and k.
In order to form the values of y j,k and xj,k , we calculate Amazon’s total revenue under both a0
and aj,k . Any revenue differences come from changes in the timing of sales tax collection when the
opening date of FC j is swapped with the opening date of FC k. That is, when computing Rit (a0t )
and Rit (aj,k
t ), we assume that all other aspects affecting revenue, including the prices and behavior
of competitors, are fixed at the levels estimated in the demand model.
Due to the importance of the timing of sales tax collection, we have to make an assumption
regarding Amazon’s expectation at the time of committing to a FC about when sales tax collection
liability commences given FC entry into a state. A concrete example illustrates the challenge:
consider a counterfactual where we swap the opening dates of a Pennsylvania FC that opened in
2008 and resulted in PA sales tax collection starting in 2011 with an Indiana FC that opened in
2007 but resulted in sales tax collection only in 2014. Several alternatives present themselves. In
our main specification, we assume agnostically that Amazon expects sales tax collection to begin
in a state at the date of the earliest opening of an FC in that state, and thus, that the observed
network is optimal under this expectation. In the specific example, this would imply that Amazon’s
profit under the observed sequence, where Amazon begins collecting sales taxes in Pennsylvania
at its observed FC opening date in 2008 and in Indiana at its FC opening date of 2007 is greater

27

than the alternative profit when the FC opening date and onset of tax collection move to 2007 in
Pennsylvania and to 2008 in Indiana. In the Appendix, we present estimation results for a perfect
foresight assumption, where Amazon has correct expectations about the outcome of negotiations
with each state government regarding the timing of sales tax collections and assume that this statespecific time lag remains the same when we change the opening date of an FC in a perturbation.
While Amazon’s true expectations likely lie between these two extremes, the results are similar
under this assumption.
The remaining inputs in y j,k and xj,k are the differences in revenue weighted shipping distance
and fixed costs. The shipping distance to consumers in county i and in year t changes under the
perturbed network if the swap of opening dates results in a different FC being the closest to county
i in year t. For example, the closest FC to a consumer living in central PA in 2007 under the
observed network was one located in Delaware. The swap with the IN FC results in an FC being
open in PA in 2007, implying a shorter shipping distance to consumers in central PA starting in
2007. Finally, in calculating discounted profit under a perturbed network, we assume that the
FC’s square footage and labor force are unaffected by an opening date swap. As a result, the
counterfactual Pennsylvania FC that opens in 2007 instead of 2008 continues to have the fixed cost
that we assign to it based on its own MWPVL information.
The parameter of interest, θ, is the net shipping cost per mile per dollar of revenue.32 Its
magnitude is bounded by two types of profitability comparisons. First, observing Amazon entering
relatively early into a high-tax state when a low-tax (but further away) option was available, but
chosen later, identifies a lower bound of the shipping cost parameter. For these comparisons, we
predict a negative pre-shipping profit differential of the observed network roll out relative to the
relevant counterfactual roll out sequences, aj,k (i.e. y j,k < 0), either due to relative revenue losses
or fixed cost increases. For the observed roll out to be preferred nevertheless, such a loss has to be
more than offset by a reduction in revenue-weighted shipping distance (i.e. xj,k < 0). This gives a
lower bound on the shipping cost so that the decrease in weighted shipping distance, when scaled
by θ, exactly makes up for the loss in pre-shipping profit.
Second, for other perturbations, we predict higher pre-shipping profit (y j,k > 0), but also an
increased shipping distance (xj,k > 0), for the observed configuration relative to the alternative.
These correspond to instances where Amazon chose to enter a FC relatively early into a low-tax
state, when a high-tax option that was closer to its customer base was available but chosen later.
For the observed roll out sequence to be optimal, the profit impact of the increased weighted
32
Note that this interpretation of θ implicitly assumes that the expansion of the FC network does not affect inbound
shipping routes and costs from the manufacturers to the FC. If a share of inbound shipping costs were passed on to
Amazon, its wholesale price would depend on its FC network, which would confound the effect of its own shipping
costs on profitability through θ. The fact that Amazon’s suppliers already deliver goods to many other retailers
across the US and/or have their own widespread distribution network alleviates this concern. For example, Barnes &
Noble requires book publishers to deliver inventory directly to stores, while Walmart requires shipment to distribution
centers, which are increasingly close to Amazon’s FCs with Amazon’s expansion. (The average distance from a FC
to the closest Walmart fulfillment center falls from 92.2 miles in 2006 to 65.4 miles in 2013.)

28

shipping distance cannot exceed the pre-shipping profit differential, yielding an upper bound on
the shipping cost.
While this discussion compares exact pre-shipping profitability and shipping cost for alternative
paths, in practice we measure both quantities with error, for a number of reasons. These include: (i)
measurement error in or omitted contributions to the fixed operating costs of FCs, (ii) estimation
error in the firm’s revenue that would affect both y j,k and xj,k , or (iii) a mis-representation of
the role of the geopolitical environment on Amazon’s profit and decision making. The political
environment affects firm profitability in several ways, including through potential public incentives
that reduce the ongoing cost of a FC being located in a particular jurisdiction and through the
timing of any change in sales tax collection triggered by the FC entry. Predicted revenue would not
correspond to the firm’s expected revenue at the time of the FC roll-out if Amazon’s beliefs of the
onset of its tax collection obligation and outcomes of negotiations with local governments differed
from our assumption about their beliefs, or if changing the opening date of an FC from its actual
opening date, as we do in our perturbations, would have affected the company’s sales tax treatment
differently from what we assume in calculating the profitability of the perturbed network.
We thus observe ỹ j,k and x̃j,k . We assume that all sources of error in y j,k and xj,k enter
additively, resulting in:
ỹ j,k = y j,k + η j,k ,

(14)

x̃j,k = xj,k + ν j,k
and that η j,k and ν j,k are mean-zero disturbances that are independent of an L vector of nonnegative instruments z j,k :
E(z j,k η j,k ) = E(z j,k ν j,k ) = 0.

(15)

Interacting the empirical equivalent of the moment inequality condition in Equation (13) with the
instruments z j,k implies that:
h
i
E z j,k (ỹ j,k − θx̃j,k ) = E[z j,k (y j,k − θxj,k )] + E[z j,k (η j,k − θν j,k )] ≥ 0,
|
{z
}

(16)

=0

This leads to the following set of l sample moment inequalities as in Pakes et al. (2015):
J
J
1 X X j,k j,k
m̃l (θ) =
zl (ỹ − θx̃j,k ) ≥ 0,
M

∀l = 1, . . . , L.

j=1 k=j+1

where M equals to the number of perturbations: M =

29

P

j=1,...,J

P

k=j+1,...,J

1, or M = 1, 575.

(17)

Instruments
We use similar sets of instruments to the ones employed in Holmes (2011). The first set consists
of indicator variables that identify perturbations that capture the interaction between the effect of
sales taxes and shipping distance on the discounted profit differential net of shipping costs (ỹ j,k ) and
the discounted difference in weighted shipping distance (x̃j,k ). Recalling the discussion from above
on roll-out comparisons that inform the lower and upper bounds on the shipping cost per mile per
dollar, we select two types of “experiments.” To identify the lower bound, we look for counterfactual
roll-outs that both increase the average shipping distance and result in higher revenues (Group 1).
For the upper bound, we consider alternative roll-outs that decrease the shipping distance of the
network, while also reducing discounted revenue streams due to sales taxes being collected on a
sufficiently large number of customers early on. (Group 2).
1. Group 1 Perturbations: Increase in shipping distance. The indicator variable z1j,k equals to
one for all perturbations (j, k) such that (a) ỹ j,k < 0, and (b) x̃j,k < 0, zero otherwise,
j = 1, ..., J, k = j + 1, ..., J.
2. Group 2 Perturbations: Decrease in shipping distance. The indicator variable z2j,k equals
to one for all perturbations (j, k) such that (a) ỹ j,k > 0, and (b) x̃j,k > 0, zero otherwise,
j = 1, ..., J, k = j + 1, ..., J.
These indicator variables thus identify counterfactual sequence that qualify for experiments 1 and
2. We also experimented with delineating groups 1 and 2 into subgroups defined by the magnitude
of x̃j,k , similar to Holmes (2011), but did not find the results to be significantly different when
taking this approach.
The second set of instruments consists of interactions between z1j,k and z2j,k and positive transformations of the change in revenue-weighted shipping distance:33
j,k
x̃j,k
−
+ = x̃

min

j 0 =1,...,J,
k0 =j 0 +1,...,J

0

x̃j ,k

0

(18)

A complication in our setting relative to Holmes (2011) is that we assume that shipping costs
are variable, rather than fixed costs, so that we specify the profit function to depend on revenueweighted shipping distances, instead of a revenue-independent measure of shipping speed. Thus,
measurement error in revenue propagates to both ỹ j,k and x̃j,k ; as a result, z1j,k , z2j,k , and x̃j,k
+ are
not valid instruments.34
33

In alternative specifications in Appendix C, we include the transformed shipping distance separately, without
interacting them with z1j,k and z2j,k . This allows us to use all the perturbations in estimation rather than limiting
them to the Group 1 and 2 perturbations. Results are robust to this adjustment
34
In contrast, Holmes (2011) derives instruments based on exogenous profit differences including store density and
shipping distances, which are assumed to be fixed cost components of store profit.

30

We therefore construct an alternative set of instruments by projecting ỹ and x̃ on exogenous
determinants of the pre-shipping profit and weighted shipping distance differential for perturbation
(j, k). We run the regressions
ỹ j,k = βy Z j,k + j,k
y

(19)

x̃j,k = βx Z j,k + j,k
x
where Z j,k are exogenous shifters of ỹ j,k and x̃j,k . We employ the discounted sum of differences in
household weighted shipping distance, household weighted sales tax rates, and fixed costs, along
with indicators of instances where either FC j of FC k, or both, are not the first FC openings in
their state. We then use the estimates of β to form the predicted values of ỹ and x̃, which we call
ŷ and x̂. The latter are then used to re-calculate exogenous versions of the instruments, ẑ1j,k , ẑ2j,k ,
j,k
and x̂j,k
+ × ẑi , i = 1, 2. For reference, we present results from estimating the shipping cost with

both the original version of the instruments, together with this second version, below.

Estimation
Estimation is based on the moment inequalities of Equation 17. Our goal is to find the maximum
and minimum values of θ such that all moments are satisfied and to provide inference on the values
of these bounds. Due to the moments being informative about bounds on θ, rather than a point
estimate, inference under moment inequalities requires methods that differ from the methods traditionally used in a GMM setting. Therefore, we follow Andrews and Soares (2010) (AS hereafter)
in constructing confidence sets in which the true value of θ falls 95% of the time and report these
sets as our estimates. Intuitively, the AS method involves estimating a test statistic for a given
value of θ and rejecting the value of θ if the test statistic is less than the 95th percentile of the test
statistic distribution computed from a number of “bootstrapped” samples of perturbations. The
confidence set is the set of θs that are not rejected.
For a candidate value of the shipping cost parameter θ0 , we calculate the L sample moments
m̃(θ0 ) and the L × L sample variance covariance matrix of the empirical moments Σ̂(θ0 ). We
estimate Σ̂(θ0 ) using the method in Holmes (2011) to account for both error in the demand model
and correlation across perturbations. See appendix B for details. We then calculate the test
statistic:



 1

0 −1
0
2
T (θ ) = min M m̃(θ ) − t Σ̂(θ )
M m̃(θ ) − t
0

1
2

0

t≥0

(20)

1

where t is a k by 1 vector. Here, the term (M 2 m̃(θ0 ) − t) is equal to 0 when the moment is
1

satisfied and M 2 m̃(θ0 ) when it is not. Therefore, the test statistic equivalent to a standard GMM
objective function after replacing any positive moment with 0. In order to calculate the critical
31

value for the test statistic, we draw R bootstrap samples of perturbations. We sample J FCs from
the population with replacement, where J is the observed number of FC clusters, to form a set
which we denote Jr for a given bootstrap sample r. We then construct a set of perturbations ar
from swapping the opening dates of the FCs contained in Jr . Note that this could result in swaps
appearing multiple times and/or swaps eliminated from the bootstrap sample. For each bootstrap
sample r, we form:
 ∗∗ 0 −1

0
0
Tr (θ0 ) = min m̃∗∗
m̃∗∗
r (θ ) − t Σ̂r (θ )
r (θ ) − t
t≥0

(21)

∗∗
where m̃∗∗
r and Σ̂r are calculated using the bootstrap sample of perturbations and the procedure

in appendix B. The sample of R bootstrapped values of Tr allow us to find a critical value for the
original estimation sample’s value of T as the (1 − α)th sample quantile. Denote this critical value
as ĉ(θ0 , 1 − α). If T (θ0 ) > ĉ(θ0 , 1 − α), we reject the hypothesis that θ = θ0 and eliminate θ0 as a
candidate value.
AS suggest using a grid search in order to determine the confidence set. However, because we
only have one parameter to estimate, we begin with one value of θ0 in the confidence set (we employ
θ0 that minimizes Equation (20)), together with guesses at low and high values of θ0 outside the
confidence set, and use the bisection-method to find the maximum and the minimum value of θ0
such that T (θ0 ) ≤ ĉ(θ0 , 1 − α). We set R = 2000 and α = 0.95.

Shipping Distance, Sales Tax, and Fixed Cost Tradeoff
To provide some intuition for the variation in the data that identifies the per dollar per mile net
shipping cost, we provide a graphical description of the perturbations that illustrate the trade-off
Amazon faces between charging sales tax, shorter shipping distances and the fixed costs of operating
FCs.
Figure 6 displays four scatter plots, where each point represents data from one of the 1,575
perturbations. The y-axis in each plot represents the difference in the household level average
shipping distance during 2006-2018 between the observed network and the perturbed network.
For example, a value of -5 implies that the average shipping distance during 2006-2018 under the
perturbed network is 5 miles less than the average shipping distance under the observed network.
This varies from -10 to 20 miles; most perturbations are between -5 and 5 miles. Each x-axis
represents the difference in one or more components of Amazon’s profit function between the
observed network and the perturb network: Figure 6a uses the difference in the discounted sum
of pre-shipping profit (ỹ) during 2006-2018 in millions of dollars, Figure 6b the difference in the
discounted sum of pre-shipping variable profit (µ × R) during 2006-2018 in millions of dollars,
Figure 6c the difference in the total the number of households taxed during 2006-2018 in millions of

32

households, and Figure 6d the difference in the discounted sum of fixed costs (F ) during 2006-2018
in millions of dollars. In each plot, we display two lines of best fit, one for all perturbations (red)
and one for the subset of perturbations that qualify for Experiments 1 and 2 (yellow).
Recall that the identification of upper bound of the shipping cost parameter comes from situations where Amazon opened an FC in a low-population/low tax state early. This would result
in a situation where both the difference in pre-shipping profit and the difference in shipping distance are positive. The lower bound is identified from situations where Amazon opened an FC in
a high-population/high tax state early, which would result in both the difference in pre-shipping
profit and shipping distance being negative. Therefore, we expect a positive relationship between
the differences in pre-shipping profit and the average shipping distance. Figure 6b shows that this
positive relationship exists across all perturbations. Of course, this relationship becomes stronger
when we limit the perturbations to the ones that qualify for experiments 1 and 2.
In Figures 6a, 6c, and 6d we examine the sources of this positive relationship by decomposing
pre-shipping profit into the variable profits and the fixed costs. Figure 6a shows that there is a
positive correlation between the differences in pre-shipping variable profit and the difference in
the average shipping distance, a relationship that is due to the fact that the difference in the
average shipping distance is negatively correlated with the difference in the number of households
who are charged sales tax, seen in Figure 6c. Figure 6d suggests that there is actually a positive
correlation between the difference in the average shipping distance and the difference in total fixed
costs across all perturbations. This implies that FCs that are close to highly populated areas have
lower fixed costs, something that appears to be driven by a few outliers in the upper right and
lower left quadrant of the figure. However, in the perturbations that qualify for our experiments,
this relationship is negative.
Together the plots in Figure 6 suggest that Amazon faces a trade-off between charging sales
tax and shipping distance, with fixed costs also playing an important role. Therefore, identification
of the shipping cost parameter θ comes from both the tax/distance and the fixed cost/distance
trade-off.

Results
We present the 95% confidence sets for θ under various definitions of the instruments in the first
two panels of Table 10. We also show the number of perturbations that qualify for each experiment.
We first focus on Panel I, where we use the data to construct the instruments. The first
row displays results when using only the indicators of group membership, z1j,k and z2j,k , while the
second row adds the interaction between the indicators and x̃j,k
+ . We have explored including
higher order functions of x̃j,k
+ , with little change in the estimated bounds. The estimates imply
that the shipping cost per dollar per mile is between 4.43E-05 and 1.04E-04, with the addition of
the continuous distance-based instruments leading to a tighter interval, which we find to be true

33

across specifications.
Next, we turn to the second panel, where we display results when using a first-stage regression
to construct the instruments. Interestingly, this results in an upward shift of the confidence interval,
suggesting that correlation in the error terms across perturbations leads to a downward bias in the
estimates. The 95% confidence interval has a lower bound of around 5.50E-05 and an upper bound
of up to 2.26E-04. None of the confidence intervals include zero, suggesting that – as expected –
shipping cost and thus any cost savings from expansion are significantly different from 0.
The baseline results relied on the assumption that Amazon serves each customer from the
closest FC to the customer’s location, which as discussed above, does not recognize that the nearest
fulfillment center might not necessarily be the cheapest. In Panel 3, we therefore present shipping
cost estimates under the assumption that Amazon serves a customer from the FC with the lowest
transportation cost, where we predict the identity of the lowest-cost FC based on average delivery
flows between county locations (see Section 3 and Appendix A). Under this model the correlation
between the shipping distance and the sales tax effects of expansion is not as strong, which results
in wider confidence intervals. The fact that the latter do not include zero provides further evidence,
however, that expansion has led to significant cost savings.
For the remainder of the analysis, we focus on the estimates in the second row of Panel 2, where
we employ both ẑ1j,k and ẑ2j,k and interactions with x̂j,k
+ as instruments. These results imply that it
costs Amazon between $0.17 and $0.47 to ship $30 of goods, the median order in the raw comScore
data, 100 miles, net of shipping revenue. Therefore, net of shipping revenue, it costs Amazon
somewhere between $0.52 to $1.40 for a $30 shipment covering 300 miles, the average shipping
distance in 2006, and between $0.20 and $0.53 in 2018, when the average shipping distance is only
115 miles, a significant amount of savings due to the expansion of the network.
Robustness
We compute three different sets of robustness estimates, which are presented in detail in Appendix
C. First, in calculating revenue under a perturbed FC opening sequence, we assume that there is a
state-specific difference between the opening date of a FC and the onset of Amazon’s tax collection
obligations, and that this lag equals to the observed lag, even when the opening date of the particular
FC differs under the perturbation. This assumption would reflect that the lag in the change in tax
liability might be due to Amazon negotiating with (or challenging) the state government regarding
their obligation to collect taxes. This assumption would imply that Amazon correctly predicted
the amount of time they would be able to avoid collecting sales tax in a given state, either through
negotiation or legal challenges, at the time they made their FC roll-out decision.
Second, we allow consumers to value the availability of same day shipping. Because same day
shipping was largely implemented after our sample period, it may be the case that consumers value
this service and that Amazon placed FCs taking this into consideration, which would be outside

34

of our model. The opening of small FCs outside of major metropolitan areas is evidence that such
concerns may be material. As we cannot easily estimate this demand side effect with our data, we
instead impose one, holding the remaining demand side parameters fixed at the estimated levels,
and consider the effect of varying its strength on the estimated supply side.
Third, we allow for a more sophisticated logistic model. The true shipping logistics model that
Amazon employs is likely significantly more complicated than the ones assumed above, where a
consumer is always served by e.g., the closest FC. In this robustness check, we allow shipments
to county i to come from multiple FCs, where the amount coming from each FC is a function of
the average shipping cost estimate from the Commodity Flow Survey and the capacity of the FC,
approximated by its size.
None of these adjustments change the results to a large degree, as we find a lower bound of the
confidence interval for the shipping cost per dollar per mile as low as 1.06E-05 and an upper bound
as high as 2.63E-04. This provides confidence that our model captures the important features
of the data generating process and that our estimates are not systematically biased due to our
assumptions.
Implications
We perform three exercises assuming that the shipping costs fall between 5.75E-05 and 1.55E-04 as
under specification 2 in Panel 2. First, we compute the total revenue, the total shipping costs and
the total fixed costs over our sample period (2006-2018) under the observed network and under the
2006 network, to isolate the contribution of the FC expansion to the firm’s profitability over this
time frame while holding other features of the market, such as prices and demand growth, fixed.
The results are reported in the first four rows of Table 11. Predictably, Amazon loses revenue
due to the tax effect and increases fixed operating costs as it expands its network, but it saves a
significant amount in shipping costs. Specifically, the expansion led to a reduction in revenue of
nearly $9.6 billion, or a loss of $2.2 billion in profit net of shipping cost, and an increase in fixed
operating cost of $3.3 billion. This is offset by between a $5.0 and $13.3 billion decrease shipping
costs, which represents a 51% reduction.35
One weakness of this exercise is that it does not consider that Amazon might have difficulty
fulfilling all orders in the later half of our sample with a distribution network held fixed at 2006
levels due to capacity constraints. Assuming that Amazon could adjust its short-run capacity at
a cost in order to fulfill orders, this implies that we are underestimating the total fulfillment costs
under the 2006 network and that our results are likely a lower bound on the total cost savings from
expansion.
While this exercise considers cost savings during the FC roll-out, one might also be interested
35

The linearity of the shipping cost function results in the same percentage reduction for the upper and lower
bounds

35

in the long-run effects of expansion on the firm’s variable cost and market position. While our
model is challenged to address this directly, we form a measure of the long-term effect of expansion
by comparing average profit margins including shipping costs in 2018, relative to what they would
have been had the distribution network not grown. We compute weighted average profit margins
in 2018 under the observed network of FCs and under the network in 2006, where the weights are
based on the expenditures from each county:
X

(µ − θdi,2018 (a))ωi,2018

i

where ωi,2018 is county i’s share of aggregate 2018 revenue and µ, as above, is 0.23. For the actual
network, a0 , the overall margin is 22.4 cents for every dollar sold under the lower bound of the
confidence interval and 21.5 cents under the upper bound. Under the 2006 network, a2006 , the
margin falls to between 21.3 cents and 18.4 cents per dollar, a reduction of between 1.2 and 3.1
cents for every dollar, or between 5 and 14%. As above, these numbers are likely lower bounds
when considering that expansion also eases the costs of adjusting short term capacity.
Finally, we estimate how much the expansion has reduced the average net cost of shipping an
order over the sample period. We calculate the average net shipping cost per order by summing
all distribution-related costs: the yearly fixed costs and net shipping costs across all counties based
on our estimates of θ. We then divide these total costs by the number of orders in each year. As
our model does not predict the number of orders, we rely on the raw comScore data to create an
annual measure of average expenditure per order for the sample shoppers and use the predicted
expenditures from the model to calculate the expected number of orders per year. Figure 7 shows
that the net average shipping cost falls from between $2.67 and $4.69 in 2006 to between $1.09 and
$2.14 in 2013. Our model projects that the cost per order will continue to fall to approximately $1
by 2018.
Put together, these three exercises demonstrate that Amazon’s expansion has resulted in significant cost decreases as a result of the FC expansion.
Discussion
Using the results of both the demand and supply models, we conclude with some suggestive evidence
of the sources of the increase in concentration in online retail over the past decade that motivated
the analysis. Two sources of increased concentration present themselves: first, the quality of the
leading online platforms could have increased over time; second, due to economies of scale and
density in distribution, the large online retailers increasingly benefit from cost advantages. Here,
we attempt to evaluate, in a reduced form, the gains in Amazon’s market position that can be
attributed to each of these two factors.
To do so, we decompose mode level preferences plotted in Figure 4 into a price effect and a

36

quality effect. Recall, that the fixed effect, ξˆjt , includes the effect of prices, meaning that we can
decompose the mode preferences into a price component, p̄jt , and a quality component, Ξjt :
ξ̂jt

z
}|
{
ξ¯jt = (1 − σ̂) ln(pjt ) + ξ˜jt + β̂j Z̄t + λ̂j C̄t
|
{z
} |
{z
}
p̄jt

Ξjt

Our model does not predict price levels; we instead assume constant margins over time. We
therefore go to the raw data in order to form a ‘price-index’ for each mode and year.36 Figure
8a plots these price indices in absolute terms. For reference, we also translate the absolute price
index into a contribution to mode preferences, (1 − σ̂) ln(pjt ), on the right axis. Amazon’s prices
steadily decline from 2006-2013, while the prices of non-taxed online competitors (mode 3) stay
relatively constant. The prices of other taxed online competitors (mode 2) follow Amazon’s early
on, but level off from 2010 to 2013. Returning to Figure 7 and relying on the mid-points of the
confidence interval, Amazon’s costs decrease by approximately 55% over this time period, while
prices decline by approximately 47%. While we cannot causally relate the price decreases to the cost
declines using our model, this provides suggestive evidence that Amazon passed some of the cost
savings realized through the expansion of the network onto consumers, resulting in a competitive
advantage.
Figure 8b displays the quality contribution to mode preferences (Ξjt ), which again shows an
increase on Amazon compared to the other two modes. While there are many different components
that could make up this quality, we examine one which we can measure with the raw data: product
assortment. We use the comScore data aggregated to the category level and calculate the HHI
using expenditure shares across product categories for each mode and year and plot it in Figure 8c.
Amazon’s assortment HHI is slightly higher than mode 2 in 2006, implying that Amazon sold fewer
product varieties at that time than all the taxed sites put together. Mode 3 sells an even larger
variety, which is not surprising considering that the category is made up of the large collection
of non-taxed online competitors. Over time, we see that Amazon has increased its assortment
significantly, reaching approximately the levels of mode 3 by 2013. Both modes 2 and 3 have kept
their assortment relatively constant over time. The patterns in these two graphs suggest that at
least some of the increase in Amazon’s share is due to an increase in assortment.
36

We run the following OLS regression:
pocjt = ζjt + λc + ocjt

where the dependent variable is the tax and shipping inclusive price on purchase occasion o, in product category c,
on mode j, and in year t. In practice, in order to calculate the dependent variable, we subtract the sum of the tax
exclusive price of the individual products in a basket from the basket total and then divide this by the total number
of products in the basket. This provides a measure of the average of the shipping charges and taxes per product
within a basket. We then add this average to the price of the individual product to form the tax inclusive price of
the given product. We use the estimated value of ζjt as the price index of mode j in year t.

37

6

Conclusion

We examine sources for the increase in concentration of online retail over the last decade, with
a focus on the economies of density associated with Amazon’s large scale distribution network.
Amazon benefits from its fulfillment centers being close to consumers for two potential reasons:
first, the customer herself may value faster shipping, and second, it saves on delivery costs. At the
same time, state laws dictate that Amazon must charge sales tax to consumers in most states where
the company has a physical presence. By raising the tax-inclusive price the consumer faces, this
reduces consumers’ willingness-to-pay for Amazon’s services. Further, locating close to significant
population clusters also comes with higher fixed costs of operating fulfillment centers. In order to
analyze the connection between observed expansion and the increase in concentration, we estimate
the contribution of these different effects of expansion to firm profitability.
Our evidence is consistent with a trade-off between taxes and delivery costs savings: consumers
dislike paying taxes, meaning the company must have benefited in other ways – faster shipping
and/or reduced delivery costs – from FC network expansion. Our demand estimates indicate that
consumer demand does not respond to our measures of shipping times, most likely due to the
fact that expansion did not result in faster shipping speeds for the vast majority of consumers
apart from the possibility of one-day shipping. Therefore, we find that the network expansion
from 2006 to 2018 resulted in a loss in revenue of around $9.6 billion dollars for Amazon, but at
the same time reduced the average shipping distance from the FC to the consumer by around 180
miles by the end of 2018. We use a moment inequalities approach, together with the assumption
that Amazon’s observed network expansion path is optimal, to infer shipping cost savings from
the observed fulfillment center network relative to alternative configurations. Results suggest that
Amazon spends between $0.17 and $0.47 per 100 miles for every $30 dollars of goods shipped, and
that the reduction in shipping distance associated with the expansion of its distribution network
has resulted in between $5 and $13.3 billion in savings on shipping costs and an increase in profit
margins of up to 14%.
These results imply that economies of scale in e-commerce are an important driver of the
channel’s growth. We find that Amazon expanded its network of FCs in order to reduce its average
handling cost by a significant margin. These variable cost savings were realized through important
sunk and fixed cost investments, most of whom we do not account for in our estimation strategy
that exploits the timing of individual openings, rather the magnitude of the geographic expansion.
Therefore, this investment strategy is profitable only to the extent that Amazon expects to maintain
a dominant position as an online retail platform.
While our model does not allow us to link these estimated cost savings and the observed
concentration in online retail over the sample period directly, we show that the decrease in costs is
mirrored by a decrease in prices relative to other online retailers thus providing suggestive evidence
of the importance of economies of density. Further, we show that improvements in the quality of
38

Amazon’s platform is another driver of the increase in concentration, with an increase in product
assortment likely being a source for this improvement.

References
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, T. Ho, and W. Qian (2013). Cross border shopping: Do consumers
respond to taxes or prices? Working Paper.
Agarwal, S., N. Marwell, and L. McGranahan (2013). Consumption responses to temporary tax
incentives: Evidence from state sales holidays. Working Paper.
Agatz, N. A., M. Fleischmann, and J. A. Van Nunen (2008). E-fulfillment and multi-channel
distribution–a review. European Journal of Operational Research 187 (2), 339–356.
Alm, J. and M. I. Melnik (2005). Sales taxes and the decision to purchase online. Public Finance
Review 33 (2), 184–212.
Anderson, E. T., N. M. Fong, D. I. Simester, and C. E. Tucker (2010). How sales taxes affect customer and firm behavior: The role of search on the internet. Journal of Marketing Research 47 (2),
229–239.
Andrews, D. W. and G. Soares (2010). Inference for parameters defined by moment inequalities
using generalized moment selection. Econometrica 78 (1), 119–157.
Asplund, M., R. Friberg, and F. Wilander (2007). Demand and distance: evidence on cross-border
shopping. Journal of Public Economics 91 (1), 141–157.
Ballard, C. L. and J. Lee (2007). Internet purchases, cross-border shopping, and sales taxes.
National Tax Journal 60 (4), 711–725.
Barwick, P. J. (2008). What happens when wal-mart comes to town: An empirical analysis of the
discount retailing industry. Econometrica 76 (6), 1263–1316.
Baugh, B., I. Ben-David, and H. Park (2014). The “Amazon Tax”: Empirical Evidence from
Amazon and Main Street Retailers. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bruce, D., W. F. Fox, and L. Luna (2009). State and local government sales tax revenue losses
from electronic commerce. State Tax Notes 52 (7), 537–558.
Brynjolfsson, E., Y. J. Hu, and M. D. Smith (2003). Consumer surplus in the digital economy: Estimating the value of increased product variety at online booksellers. Managment Science 49 (11),
1580–1596.

39

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence. The
American Economic Review 99 (4), 1145–1177.
De los Santos, B., A. Hortaçsu, and M. R. Wildenbeest (2012). Testing models of consumer search
using data on web browsing and purchasing behavior. The American Economic Review 102 (6),
2955–2980.
Einav, L., J. Levin, and N. Sundaresan (2014). Sales taxes and internet commerce. The American
Economic Review 104 (1), 1–26.
Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009). Tax sensitivity and home state preferences in internet purchasing. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2), 53–71.
Goolsbee, A. (2000a). In a world without borders: The impact of taxes on internet commerce. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2), 561–576.
Goolsbee, A. (2000b). Internet commerce, tax sensitivity, and the generation gap. Tax Policy and
the Economy, 45–65.
Goolsbee, A., M. F. Lovenheim, and J. Slemrod (2010). Playing with fire: Cigarettes, taxes, and
competition from the internet. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 131–154.
Holmes, T. J. (2011). The diffusion of Wal-Mart and economies of density. Econometrica 79,
253–302.
Pakes, A., J. Porter, K. Ho, and J. Ishii (2015). Moment inequalities and their application. Econometrica 83 (1), 315–334.
Quan, T. and K. Williams (2016). Product Variety, Across-Market Demand Heterogeneity, and the
Value of Online Retail. Working Paper.
Scanlan, M. A. (2007). Tax Sensitivity in Electronic Commerce. Fiscal Studies 28 (4), 417–436.
Smith, M. D. and E. Brynjolfsson (2001). Consumer decision-making at an internet shopbot: Brand
still matters. Journal of Industrial Economics 49 (4), 541–558.
Zheng, F. (2014). Spatial Competition and Preemptive Entry in the Discount Retail Industry.
Working Paper.

40

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Expansion of Fulfillment Center Network

Year

Count
of FCs

States
with FC

States
Taxed

Counties
Taxed

Avg Distance (m)

Avg FC Size
(000 sqft)

Avg FC
Employees

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

8
9
12
17
17
24
32
41
48
54
90
101
104

6
7
10
10
10
10
12
14
14
16
27
28
28

4
4
5
5
5
5
8
16
23
26
27
28
28

317
317
379
379
379
379
752
1,189
1,644
1,937
1,983
2,047
2,047

297
292
236
227
243
236
223
207
175
152
123
116
116

544
522
487
570
570
657
718
765
707
665
562
552
558

504
484
452
529
529
610
666
709
656
616
521
511
517

Notes: The number of states where purchases from Amazon are subject to sales tax exceeds the
number of states with a fulfillment center due to states negotiating for sales tax collection to begin
immediately upon entering an agreement with Amazon for a fulfillment center to be build in the state,
even if the center opening occurs later. Average distance is the weighted average distance in miles
from each county centroid to the nearest fulfillment center, where the weights are based on county
number of households.

41

Table 2: Taxed and Non-Taxed Competitors
Sales Rank

Taxed

Non-Taxed

1

walmart.com

dell.com

2

jcpenney.com

qvc.com

3

staples.com

yahoo.net

4

victoriassecret.com

hsn.com

5

officedepot.com

yahoo.com

6

bestbuy.com

quillcorp.com

7

apple.com

overstock.com

8

target.com

ebay.com

9

sears.com

orientaltrading.com

10

costco.com

zappos.com

Total (%)

192 (34)

375 (66)

Notes: Table displays top 10 domains in terms of 2013 expenditures
in the comScore data that we define as taxed and non-taxed.

Table 3: Household Online Purchasing

Year

Households
(000)

Counties
(%)

Online Expenditures
($/year)

Amazon
($/year)

Taxed Competitors
($/year)

Non-Taxed Competitors
($/year)

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

87.1
90.0
57.0
55.9
54.1
63.4
55.2
46.5

92
92
87
85
84
87
84
78

217
215
232
226
243
301
283
273

23
25
32
37
51
78
108
100

91
92
102
96
95
121
99
91

104
98
99
94
98
102
77
83

Notes: Households refers to the number of households in the comScore data, together with the percentage of counties
they represent. Expenditures are the unweighted average spending by the representative household in each county.

42

Table 4: Regression Models of Propensity of Purchasing from Amazon

Tax Elasticity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.156**
(0.074)

-0.142*
(0.074)
-0.019*
(0.010)

-0.158**
(0.075)

-0.152**
(0.074)

-0.162**
(0.075)

-0.164**
(0.075)

-0.162**
(0.075)

Local Express Delivery
Log Distance

0.001
(0.002)

1 or 2 Day Priority

0.019*
(0.011)

1, 2, or 3 Day Package

-0.004
(0.004)

1 Day First Class

-0.005
(0.004)

1, 2, or 3 Day Standard

Obs
R-Sq

-0.004
(0.004)
2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

2,291,291
0.355

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Depicted are linear probability models of a household’s likelihood of choosing Amazon
on a given purchase occasion. Standard errors are clustered at the county/year level. Product category and year fixed
effects included in all models along with consumer demographics and measures of offline competition. Local Express
Delivery indicates whether same day shipping is available in the household’s county at the time of the purchase
occasion. Log Distance is the log of the great-circle from the centroid of the household’s county to the nearest
fulfillment center. For Specifications (4)-(7), shipping times are grouped into “long” and “short,” with “long” being
the excluded category.

43

Table 5: Regression Models of Annual Amazon Expenditures per County

Amazon Purchase Taxed

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.105*
(0.060)

-0.105*
(0.060)
0.147
(0.185)

-0.104*
(0.061)

-0.108*
(0.061)

-0.096
(0.061)

-0.104*
(0.061)

-0.096
(0.061)

Local Express Delivery
Log Distance

-0.002
(0.035)

1 or 2 Day Priority

-0.057
(0.107)

1, 2, or 3 Day Package

0.033
(0.042)

1 Day First Class

0.004
(0.052)

1, 2, or 3 Day Standard

Obs
R-Sq

0.033
(0.042)
12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

12,486
0.448

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Depicted are regression models of the log of annual Amazon expenditures per county.
Year and county fixed effects included in all models along with consumer demographics and measures of offline
competition. Amazon Purchase Taxed is an indicator variable that a purchase from Amazon is subject to sales tax
in the county in a given year. Local Express Delivery indicates whether same day shipping is available in the county
in that year. Log Distance is the log of the great-circle distance from the country centroid to the nearest fulfillment
center. For Specifications (4)-(7), shipping times are grouped into “long” and “short,” with “long” being the excluded
category.

44

Table 6: CES Demand Estimates: Effects of Taxes and Shipping Speed

Tax Elasticity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-1.430***
(0.486)

-1.454***
(0.486)
0.186
(0.149)

-1.471***
(0.490)

-1.440***
(0.486)

-1.400***
(0.486)

-1.429***
(0.486)

-1.400***
(0.486)

Local Express Delivery
Log Distance

-0.011
(0.016)

1 or 2 Day Priority

-0.058
(0.058)

1, 2, or 3 Day Package

0.040
(0.031)

1 Day First Class

0.002
(0.034)

1, 2, or 3 Day Standard
Obs
R-Sq

0.040
(0.031)
42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

42,390
0.236

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are the estimated tax elasticity and the effect of shipping speeds. Regressions
include county, mode-year, and region-year fixed effects along with mode-level effects of local demographics and
competition. Shipping speed proxies described in notes to Table 5.

Table 7: CES Demand Estimates: Demographics

Total Offline Competitors
Large Offline Competitors
Income
% Pop Black
% Pop White
% Pop Asian

Amazon

Mode 2

Mode 3

-0.002
(0.016)
-0.010
(0.006)
0.655***
(0.020)
-0.309
(0.271)
-0.130
(0.258)
1.660**
(0.821)

-0.002
(0.016)
-0.016***
(0.006)
0.638***
(0.018)
0.328
(0.241)
0.442*
(0.253)
-0.386
(0.800)

-0.003
(0.016)
-0.010*
(0.006)
0.629***
(0.018)

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are the estimated demographic effects from Specification (1) in Table
6. Total Offline Competitors denotes the number of retail establishments in the county, measured in hundreds of
establishments, and Large Offline Competitors the number of retail establishments with more than 50 employees.
Mode 2 denotes taxed online competitors and mode 3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

45

Table 8: CES Demand Estimates: Mode Fixed Effects
Year

Amazon

Mode 2

Mode 3

2006

-1.777***
(0.343)
-1.421***
(0.352)
-0.850**
(0.354)
-0.630*
(0.355)
-0.578
(0.356)
-0.071
(0.354)
0.220
(0.352)
0.663*
(0.354)

-0.597*
(0.322)
-0.303
(0.332)
0.088
(0.334)
0.123
(0.334)
-0.020
(0.335)
0.338
(0.334)
0.536
(0.333)
0.711**
(0.335)

0.191**
(0.084)
0.461***
(0.091)
0.464***
(0.095)
0.326***
(0.098)
0.496***
(0.095)
0.684***
(0.094)
0.934***
(0.102)

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are the estimated mode-year fixed effects from Specification (1) in Table 6.

Table 9: Predicted Revenue ($Billion)
Year

Amazon

Mode 2

Mode 3

Total

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

5.61
7.77
9.78
12.28
17.88
25.27
32.46
40.79

21.21
27.76
27.81
29.06
34.91
42.56
50.22
51.23

25.98
30.65
29.01
29.37
35.38
35.73
41.82
43.22

52.79
66.18
66.60
70.71
88.17
103.57
124.50
135.24

2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

53.59
65.85
80.04
96.09
114.11

61.70
66.57
71.30
75.90
80.33

49.14
52.33
55.43
58.44
61.34

164.44
184.74
206.78
230.43
255.78

Notes: Depicted are the revenue predictions based on the model estimates. Out-of-sample revenues from 20142018 are predicted based on projections of the mode-year and region-year fixed effects. See Section 5 for details.
Mode 2 denotes taxed online competitors and mode 3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

46

Table 10: Shipping Cost Estimates

Instruments

95% Confidence Set

# Perturbations
Group 1 Group 2

(1)
(2)

z̃
z̃ j,k z̃ j,k × x̃j,k
+

I. Closest FC: No First Stage
[3.43E-05,1.04E-04]
332
[3.60E-05,9.29E-05]
332

(1)
(2)

ẑ j,k
j,k
ẑ , ẑ j,k × x̂j,k
+

II. Closest FC: First Stage
[5.45E-05,2.26E-04]
263
[5.75E-05,1.55E-04]
263

564
564

(1)
(2)

III. Lowest Cost FC: First Stage
ẑ j,k
[3.90E-05,1.20E-04]
180
j,k
j,k
j,k
ẑ , ẑ × x̂+
[3.50E-05,4.56E-04]
180

557
557

j,k

496
496

Notes: We depict confidence sets for Amazon’s net shipping cost per dollar of goods sold per
mile constructed using the methods of Andrews and Soares (2010). Panel I uses in Specification
(1) two indicators for informative perturbations as instruments z̃a , and adds in Specification
(2) these indicators interacted with the shifted change in revenue-scaled shipping distance x̃+
a.
Panels II and III use indicators of informative perturbations ẑ constructed from exogenous
contributions to pre-shipping profit and revenue-scaled shipping distance. Panel III assumes
that Amazon uses the lowest-cost FC to serve the customers in a county. The last two columns
indicate the number of perturbations that belong to each experiment.

Table 11: Effect of Fulfillment Center Expansion

µ×Revenue ($B)
Labor Cost ($B)
Land Cost ($B)
Shipping Cost ($B)
2018 Margin (%)

Observed Network

2006 Network

Change

Percent Change (%)

129.15
4.30
0.57
[4.66 , 12.55]
[22.4 , 21.5]

131.36
1.41
0.14
[9.62 , 25.91]
[21.3 , 18.4]

-2.21
2.90
0.43
[-4.96 , -13.36]
[1.2 , 3.1]

-1.71
67.34
74.94
-51.56
[5.13 , 14.43]

Notes: Table compares outcomes under observed fulfillment center roll-out to outcomes holding the fulfillment center
network fixed as in 2006. For this counterfactual fulfillment center network, we predict revenue assuming that the
tax status of a county does not change from 2006 onwards and that the shipping distance remains fixed. The total
shipping costs are calculated using the 95% confidence set for shipping cost per dollar of goods sold per mile under
Specification (2) from Panel II in Table 10.

47

0

Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
.05
.1
.15
.2

.25

Figure 1: Concentration in Online Retail, 2006-2013

2006

2007

2008

2009

Year

Expenditure HHI

2010

2011

2012

2013

Transaction HHI

Notes: Authors’ calculations using comScore Web Behavior database restricted to categories in which Amazon
has a presence. “Expenditure HHI” and “Transaction HHI” denote Herfindahl-Hirshman indices based on
market shares using the raw expenditures and number of transactions, respectively, at each retailer in each
year.

48

Figure 2: Amazon’s Fulfillment Center Expansion

(a) Amazon network, 2006
8.7

(b) Amazon network, 2010

5.5

0

8.7
7.1

0

4.8

6

5.4

5.5
6.1

6.6

6.1

7.9

7.6

7.9

7.1

7

7.2

7.6

6.7

6

6.8

7.8

8.4

6.10
8.5 6.46.3
7
6.3 7
6 0
5.8
5.6

6

6
9.4

8.3

5.5

0

7.1

0

4.8

6

6.1

6.6

6.1

7.9

7.8

8.4
7.6

7.6

6.7

6

6.8
7.9

7.1

7

7.2

6

6
9.4

8.3
7

8.6

7.6

5.4

5.5

6.9
7

5.6

7.7

7

5.5

7.7

8.6

7.6

6.6

(c) Amazon network, 2014
8.7

(d) Amazon planned network, 2018

5.5

0

8.7
7.1

4.8

6

5.4

5.5
6.1

6.6

6.1

7.9
8.4
7.6

6

7.9

7.1

7

7.2

7.6

6.7

6.10
8.5 6.46.3
7
6.3 7
6 0
5.8
5.6

6.8

7.8

6

6
9.4

8.3
7

5.5

7.1
4.8

6

5.4

5.5
6.6
7.9

6.1
6.1

8.4
7.6

8.6

7.6

5.5

0

0

6.9
7

5.6

7.7

6.7

7.8
7.6

7.9

7.1

7

7.2

6
9.4

8.3
7

7.6

6

6.8

7.7

5.6

6

6.10
8.5 6.46.3
7
6.3 7
6 0
5.8
5.6

6.9
7

8.6

6.6

6.6

(e) Wal-Mart network, 2014
8.7

5.5

0

7.1

0

4.8

6

5.4

5.5
6.6
7.9

6.1
6.1

8.4
7.6

6.7

7.8
7.6

7.9

7.1

7

7.2

6
9.4

8.3
7

7.6

6

6.8

7.7

5.6

6

5.5

6.9
7

5.6

6.6

0

6.10
8.5 6.46.3
7
6.3 7
6 0
5.8
5.6

6.10
8.5 6.46.3
7
6.3 7
6 0
5.8
5.6

5.5

Legend

Amazon fulfillment center
Wal-Mart fulfillment center
2.6m-12.4m households
1.7m-2.6m households
0.7m-1.7m households
0.2m-0.7m households

6.9
7

8.6
6.6

Notes: Maps exclude Amazon Fresh, Returns, and Sortation Centers. Shading represents number of
households per state. We display the state-level population-weighted average 2013 sales tax rate in each
map

49

5.5

.1

.2

Market Share
.3

.4

.5

Figure 3: Online Market Shares, 2006-2013

2006

2008

2010
Year

2012

Amazon
Mode 3

2014

Mode 2

Notes: Shares are calculated using aggregate revenue derived from the adjusted expenditures of the representative household. Mode 2 denotes taxed online competitors and mode 3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

5

Average Mode Preference
6
7

8

Figure 4: Average Mode Preference, 2006-2013

2006

2007

2008

2009

Year

Amazon

2010

Mode 2

2011

2012

2013

Mode 3

Notes: We display the time series of the mean of mode preferences, derived from the estimated mode fixed effects
in Table 8 and demographic interactions in Table 7 evaluated at the mean of the demographic attributes. Mode
2 denotes taxed online competitors and mode 3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

50

0

Market Share
.005
.01

.015

Figure 5: Estimated Retail Market Shares of Online Modes, 2006-2013

2006

2008

2010
Year
Amazon
Mode 3

2012

2014

Mode 2

Notes: Market shares are calculated using aggregate spending derived from predicted annual household level
expenditures for each county under the estimates of specification (1) in Table 6. Mode 2 denotes taxed online
competitors and mode 3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

51

Figure 6: Comparison of Outcomes under Perturbed and Actual Fulfillment Center Networks

Difference in Average Shipping Distance
0
10
-10

-10

Difference in Average Shipping Distance
0
10

20

(b) Change in discounted sum of pre-shipping
variable profit (µ × R) 2006-2018

20

(a) Change in discounted sum of pre-shipping
profit (µ × R − F ) 2006-2018

-200

0

200
Difference in y ($ Millions)

400

600

-100

0
50
Difference in Revenue ($ Millions)

100

150

Difference in Average Shipping Distance
0
10
-10

-10

Difference in Average Shipping Distance
0
10

20

(d) Difference in discounted sum of fixed costs
2006-2018

20

(c) Difference in number of households taxed
2006-2018

-50

-100

-50
0
50
Difference in the Number of People Taxed (Millions)

100

-600

-400
-200
0
Difference in Fixed Costs ($ Millions)

Notes: Each point represents one of the 1,575 perturbations. The y-axis in all four plots is the difference
in the household level average shipping distance between the observed network and the perturbation from
2006-2018. The red and yellow lines depict the lines of best fit for all perturbations and for the subset of
perturbations that qualify for experiments 1 or 2, respectively.

52

200

1

Average Cost of Shipping ($)
2
3
4

5

Figure 7: Average Shipping Cost per Order

2006

2008

2010

2012
Year

Lower Bound

2014

2016

2018

Upper Bound

Notes: The figure displays the 95% confidence interval for the average net cost of shipping one order using
the estimates from the fourth row in Table 10. We construct the net shipping cost per order by dividing
total annual fixed and shipping costs predicted by the model by the annual number of orders, estimated
using a combination of the raw data and predictions of the model.

53

Non-Price Component of Mode Preference
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9

10

15

Price Index ($)
20

25

-01.17
-01.3
-1.39
Price Component of Mode Effect

30

-1.46

Figure 8: Sources of Concentration

2006

2007

2008
Amazon

2009
2010
Year

2011

Mode 2

2012

2013

2006

2007

Mode 3

2008

2009

Amazon

2010

Mode 2

2011

2012
Mode 3

(b) Quality

.05

.1

HHI Across Categories
.15
.2
.25

.3

(a) Prices

Year

2006

2007

2008

2009

Year

Amazon

2010

Mode 2

2011

2012

2013

Mode 3

(c) Assortment
Notes: Price indices calculated using raw comScore Web Behavior data for categories in which Amazon
has a presence, netting out mean category-level prices. Quality is the residual mode preference, after
subtracting the price component. Assortment denotes the HHI at the product category level, summing
the squared revenue share of each product category. Mode 2 denotes taxed online competitors and mode
3 denotes non-taxed online competitors.

54

2013

A

Appendix: Data

Calculating Expenditures
In what follows, we provide a description of the procedure to calculate the expenditures for the
representative household in county i and year t on the three different modes of shopping. First, we
annualize each household’s online expenditures by grossing up the observed weekly expenditures
by 52 weeks, where the observed weekly expenditures are the total expenditures divided by the
total number of weeks we observe any browsing behavior by the household. We do this because
the browsing data suggests that many households are only in the sample for a short time period.
Denote the expenditures for household h in year t as eht .
We present the annual average of household online expenditures in the first column of Table
A.1. The second column displays the average number of transactions calculated in a similar manner to expenditures, while the third column shows the percentage of households with zero online
expenditures. Interestingly, we see decreasing average expenditures and transactions over time.
Column 3 indicates that this is due to an increasing percentage of comScore households with zero
online purchases. This not in line with outside evidence about the take-up of online purchasing;
eMarketer estimates the share of such internet users who do not make online purchases is 32% in
2009.
While comScore’s sampling procedure could be causing this pattern, a more plausible explanation is that comScore does not record a household’s transactions because the household deactivated
the behavior monitor or because the household uses a second computer (e.g., at work) or a mobile
device for all of their online shopping. Because we do not know which households truly do not purchase online and have zero expenditures, we choose to exclude all households with zero transactions
from the sample. In order to account for the extensive margin of becoming an online buyer, we supplement the comScore data with survey data from Forrester Research, Inc. (www.forrester.com).
The survey data comes from Forrester’s “North American Technographics Online Benchmark
Survey”, which was conducted from 2006-2007 by mail and 2010-2014 online. It surveyed between
30,000 and 60,000 households in the United States and Canada. The exact content of the survey
questions varies by year, but generally the most pertinent question for us is the one which asks
the user “Have you bought anything online in the past three months?”. The survey also asks for
information about the age, income, race, and zip code of the respondent. Documentation for the
survey is available from the authors upon request. Patterns in the Forrester responses are in line
with anecdotal evidence about the use of the take up of e-commerce (see the last column of Table
A.1).
We first use the Forrester data to estimate the extent of online shopping for a given demographic
group by running the following linear probability regression:
P r(Dht = 1) = β0 + β1 Zh + β2 Ih + γt + ht
55

where the dependent variable, Dht , indicates whether the household made any online purchases in
the past three months. The explanatory variables Z denote a set of dummy variables indicating
the characteristics of respondent household h (i.e., race, age and census region), I is a continuous
measure of their income, and γt are yearly dummy variables. We then use the estimates of the
model to predict the probability that a household in the comScore data made any online purchase in
year t, p̂ht , based on their demographics. For the years 2008 and 2009, we use linear interpolations
for a given demographic group based on the predictions in 2007 and 2010.
Using these predicted purchase probabilities, we calculate the Forrester adjusted expected online
expenditures from data for comScore households with positive expenditures, ẽht = p̂ht eht . We report
raw averages of online expenditures for the Forrester adjusted data, along with transactions that
are adjusted in the same way as expenditures, in Table A.1. Household expenditures increase from
$250 per year in 2006 to $374 in 2013.
Table A.1: Household Online Purchasing

Year
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Raw comScore Data
Expenditures Transactions
Offline
($)
Only (%)
248
260
201
148
129
134
155
164

2.5
2.6
2.1
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.8
2.2

Adjusted
Expenditures ($)

Adjusted
Transactions

Forrester
Offline
Only (%)

250
248
274
282
288
342
327
374

2.5
2.4
2.8
2.9
3.1
3.5
3.8
5.0

55.5
60.8
32.1
23.0
23.9
15.5

49.8
51.2
59.3
66.7
67.9
69.3
63.6
60.1

Notes: Expenditures and Transactions are the average amount of per-household spending and number of online
purchase transactions. Offline Only denotes the share of households with no online expenditures in the comScore
data. Forrester Offline Only denotes the share of respondents who answered no to the question whether they had
shopped online in the previous three months in the Forrester Technographics Survey.

Next, we aggregate across households to derive the expenditure of a representative household
in county i in year t on online retail. We start by calculating the average online expenditures for
demographic group z in county i and year t, in aggregate and for mode j:
ēzit =

1
Nit (z)

X

ẽht and

h∈Hit (z)

where Hit (z) is the set of comScore households in demographic group z in county i and Nit (z) is
the size of this set.
56

Each demographic group is defined by age of the head of the household, the household income
level, and the race of the head of the household. We find the comScore sample of households to
be generally representative of the Unites States population according the 2010 Census, with three
exceptions: (1) the head of the household is younger, (2) a higher percentage of the households
are white, and (3) the household income is higher. De los Santos et al. (2012) similarly compare
the sample of comScore users in 2002 and 2004 to the Computer Use Supplement of the Current
Population Survey and find that the sample generally compares well with the population of online
shoppers. We account for the possibility that comScore may be over- or undersampling certain
demographic groups using sampling weights. We classify each comScore household by income and
race and age of the head of household, and calculate a household-specific sampling weight based on
the relative prevalence of each demographic category in the comScore data and the 2010 Census at
the county level.
Using the resulting weights for demographic group z, denoted wiz , and the average expenditures
from the comScore data, we create the total online expenditures for a representative consumer in
a given county:
eit =

X

wiz ēzit

z

and the modes’ representative shares and expenditures:
sijt =

X

wiz szijt

and

eitj = sijt eit .

z

Here, szijt are demographic group level shares for each shopping mode in each county calculated
from the raw ComScore data:
szijt =

ēzijt
ēzit

ēzijt represents the annual average expenditures on mode j for county i across all households in
demographic group z and ēzit is the sum of ēzijt across all three modes.

Shipping Costs
In order to identify the lowest cost FC for a given county, we estimate a shipment cost function that
predicts the average per pound cost of shipping a package between a given origin and destination
county using data from the 2012 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS). Assuming that this cost is
proportional to the shipping cost for Amazon allows us to predict which FC is the lowest cost FC
for each county.
The CFS consists of individual commodity shipments that are described by type, origin and
destination, value, weight, mode of transportation, distance shipped, and ton-miles of commodities
shipped. We select shipments from the CFS based on the modes of transportation that Amazon
uses (e.g., air) and the commodity type Amazon sells (e.g., electronic merchandise).
57

We first calculate the costs per pound for each of these shipments, which are approximated by
multiplying the unit cost (per-pound per-mile) by the distance shipped. We do not observe the
unit cost, so for the shipment modes besides ‘stepwise-pricing parcel’ we assume the unit costs are
equal to the 2012 ‘Average Freight Revenue Per Ton-mile’, which we obtain from the Department
of Transportation.37,38 For parcel service shipments, we calculate the postage costs of a subsample
of 131 shipments in the CFS using the Postage Price Calculator on USPS website, and then run
a regression of the postage price on an interaction of the shipping weight and shipping distance.
We then use the estimated coefficient as our unit cost per ton-mile and predict total parcel service
costs per pound for the remainder of the data.
Next, we specify and estimate the following shipment total cost function:
Ci = β0 + β1 di + Oi + Di + i

(A.1)

where Ci is the cost per pound of shipment i, di is the great-circle distance between the origin and
the destination, and Oi and Di are origin and destination county level fixed effects. Importantly,
while the shipping costs were calculated using the ‘distance shipped’, di is measured as the greatcircle distance, allowing us to predict a measure of costs in our data. In practice, we estimate a
number of different specifications which include interactions and/or non-linear functions of distance
and choose the model with the best fit. Using the estimates of β̂, we are able to predict the average
shipping cost per pound for each FC (f ) and county (i) pair in our data, which we denote as Cif .
The lowest cost FC is then the FC which solves:
fi∗ = argmin Cif
f

B

Appendix: Estimation

Calculating µ
Amazon reports the total amount of revenue in the “Media” and “Electronics and Other General
Merchandise” categories in North America, which is roughly equivalent to the revenue we predict
from our model. Revenue from Canada and Mexico is not included in the comScore data. Therefore,
these sales are accounted for through the ‘multiplier’ that we use to match the predictions of the
model in the financial reports. See Section 4 for a discussion of these multipliers. They also report
the “Cost of Goods Sold” for all of their sales. We compute the cost of goods sold for North
America by multiplying the total cost by the ratio of sales from North America to total sales. This
37
https://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/national_transportation_
statistics/html/table_03_21.html
38
Due to missing data for the ‘Barge’ and ‘Truck’ modes, we predict 2012 unit costs using the estimates of an AR-1
regression.

58

provides us with a value for the “gross margin”. However, as Amazon states, the reported cost of
goods sold includes both outbound shipping costs and inbound shipping costs (through wholesale
prices). Recall that we assume that inbound shipping costs from suppliers to Amazon do not vary
with the network of FCs. As we are estimating the outbound shipping costs, we exclude them from
the gross margin by adding in the reported “Net Shipping Cost as a Percentage of Revenue” to the
gross margin. This value grows over time, but we suspect this is due to an increase in Amazon’s
non-shipping related activities (i.e. Amazon Web Services and digital goods). We therefore set
µ = 0.23.

Estimation of Variance-Covariance Matrix
In our problem, we cannot simply calculate Σ̂(θ0 ) using equation 3.2 in AS because (1) there is first
stage error in our revenue equation and (2) there exists correlation across a because the same FCs
are used in many perturbations. We take the approach described in Section 8.1 of Holmes (2011)
in order to account for these two issues.
Specifically, we draw a subsample of FCs of size b << J, where J is the total number of FCs.
We keep the perturbations in which both the swapped FCs are in the subsample, thereby forming
the ‘deviation subsample’ indexed by s. We then take a draw of the tax parameter σ̂s from a
normal distribution centered at σ̂ with variance

J σ
b Σ̂ ,

where Σ̂σ is the estimated variance from

the first demand model. Note that in order to account for first stage error, we only draw the tax
parameter and assume that all other features of the demand model approximately cancel out when
calculating the perturbation. This assumption is made for simplification because for each draw
of the parameters, we must compute all the perturbations. There are over 90 parameters of the
demand model, meaning we would have to draw a large number of vectors of parameters in order to
have variation across the full joint distribution. Instead, we take 100 draws of the tax parameters
and calculate the set of perturbations for 100 times. While the non-linearity of the demand model
imply that the other components of demand won’t exactly cancel out, we believe that it is a good
approximation and that the results will not be significantly affected.
We calculate ỹsj,k and x̃j,k
s with the deviation subsample and the new tax parameter σs to form:
m̃l,s (θ0 ) =

J
J
1 X X j,k j,k
zl,s [ỹs − θ0 x̃j,k
s ]
M
j=1 k=J+1

resulting in the l × 1 vector →; deml,s (θ0 )). The variance-covariance matrix is then estimated from
the S different deviation subsamples:
Σ̂(θ0 ) =

b
varcov(m̃(θ0 ))
J

where m̃(θ0 ) is the S × l matrix of moments.
59

In practice, we set b =

J
3

and S = 200 and use the diagonal matrix equivalent of Σ̂(θ0 ) as our

weight matrix in Equation (20). The reason for the latter is that we ran into a number of instances
where the full matrix was not invertible.

Bootstrap Moments and Variance Covariance Matrix
We follow the procedure is described in Section 4.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010). From the
bootstrap sample of R perturbations, we calculate {m̃∗r (θ0 ), Σ̂∗r (θ0 )} where:
1

1

m̃∗r (θ0 ) = Mr2 (D̂∗ (θ0 ))− 2 (m̃r (θ0 ) − m̃(θ0 ))
and:
1

1

Σ̂∗r (θ0 ) = (D̂r∗ (θ0 ))− 2 Σ̂∗r (θ0 )(D̂r∗ (θ0 ))− 2
The elements of m̃r (θ0 ) are given by:
m̃∗l,r (θ0 ) =

Jr
J
X
1 X
j,k j,k
[ỹr − θ0 x̃j,k
zl,r
r ]
Mr
j=1 k=Jr +1

and:
D̂r∗ (θ0 ) = Diag(Σ̂∗r (θ0 ))
Diag(X) represents a vector containing the diagonal elements of X. Here, Σ̂∗r (θ0 ) is computed using
the same subsampling method described above, but replacing the the ‘population’ of FCs from which
we draw the deviation subsample with Jr . We then eliminate the elements of {m̃∗r (θ0 ), Σ̂∗r (θ0 )}
where:
1

M2

1
m̃l (θ0 )
2
>
κ
=
(ln(M
))
ν̂l (θ0 )

where m̃l (θ0 ) is the lth element of m̃(θ0 ) and ν̂l (θ0 ) is the corresponding standard deviation taken
from Σ̂(θ0 ). This results in a weakly smaller set of moments and their variance-covariance matrix:
0
∗∗ 0
{m̃∗∗
r (θ ), Σ̂r (θ )}

C

Appendix: Robustness

Demand
In what follows, we provide robustness to the CES demand estimates reported in the body of
the paper. First, we provide the ‘starting’ estimates of the CES demand model, or the estimates
without the multipliers, in Tables C.1 and C.2. While the estimates of the the tax effect and the
convenience effect are similar to the estimation with the multipliers, the mode level fixed effects
60

show some differences. This is especially true for mode 3, which has significantly larger fixed effects
when the multipliers are employed.
Table C.1: CES Demand Estimates of Tax Elasticity: No Multipliers

Tax Elasticity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-1.493***
(0.480)

-1.504***
(0.480)
0.076
(0.131)

-1.516***
(0.483)

-1.504***
(0.480)

-1.469***
(0.480)

-1.499***
(0.480)

-1.469***
(0.480)

Local Express Delivery
Log Distance

-0.006
(0.016)

1 or 2 Day Priority

-0.069
(0.057)

1, 2, or 3 Day Package

0.031
(0.031)

1 Day First Class

-0.013
(0.034)

1, 2, or 3 Day Standard

Obs
R-Sq

0.031
(0.031)
42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are the estimated tax elasticity and the effect of shipping speeds estimated
without the multipliers. Regressions include county, mode-year, and region-year fixed effects along with mode-level
effects of local demographics and competition. Shipping speed proxies described in notes to Table 5.

61

Table C.2: CES Demand Estimates of Mode Fixed Effects: No Multipliers
Year

Amazon

Mode 2

2006

-1.566***

-0.608*

(0.339)

(0.318)

-1.511***

-0.602*

-0.097

(0.348)

(0.327)

(0.083)

-0.990***

-0.220

0.161*

(0.349)

(0.330)

(0.090)

-0.809**

-0.230

0.121

(0.350)

(0.330)

(0.094)

-0.808**

-0.551*

-0.193**

(0.351)

(0.331)

(0.097)

-0.329

-0.251

-0.086

(0.349)

(0.330)

(0.094)

0.040

-0.453

-0.285***

(0.347)

(0.328)

(0.093)

0.175

-0.353

-0.121

(0.350)

(0.331)

(0.100)

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Mode 3

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are the estimated mode-year fixed effects from Specification (1) in Table C.1.

Tables C.3, C.4, and C.5 provide results for a number of different variants of the demand model
and results when adjusting the sample used in estimation, while Table C.6 displays results under
alternative measures of the shipping distance. These estimates do not account for the multipliers.
In Table C.3, specification (1) uses weighted OLS, where the weights are analytical weights
based on the number of observations used to calculate the average expenditures in a county, specification (2) incorporates the zeros by changing any mode-level expenditures that are equal to $0
to $1, specification (3) uses data from 2008 and beyond because the number of households in the
comScore sample shifts after 2007, specification (5) does not use the Forrester correction to adjust
expenditures, and specification (6) does not use population weights to create the expenditures.
Specification (4) estimates the tax sensitive separately for each mode, as a way of accounting for
Amazon Marketplace. That is, it allows for an Amazon specific tax effect that may be lower than
the effect for offline retailers and mode 3 because not all customers on Amazon are charged sales
tax.
In Table C.4, the first two specifications include a state-year level fixed effect (1) or a county-year
level fixed effect (2) rather than a region-year level effect in order to account for the possibility that

62

the unobservable factors which may be correlated with the tax variable are more local compared
to our main specification. Specification (3) includes dummy variables indicating whether or not
a FC entered the state in which the county is located one, two, three, or more than three years
ago. The is intended to capture any sort of delayed marketing push or push to get users to adopt
Amazon Prime which is associated with the entry of a FC. Finally, specification (4) includes an
interaction between these dummy variables and the tax variable in order capture any possible
learning which may happen over time. That is, it may take consumers time in order to learn that
they are actually being charged higher prices than the were before, meaning the response to FC
entry may be delayed. While we don’t display the results here, we have also explored a learning
effect with regards to shipping speeds, but again fail to find any evidence that our measures of
shipping speeds affect consumer decisions. In Table C.5, we include an interaction between the
income of the representative household in county i and the measure of shipping speed for the
different specifications.
Finally, in Table C.6, we adjust the measure of shipping speed by allowing the consumer from
county i to receive shipments from different FCs, where the amount of spending coming from each
FC is a function of the estimated shipping cost from that FC and the capacity. See the Cost section
of this Appendix for details on how we derive the distribution of goods coming from different FCs.
Overall, the results of these robustness checks are consistent with the base results with the
estimated tax sensitivity being between -1.2 and -1.9 and the convenience effect not being significant.
The only exception is the interaction between the priority shipping dummy variable and the log of
income in Table C.5. This indicates that there is no effect of faster shipping at the average level of
income, but that there may be for higher income counties. However, because this effect does not
appear in any of the other specifications, we believe that the convenience effects are not strong in
our sample.

63

Table C.3: CES Demand Estimates of Tax Elasticity: Robustness to Sample Construction

Tax Elasticity

(1)

(2)

(3)

-1.307***
(0.286)

-1.687***
(0.585)

-1.867***
(0.575)

Tax Elasticity (Amazon)

Regression

(5)

(6)

-1.203*
(0.625)

-1.199***
(0.401)

-1.166**
(0.515)
-2.900***
(0.847)

Tax Elasticity (Mode 3)

Obs
R-Sq

(4)

42,399
0.315

52,617
0.162

29,053
0.135

42,399
0.185

43,811
0.137

42,400
0.199

A-Weights

Zeros

2008-2013

Individual
Tax Effect

No
Forrester
Adjustment

No
Population
Weights

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are alternative CES demand model specifications. See text for model
descriptions. Regressions include county, mode-year, and region-year fixed effects along with mode-level effects
of local demographics and competition. Models that include shipping speed proxies in addition yield similar tax
elasticities.

64

Table C.4: CES Demand Estimates of Tax Elasticity: Robustness to Controls (1)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.325***
(0.498)

-1.215***
(0.443)

-1.401***
(0.481)
-0.034
(0.050)
-0.015
(0.061)
0.093
(0.072)
0.046
(0.073)
-0.078
(0.058)

-1.644***
(0.525)

Variable name
Tax Elasticity
Entry Year 0
Entry Year -1
Entry Year -2
Entry Year -3
Entry Year $¡$ -3
Tax*(Entry Year 0)
Tax*(Entry Year -1)
Tax*(Entry Year -2)
Tax*(Entry Year -3)
Tax*(Entry Year $¡$ -3)
Obs
R-Sq
Fixed Effects

42,399
0.195
Year-State,
County

42,399
0.240
Year-County

42,399
0.186
County

-0.620
(0.759)
-0.045
(0.845)
-0.719
(1.061)
-1.104
(1.082)
0.551
(0.406)
42,399
0.186
County

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are alternative CES demand model specifications. Specifications (1) and
(2) include different delineations of the fixed effects, while (3) includes indicators of the time since the fulfillment
center opened in a consumer’s state and (4) includes interactions between these dummies and the tax rate charged.
Regressions include additional mode-year fixed effects and mode-level effects of local demographics and competition.
Models that include shipping speed proxies in addition yield similar tax elasticities.

65

Table C.5: CES Demand Estimates of Tax Elasticity: Robustness to Controls (2)

Tax Elasticity
Shipping Speed*Log Income
Local Express Delivery

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-1.504***
(0.480)
-0.023
(0.198)
0.330
(2.193)

-1.515***
(0.483)
-0.019
(0.022)

-1.501***
(0.480)
0.134***
(0.030)

-1.467***
(0.480)
-0.016
(0.023)

-1.496***
(0.480)
-0.024
(0.024)

-1.467***
(0.480)
-0.016
(0.023)

Log Distance

0.201
(0.240)

1 or 2 Day Priority

-1.499***
(0.324)

1, 2, or 3 Day Package

0.202
(0.245)

1 Day First Class

0.243
(0.258)

1, 2, or 3 Day Standard

Obs
R-Sq

0.202
(0.245)
42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

42,399
0.186

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are alternative CES demand model specifications. Each regression includes
and interaction between household income and the measure of shipping speed. Regressions include county, modeyear, and region-year fixed effects along with mode-level effects of local demographics and competition. Models that
include shipping speed proxies in addition yield similar tax elasticities.

66

Table C.6: CES Demand Estimates of Tax Elasticity: Robustness to Shipping Distance

Tax Elasticity
Log Distance

Obs
R-Sq
{β1 , β2 }

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-1.469***
(0.481)
-0.031
(0.040)

-1.497***
(0.480)
0.025
(0.025)

-1.468***
(0.480)
-0.028
(0.030)

-1.497***
(0.480)
0.016
(0.026)

-1.508***
(0.494)
-0.015
(0.025)

-1.531***
(0.487)
-0.022
(0.023)

-1.474***
(0.480)
-0.020
(0.024)

42,399
0.186
{10, 0}

42,399
0.186
{10, 20}

42,399
0.186
{20, 0}

42,399
0.186
{20, 20}

40,755
0.185
{200, 0}

41,695
0.186
{200, 20}

42,399
0.186
Low
Cost

*** 1% ** 5% * 10%. Notes: Presented are alternative CES demand model specifications that differ in their measure
of shipping speed, proxied by various weighted average distances to the full set of fulfillment
centers. For county i,
P
the weight attributed to fulfillment center f is ωif t = exp(−β1 costif + β2 capf ) / g∈Ft exp(−β1 costig + β2 capg ),
where the last row, labeled {β1 , β2 }, indicates the coefficients used in a given specification, cost denotes the estimated
cost of shipping from i to f (see page 69), and cap denotes the square footage of the fulfillment center. “Low Cost”
assigns all of the weight to the fulfillment center with the lowest logistics model shipping cost. Regressions include
mode-year and region-year fixed effects and mode-level effects of local demographics and competition.

Cost: State Level Lag
We allow for the assumption about when the tax laws will change upon entry to be a function of
the observed lag between entry and the change in the law as described in Section 5. For example,
if we swap a FC that opened in Pennsylvania in 2008 and resulted in sales tax liabilities starting in
2011 with one that opened in Nevada in 1999 but resulted in sales tax liabilities only in 2014, then
we would assume that the FC in Pennsylvania opens in 1999 and sales tax is collected beginning
in 2002 (i.e., there is a 3 year lag as there was with the actual FC that opened in Pennsylvania in
2008).
The results in Table C.7 are mostly in line with the no-lag assumption, with slightly wider
confidence intervals for the base model and tighter intervals for the low-cost model. Importantly,
non of the confidence sets include zero.
We have also estimated the model under a opening date specific lag. In the example above, this
assumption would imply that the lag would “follow” the swapped FCs. That is, taxes would begin
being collected in Nevada in 2011 and in Pennsylvania in 2014. The results under this specification
do not vary significantly from the estimates of the no-lag model.

67

Table C.7: Shipping Cost Estimates: Fixed Lag between FC Opening and Sales Tax in Effect
# Perturbations
Instruments

95% Confidence Set

Group 1

Group 2

I. Closest FC: No First Stage
(1)
(2)

z̃a
z̃a , z̃a ×

x̃+
a

[5.39E-05,1.67E-04]

313

505

[6.11E-05,1.31E-04]

313

505

[4.28E-05,2.63E-04]

272

588

[3.89E-05,1.61E-04]

272

588

II. Closest FC: First Stage
(1)
(2)

ẑa
ẑa , ẑa ×

x̂+
a

III. Lowest Cost FC: First Stage
(1)
(2)

ẑa
ẑa , ẑa ×

x̂+
a

[5.46E-05,9.36E-05]

220

576

[5.76E-05,8.43E-05]

220

576

Notes: We depict confidence sets for Amazon’s shipping cost per dollar of goods sold per mile
constructed using the methods of Andrews and Soares (2010). We assume that for a perturbed
fulfilment center opening sequence, the delay between an opening and sales taxes going into
effect is the same as the one observed under the actual opening sequence. For a description
of the specifications, see notes to Table 10.

Cost: Same Day Shipping
As discussed in the body of the paper, the lack of a convenience effect could be because our
data period does not include significant changes to shipping times. However, anecdotal evidence
and Figure 2 indicate that Amazon started to place FCs in locations close to large markets in
anticipation of introducing same-day delivery. In ignoring this effect of FC expansion, we may
be incorrectly attributing an expected boost in demand due to same-day shipping to cost savings
from being close consumers. Intuitively, this would lead to an overestimate of the shipping cost
parameter.
In order to address this issue, we add a preference for same-day shipping after 2014 for counties
which have access to this service and then re-estimate the supply model. In order to determine the
counties which would have same-day delivery, we use a tool on Amazon.com to find the markets
which have same day shipping as as of the Fall of 2015.39 This information allows us to construct a
measure of the radius from a FC in which local customers have access to same day delivery, which
is about 50 miles. We then add the term γ same 1same
to ζijt , where 1same
is equal to one for counties
ijt
ijt
within 50 miles of a FC in year t ≥ 2014. Because we cannot estimate γ same directly, we choose
reasonable values for it and check if/how this changes the results. We choose γ same ∈ {0.10, 0.20},
which increase the expenditures on Amazon due to same-day shipping by approximately 10 and
39

http://www.amazon.com/b?node=8729023011.

68

20%, respectively. These values are in line with the results in Table 6, which suggest that the effect
of ‘Local-Express Delivery’, the early version of Same-Day delivery, is 0.186.
Results from these robustness estimates under the no lag assumption are in rows four and five
of Table C.9. We focus on the first column, where the instruments are the indicator variables based
on the first stage regression. The first three rows display the baseline estimates, where the direct
comparison is to the second row. The downward shift in the confidence set is due to the fact that
FC entry now results in both a demand and a supply side effect. That is, the loss in revenue due
to the tax effect and an increase in fixed costs is offset by both a reduction in shipping cost and an
increase in demand due to same-day shipping.
However, the fact that the confidence sets do not include zero provides reassurance that even
if there exists a same day shipping effect, there is still significant cost savings associated with
expansion. Therefore, it is likely that economies of density are a key component in determining FC
locations.

Cost: Logistics Model
In the primary estimates, we assume that the closest fulfillment center to county i handles all of
the shipping to that county. This may be incorrect for a few reasons. First, the lowest cost FC may
not be the same as the closest FC. For example, it may be cheaper to ship items to Minneapolis
from the FC in Indiana than from the FC in Wisconsin. Presumably Amazon would take this
into account when making their distribution decisions. Second, there may be capacity constraints
implying that not all shipments can come from a small local FC. Third, it may be the case that
the universe of products is not available across all FCs. This last concern is somewhat mitigated
by the fact that FCs of different types are often clustered.
In order to address this, we estimate the supply side of the model considering that the shipment
of products to county i may be distributed across the FCs in year t and assume that this distribution
is a function of both the cost of shipping between the FC and county i and the capacity of the FC
relative to the total capacity. The relative capacity captures the fact that a single FC may not be
able to satisfy all the local demand and the fact that not all types of products will be available at
all FCs. The distribution function determines the percentage of expenditures by county i in year t
that are shipped from fulfillment center f :
exp(−β1 Cif + β2 capf )
g∈Ft exp(−β1 costig + β2 capg )

ωif t = P

where Cif is the estimated cost of shipping an item between county i and FC f , capf is the capacity
of FC f in millions of square feet, and Ft is the set of FCs that are open in year t. The method
used to calculate Cif is described in Appendix A.

69

Table C.8: Shipping Distances Implied by Alternative Logistics Models
[Mean Shipping Distance (StDev), Mean ω for Closest FC]
{β1 , β2 }

2006

2010

2014

2018

Closest

[315 (224), 1.00]

[287 (221), 1.00]

[240 (225), 1.00]

[200 (207), 1.00]

{10, 0}

[366 (231), 0.06]

[357 (228), 0.05]

[352 (233), 0.03]

[338 (219), 0.02]

{10, 20}

[443 (235), 0.04]

[457 (245), 0.03]

[436 (304), 0.02]

[405 (268), 0.01]

{20, 0}

[335 (228), 0.07]

[318 (225), 0.07]

[290 (227), 0.05]

[271 (214), 0.04]

{20, 20}

[397 (234), 0.05]

[400 (238), 0.05]

[347 (259), 0.03]

[311 (232), 0.02]

{200, 0}

[320 (226), 0.84]

[295 (221), 0.84]

[252 (224), 0.74]

[241 (222), 0.52]

{200, 20}

[324 (226), 0.78]

[295 (220), 0.84]

[255 (222), 0.70]

[237 (216), 0.42]

Notes: The table summarizes shipping distances under different assumptions about Amazon’s choice of
fulfillment center to serve each county.
P For county i, the share of revenue satisfied by fulfillment center f
is ωif t = exp(−β1 costif + β2 capf ) / g∈Ft exp(−β1 costig + β2 capg ). Column (1), labeled {β1 , β2 }, lists
the weight placed on the cost of shipping from from i to f , costif , and the capacity of f , capf . Each entry
in the table contains the average and standard deviation in shipping distance across US counties under
the particular choice of β1 and β2 , together with the average share of revenue satisfied by the closest
fulfillment center for each logistic model.

Given this distribution, Equation (10) becomes:

Π(a; θ) =

∞
X
t=2006


β t−2006

X
i

µRit (at ) − 


X

θdif t (at ) × ωif t × Rit (at ) − Fit ati − St (ait − ait−1 )

f ∈Ft

(C.1)
where dif t is the distance between FC f and county i. Here, the total shipping distance is equivalent
to a weighted average of the distance from the FCs in the network, where the weights are based on
the percentage of goods coming from each FC.
Again, because we cannot estimate this distribution directly, we choose reasonable values of β1
and β2 and check if/how this affects the results. In practice, we choose three different values for
β1 and two different values for β2 , resulting in six additional specifications. Table C.8 displays the
summary statistics for the shipping distances and the ωs for the closes FC under each combination
of the parameters. The values for the base model (closest FC) are in the first row for comparison.
A low value of β1 puts less emphasis on the shipping cost from each FC, which results in shipping
being more uniformly distributed around the country. This increases the average shipping distance
and the amount of goods being shipped from the closest FC. As β1 increases, deliveries get more
concentrated to the lowest cost FC, which lowers the shipping distance and increases the amount of
good being shipped from the closest FC. Note that when β1 = 200 and β2 = 0, the average distance
is close to that of the base model and the majority of shipments are coming from the closest FC.
Increasing the value of β2 increases the amount of goods that are going to come from the biggest
70

FCs. Note that a value of β2 = 20 and β1 = 0 results in the distribution of goods shipped from
FC f is approximately equal to FC f ’s capacity relative to total capacity. Therefore, we can think
of the model when β2 = 0 as a model where capacity does not play a role and the model when
β2 = 20 as when the amount of goods shipped from FC f is proportional to its capacity. We can
see that increasing β2 increase the average shipping distance and decreases the amount of goods
coming from the closest FC.
Overall, under any specification, it is clear that expansion of the network leads to a decrease in
the shipping distance to the consumers, implying that there is still a tradeoff between the tax and
shipping effects of entering a new state. However, it is not clear how these alternative assumptions
will affect the estimates of the supply side model: it depends on the relationship between the change
in shipping distance, fixed costs, and revenue as a result of specific FC entry, which may vary across
these different models.
Results from these models appear in the last 6 rows of C.9. Again focusing on column 1, we see
that the interval shifts downwards, which is likely because there is not as strong as a connection
between the tax implications and the cost savings of FC entry. However, because the results do
not vary significantly from the base model, we believe that the simple model of logistics is a good
approximation of the true data generating process.

Cost: Continuous Instruments
In our base model, the instruments are defined base on whether or not perturbations fall into
experiment 1 or experiment 2, implying that there are a number of perturbations that receive 0
weight and, thus, are not used. Therefore, in the second column of Table C.9 we present results
for our primary models along with the robustness models when including the continuous measure
of distance as an instrument. In these specifications, all 1,575 perturbations have weight in the
objective function. The results indicated by a star are ones in which the method of Andrews and
Soares (2010) results in an empty set. Therefore, we display the value of θ which minimizes the
objective function.
The confidence sets shift down because there is now positive weight on perturbations which do
not fall into experiments 1 or 2. However, even under the most conservative of estimates, there is
still a positive level of cost savings, although they are quite small.

71

Table C.9: Shipping Cost Estimates: Robustness to Model Assumptions
Confidence Set
ẑa

ẑa , x̂+
a

[3.43E-05,1.04E-04]
[5.45E-05,2.26E-04]
[3.90E-05,1.20E-04]

[2.34E-05,7.05E-05]
[4.65E-05,1.02E-04]
[4.29E-05,4.29E-05]*

Model
Base Specification
Closest FC: No First Stage
Closest FC: First Stage
Lowest Cost FC: First Stage

Introduction of Same-Day Shipping Demand Effect
Small Same-Day Effect (β = 0.10)
[1.06E-05,1.38E-04]
Large Same-Day Effect (β = 0.20)
[2.28E-05,1.28E-04]

[1.35E-08,6.15E-05]
[1.36E-08,5.42E-05]

Alternative Logistics Models
Cost: low, capacity: no {10, 0}
Cost: low, capacity: yes {10, 20}
Cost: medium, capacity: no {20, 0}
Cost: medium, capacity: yes {20, 20}
Cost: high, capacity: no {200, 0}
Cost: high, capacity: yes {200, 20}

[4.46E-05,4.46E-05]*
[2.15E-05,1.87E-04]
[3.49E-05,3.49E-05]*
[2.96E-05,7.39E-05]
[4.25E-05,4.25E-05]*
[4.53E-05,4.53E-05]*

[5.73E-05,9.99E-05]
[2.50E-05,1.47E-04]
[4.08E-05,1.52E-04]
[3.28E-05,9.53E-05]
[3.92E-05,1.14E-04]
[4.35E-05,1.08E-04]

Notes: Displayed are the estimated 95% confidence sets under alternative supply and demand side
and instrumenting assumptions. A * indicates that the methods of Andrews and Soares (2010)
resulted in an empty confidence set. Instead we display the value of θ that minimizes the objective
function. The first column uses indicators for informative perturbations as instruments, as in
Specifications (1) in Table 10. The second column adds continuous instruments. The same-day
specifications assume that a county is served by its closest fulfillment center; the alternative logistics
model specifications assign a revenue share to each center based on cost and capacity considerations,
described above as [weight on cost, inclusion of capacity effect, {β1 , β2 }]. See notes to Table C.8.
Same-day shipping and alternative logistics model estimates use informative perturbations predicted
from exogenous contributions to variable profit and shipping cost deviations as instruments.

72

