NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING NON-LINEAR BUDGET SETS TO ESTIMATE EXTENSIVE MARGIN RESPONSES:
METHOD AND EVIDENCE FROM THE SOCIAL SECURITY EARNINGS TEST
Alexander M. Gelber
Damon Jones
Daniel W. Sacks
Jae Song
Working Paper 23362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23362
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised June 2018
Previously circulated as "Using Kinked Budget Sets to Estimate Extensive
Margin Responses: Method and Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test." This
research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant
#RRC08098400-06-00 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Retirement Research Consortium and by grant #G-2015-14005 from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation. The paper was completed partly while Gelber was the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation. The paper was completed partly while Gelber was the Alfred P. Sloan
Visiting Associate Professor at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent
the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We also thank the
UC Berkeley IRLE, CGIF, and Burch Center for research support. We are extremely grateful
to David Pattison for running our early code on the data. We thank David Card, Raj Chetty, Jim
Cole, Julie Cullen, Rebecca Diamond, Avi Feller, Jon Gruber, Hilary Hoynes, Pat Kline,
Rafael Lalive, Emmanuel Saez, Håkan Selin, Joel Slemrod, Dmitry Taubinsky and seminar
participants at Brookings, Case Western Reserve, Cornell, Dartmouth, DePaul, Duke, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Maryland, NBER, Notre Dame, NYU, SIEPR, SOLE,
UC Berkeley, UC Davis, University of Chicago, UIC, UIUC, and UVA for helpful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23362.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, Daniel W. Sacks, and Jae Song. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Non-Linear Budget Sets to Estimate Extensive Margin Responses: Method and Evidence
from the Social Security Earnings Test
Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, Daniel W. Sacks, and Jae Song
NBER Working Paper No. 23362
April 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. H24,H31,H55,J14,J22
ABSTRACT
We develop a method for estimating the effect of a kinked or notched budget set on workers’
employment decisions, and we use it to estimate the impact of the Social Security Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance (OASI) Annual Earnings Test (AET). The AET reduces OASI claimants’
current OASI benefits in proportion to their earnings in excess of an exempt amount. Using a
Regression Kink Design and Social Security Administration data, we document that the
discontinuous change in the benefit reduction rate at the exempt amount causes a corresponding
change in the slope of the employment rate. We develop conditions in a general setting under
which we can use such patterns to estimate the elasticity of the employment rate with respect to
the effective average net-of-tax rate. Our resulting point estimate for the AET indicates an
elasticity of at least 0.49, suggesting that the AET reduces employment by more than one
percentage point in the group we study.
Alexander M. Gelber
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Ave
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
agelber@berkeley.edu
Damon Jones
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
damonjones@uchicago.edu

Daniel W. Sacks
Indiana University
1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
dansacks@indiana.edu
Jae Song
Social Security Administration
Office of Disability Adjudication
and Review
5107 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1400
Falls Church, VA 22041
jae.song@ssa.gov

1

Introduction

Non-linear price schedules are common across a wide variety of economic applications, including labor supply
(e.g. Hausman, 1981), electricity demand (e.g. Ito, 2014), and retirement savings (e.g. Bernheim et al.,
2015). Taxes and government transfers in particular often create kink points, which are discontinuous changes
in the marginal incentive to earn or work more, or notches, which are discrete changes in the level of net
income as a function of earnings. For example, many means-tested government transfer programs reduce
or eliminate transfer bene…ts as income rises above threshold levels, and the individual income tax in many
countries generates a piecewise linear budget set with kinks at each point at which the marginal tax rate
(MTR) jumps. Previous literature has developed methods for explicitly using kink points or notches in the
e¤ective tax schedule to estimate responses at the intensive margin, the choice of earnings or hours worked
conditional on working (e.g. Burtless and Hausman, 1978; Hausman, 1981; Saez, 2010; Chetty et al., 2011;
Kleven and Waseem, 2013; see the review in Kleven, 2016). However, tax and transfer policies a¤ect not
only intensive margin responses, but also responses at the extensive margin, the choice of whether or not
to be employed (Cogan, 1981; Saez, 2002; Eissa et al., 2008). More generally, the e¤ects of incentives on
earnings and the employment rate are both key questions across several …elds in economics.
In this paper, we develop a method for estimating the e¤ects of budget sets with kinks or notches on
workers’extensive margin decisions. Our method relies on clear patterns in data: under the conditions we
specify, a kink in a budget set leads to a kink in the employment rate, and a notch leads to a discontinuous
change in the level of the employment rate. Speci…cally, suppose individuals face …xed costs of employment
such as commuting costs (Cogan, 1981), and consider the probability of employment as a function of the
desired earnings individuals would choose if employed. If the individual faces a linear budget set, this function
should presumably be smooth (continuously di¤erentiable), as illustrated in the dashed line in Figure 1A.
Now consider a budget set with a convex kink at which the e¤ective marginal tax rate discontinuously rises.
Figure 2A shows that in this case the slope of the average net-of-tax rate (ANTR) decreases discontinuously
at the kink point. The ANTR is de…ned as the fraction of an individual’s income that the individual keeps
net of taxes and bene…t reduction when earning a positive amount rather than earning zero, re‡ecting
the individual’s incentive to be employed.1 In this environment, we show that there should robustly be a
discontinuous decrease at the kink point in the slope of the probability of employment among individuals
who are constrained from making small, intensive margin adjustments. This is illustrated in the solid line
in Figure 1A. Intuitively, these intensive margin frictions prevent individuals from locating at the kink even
if they might otherwise like to do so under the kinked budget constraint, driving them to non-employment
instead and fueling a discontinuous decrease in the slope of employment.2
Thus, observing such a change in slope represents a novel type of evidence that a kinked budget set has
an extensive margin e¤ect. Our assumptions are therefore testable, as this change in slope should arise if
1

Form ally, for a tax schedule T (z), we de…ne the ANTR as AN T R
1 [T (z) T (0)] =z, where z is pre-tax earnings.
Our m etho d also applies at non-convex kinks: the slop e of the em ploym ent rate discontinuously increases for those constrained
from adjusting away from non-convex kinks.
2

1

individuals face …xed costs of employment as well as intensive margin frictions. This prediction does not
rely on parametric assumptions on the utility function, nor on assuming a representative agent; indeed the
distribution of employment responses in the population, as well as other distributional assumptions, are left
unrestricted. Using a Regression Kink Design (RKD), we can estimate the change in slope of the employment
rate (Nielsen et al., 2010; Card et al., 2015), which re‡ects average extensive margin e¤ects for those near
the budget set kink.
The elasticity of participation with respect to the ANTR can be expressed as a function of the change
in the slope of the employment rate at the kink, as well as other observable moments in the data. All
else equal, the larger the change in the slope of employment at the kink point, the larger the elasticity of
employment with respect to the ANTR. If some individuals do not face such frictions and some do, then we
estimate a lower bound on the average elasticity among both of these two groups without making parametric
or distributional assumptions. We suggest that this method for estimating (a lower bound on) extensive
margin elasticities is valid without such assumptions not only in the case of employment (i.e. a corner
solution in leisure demand), but also in the case of demand for other commodities in the presence of …xed
costs of extensive margin decisions as well as intensive margin frictions.
Parallel logic implies that in the presence of such a friction, a notch in the budget set leads to a discontinuous change in the level of employment as a function of the desired earnings individuals would choose
if employed. This is illustrated by the solid line in Figure 1B. Again, this prediction is non-parametrically
valid within the model we specify and does not rely on assuming a representative agent. The magnitude of
the discontinuity can be estimated using a Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD). The elasticity of participation can again be expressed as a function of the magnitude of the discontinuity as well as other estimable
parameters, and we suggest this method is also generalizable to demand for other commodities.
One collection of prior literature explicitly uses kinked or notched budget sets to estimate intensive
margin responses, while abstracting from the extensive margin that we study (e.g. Burtless and Hausman,
1978; Hausman, 1981; Saez, 2010; Chetty et al., 2011; Kleven and Waseem, 2013; Kleven, 2016). Previous
literature on the e¤ect of the marginal incentives to be employed on extensive margin employment decisions,
including the literature based on non-linear budget sets, has generally imposed parametric restrictions to
generate labor supply estimates (Manski, 2014), or has not explicitly related causal responses to the budget
constraint (Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999). For example, prior literature contains estimates of extensive
margin responses to employment incentives under the distributional assumptions in Tobit or discrete choice
models (McDonald and Mo¢ tt, 1980; Mo¢ tt, 1983; Hoynes, 1996; Keane and Mo¢ tt, 1998; Blundell and
Shephard, 2012; see the surveys in Keane, 2011, or Saez et al., 2012). Similarly, Alpert and Powell (2014)
develop a method that can be used when capital and labor income are both observed under certain restrictions
on functional forms. Other papers have performed program evaluations of such e¤ects using randomized
experiments (e.g. Bitler et al., 2006) or other techniques such as di¤erence-in-di¤erences (e.g. Eissa and
Liebman, 1996), but with empirical models that do not explicitly take into account how the data relate

2

to the budget constraint (Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999). For example, such papers do not model intensive
margin responses to kinks or notches jointly with extensive margin responses. We specify the conditions
under which our method can be used, and our model allows us to be explicit about the about the population
and parameter that our elasticity refers to.
Two recent papers have investigated the e¤ects of a notch on extensive margin decisions in very di¤erent
contexts than ours. Kleven et al. (2014) explore the e¤ect of a kink on migration using di¤erences-indi¤erences methods, and Kopczuk and Munroe (2015) show that a housing tax notch creates “unraveling”of
productive matches within a bargaining model for the particular housing context. Our work develops methods
applicable in the context of a general budget set kink or notch, with an application to the employment
decision.3
None of these existing methods applies the RKD or RDD design in the novel context of explicitly using
kinks or notches in budget sets to estimate extensive margin labor supply or earnings responses.4 Thus, a
key feature of our method is that its central predictions can be transparently con…rmed in a simple graph of
the data showing whether the slope or level of the employment rate changes discontinuously at the kink. Our
method explicitly focuses on discontinuities in the data to drive the results. As our empirical method is valid
under a di¤erent set of assumptions than alternative methods for estimating extensive margin responses, we
see our method as complementary to other approaches.
Substantively, we apply our method for kinks to show that extensive margin responses are important in
the context of the Social Security Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) Annual Earnings Test (AET).
Although we focus on the AET, we also explain how our method can be used in other contexts, and we show
empirically that in a broader sample of ages— not just older Americans subject to the AET— conditions
hold that allow our method to be used. The AET reduces OASI claimants’ current OASI bene…ts as a
proportion of earnings in excess of an exempt amount. For example, for OASI claimants aged 62 to the year
of attaining the Normal Retirement Age (NRA) of 66 in 2018, current OASI bene…ts are reduced by one
dollar for every additional two dollars earned above $17,040. This could reduce OASI claimants’incentives
for additional work. Reductions in current bene…ts due to the AET sometimes lead to increases in later
bene…ts; nonetheless, as we discuss, several factors may explain why individuals’ earnings still respond to
the AET.
The AET is a natural context for studying the extensive margin e¤ects of non-linear budget sets. The
AET is a signi…cant factor a¤ecting the income of many older Americans. The AET’s large bene…t reduction
3
A sm all literature has develop ed non-param etric m ethods for estim ating a di¤erent param eter, or in a substantially di¤erent context.
Blom quist et al. (2015) non-param etrically estim ate the e¤ect of a non-linear budget set on exp ected lab or incom e, without separating
the intensive and extensive m argin resp onses that are necessary for welfare evaluation. In a welfare program creating kinks and notches,
as well as under-rep orting of incom e, welfare stigm a, and hassle costs of welfare work requirem ents, Kline and Tartari (2016) develop
non-param etric b ounds on lab or supply resp onses in the context of the particular features of their setting, whereas our pap er fo cuses
on b ehavior around a general kink or notch.
4
In Austria, M anoli and Web er (2016) use an RKD to study retirem ent decisions relying on a Saez (2010)-typ e m o del of intensive
m argin bunching in retirem ent at the retirem ent age, while M anoli and Web er (forthcom ing) study bunching in retirem ent at notches
created by severance paym ents using intensive m argin m etho ds. Sim ilarly, Card et al. (2015) and Card et al. (2016) use an RKD to
estim ate the e¤ect of unem ploym ent b ene…ts on unem ploym ent, but in their context the unem ploym ent b ene…t do es not dep end on
contem p oraneous earnings and therefore do es not create the kinked budget constraint studied in this pap er or in other literature on
kinked budget constraints such as Hausm an (1981) or Saez (2010).

3

rate (BRR) can lead to a large budget set kink, suggesting that the AET could have important impacts
on employment that policy-makers wish to understand. Particularly as the economy-wide employment-topopulation ratio has fallen by over four percentage points since its peak in 2000 (Aaronson et al., 2014), many
policy makers are interested in ways to a¤ect employment rates (Abraham and Kearney, 2017), including
potential changes to the AET (Tergesen, 2016). Indeed, the AET is a leading candidate in helping to explain
the upward spike in the hazard of retirement at age 62 (Gruber and Wise 1999). The importance of the
AET is now increasing as the NRA gradually rises from 65 for those born in 1937 and earlier, to 67 for those
born in 1960 and later, exposing more OASI claimants to the AET. Even in 2003— the last year for which
we have bene…ts data— when the NRA was only 65.5, 538,000 bene…ciaries lost fully $4.30 billion of current
total bene…ts to the AET.5
To estimate the employment e¤ects of the AET, we use Social Security Administration (SSA) data on
a 25 percent random sample of the U.S. population in birth cohorts 1918 to 1923 over the years 1978 to
1987.6 These data cover 11,397,336 observations of calendar year earnings and other information on 1,424,667
individuals in our full sample. Using an RKD, we uncover a novel fact: as a function of past earnings—
which captures desired earnings as we verify— the slope of the employment rate among 63 to 64 year-olds
discontinuously decreases around the budget set kink created by the AET at the exempt amount.7 We
conduct several placebo and other robustness checks to verify that we have found a true e¤ect on earnings,
as opposed to an underlying nonlinearity in the employment rate.
A baseline speci…cation shows that the point estimate of the elasticity of employment with respect to
the ANTR is at least 0.49.8 Simulations relying on these estimates show that eliminating the AET would
cause an increase in the annual employment rate at ages 63 to 64 of 1.4 percentage points in the group we
study near the kink, re‡ecting a 2.5 percent increase in employment. Using our extensive margin elasticity
from this paper, as well as the AET intensive margin elasticities from Gelber et al. (2013), we calculate that
earnings in the group we study decrease by 9.8 percent due to the AET. Of the total earnings reductions
due to the AET, 27.6 percent are associated with extensive margin exit decisions. Our model and results
therefore highlight both the potential importance of the AET to older workers’ earnings and employment
decisions, as well as the importance of the extensive margin responses in addition to the intensive margin
responses around the kink that are the focus of much recent literature following Saez (2010).
Our new estimates of the e¤ect of the AET on employment relate to long lines of previous research
on the e¤ect of Social Security and other types of pensions on retirement or employment decisions (see
5
If earnings and/or em ploym ent are reduced by the AET, then this calculated reduction in b ene…ts re‡ects a lower b ound on the
reduction in current b ene…ts we would hyp othetically observe if earnings and em ploym ent were inert in resp onse to the AET.
6
For our calculation of the $4.3 billion aggregate b ene…t reduction alone, we use the Bene…ts and Earnings Public Use File one
p ercent p opulation sam ple, b ecause this …le has inform ation on all birth cohorts until the m ore recent year 2003 that illustrates the
aggregate b ene…t reduction b etter after the NRA had risen ab ove 65. We use our 25 p ercent random sam ple of adm inistrative data
from 1978 to 1987 everywhere else b ecause these data allow much m ore statistical p ower to p erform the other estim ates in the pap er.
7
We fo cus on 63 to 64 year-olds for several reasons: this group is relevant to p olicy, as the AET currently applies to this group but
not to those over NRA; this is the youngest group sub ject to the AET for which m easured em ploym ent would b e a¤ected by the AET,
as we explain in detail later; and thus this is the group for which age 60 earnings represents the b est proxy for desired earnings.
8
For consistency with the previous literature on kink p oints that has fo cused on the e¤ect of taxation, we som etim es use “tax” as
shorthand for “tax-and-transfer,” as in our use of the term “ANTR” to apply to the AET, while recognizing that the AET reduces
So cial Security b ene…ts and is not adm inistered through the tax system .

4

the literature review in Blundell et al., 2016). With respect to the AET in particular, much of the previous
literature has focused on the policy’s intensive margin e¤ect (e.g. Burtless and Mo¢ tt, 1985; Friedberg, 1998;
Friedberg, 2000; Song and Manchester, 2007; Gelber et al., 2013), typically …nding moderate substitution
elasticities at the intensive margin. Given the clear but moderate responses at the intensive margin, it is
arguably surprising that nearly all prior studies …nd little evidence of extensive margin responses. Indeed,
much of the earlier empirical literature on the AET concludes that the policy has little meaningful e¤ect
on the labor supply of older men.9 More recent work has examined the e¤ect of the AET on employment
decisions using a di¤erence-in-di¤erences framework. Several of these papers …nd little evidence for an e¤ect
on the employment rate (Gruber and Orszag, 2003; Song, 2004; Song and Manchester, 2007; Haider and
Loughran, 2008), while Friedberg and Webb (2009) …nd a signi…cant e¤ect in some speci…cations in the
Current Population Survey.10
We interpret our evidence as showing a clear and robust impact of the AET on the annual employment
rate, in contrast to the bulk of previous literature. The combination of a large administrative dataset with
individual-level microdata (also used in various forms in Song, 2004, Song and Manchester, 2007, and Haider
and Loughran, 2008) and our novel identi…cation strategy based on discontinuities leads to precise estimates
of sizeable elasticities. Our paper is the …rst that has estimated a signi…cant impact of the AET at the
extensive margin through explicitly modeling individuals’ budget sets. However, we estimate the e¤ect of
the AET on those locating near the exempt amount in the policy-relevant 63 to 64 year-old group to which
the AET currently applies— a younger group than those studied in the di¤erence-in-di¤erences literature
cited above. Thus, our results are not directly comparable to this previous literature, but provide relatively
novel estimates for a younger group.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our model. Section 3 describes the policy environment.
Section 4 explains our empirical strategy. Section 5 discusses the data. Section 6 presents empirical evidence
on the response to the AET and performs counterfactual simulations. Section 7 concludes.

2

Model

We model how a kink in the budget set impacts an individual’s decision of whether or not to have a positive
amount of earnings, which we refer to as the “employment” decision. In particular, we explore under what
conditions the introduction of a kink in the e¤ective tax schedule should cause a corresponding kink in the
employment rate.11 We also explore the case of a budget set notch. Throughout, we make use of a potential
outcomes framework (Rubin, 1974).
9
See Viscusi (1979), Burtless and M o¢ t (1985), Gustm an and Steinm eier (1985, 1991), Vrom an (1985), Honig and Reim ers (1989),
and Leonesio (1990).
10
Exam ining the e¤ects of earnings tests in other countries using di¤erence-in-di¤erences designs, Baker and Benjam in (1999) …nd a
signi…cant e¤ect of the Canadian earnings test on weeks worked p er year but no signi…cant e¤ect on em ploym ent at som e p oint during
the year, and Disney and Sm ith (2002) …nd inconclusive evidence on the im pact of the U.K. earnings test on the em ploym ent rate.
French (2005) uses m etho d of simulated m om ents in a lifecycle m o del to estim ate the e¤ects of health, wealth (including all form s of
p ension wealth, not just incentives created by the the AET), and wages on lab or supply and retirem ent; simulations based on these
estim ates im ply that elim inating the AET would cause individuals to retire later on average.
11
To clarify, we use “kink” in two senses— b oth to describ e a discontinuity in the e¤ective m arginal tax rate in the budget set, and
to describ e a discontinuity in the slop e of an outcom e variable (in our case the em ploym ent rate).

5

We index two potential states of the world by j 2 f0; 1g. In state 0 individuals face a linear tax
i.e. T0 (z) =

0 z,

0,

where Tj ( ) denotes their tax liability in state j and z denotes their pre-tax earnings.

Alternatively, in the case of a kink, in state 1 the tax schedule exhibits a change in slope at z :

T1 (z) =

8
<

0 z;

:

0z

+

1

if z < z

(z

z ) if z

(1)

z

In the case of a notch, the tax schedule in state 0 is the same, but now, in state 1, the tax schedule
exhibits a “downward”notch at z , where “downward”indicates an increase in the tax liability or a decrease
in transfers. As in Kleven and Waseem (2013), the notched schedule takes the form: T1 (z) =
[dT + d

0

z+

z] 1 fz > z g, where dT is a “pure notch,” i.e. an intercept shift in the budget set, and d

captures a "proportional notch," i.e. a change in level and slope. In our application we interpret z as
earnings and T as a tax schedule, but an analogous model should apply to consumption of any good (or
“bad”) under a price schedule with a convex kink or downward notch.
Following much previous literature on employment responses to kinks or notches (e.g. Hausman, 1981;
Saez, 2010; Kleven and Waseem, 2013), we begin with a model in which individuals’ utility depends on
consumption and earnings, u (c; z; n), where the partial e¤ect of an increase in z on utility is negative as it
requires e¤ort to increase earnings, and the partial e¤ect of an increase in c on utility is positive. We assume
u ( ) is a function of class C 2 . We do not make assumptions constraining the nature of income e¤ects, e.g.
we do not assume that utility is quasi-linear, that leisure is a normal good, or other such assumptions. As
in Saez (2010) and much subsequent literature, we model the determination of earnings, rather than hours
worked, as earnings (but not hours worked) are observed in many administrative datasets. However, our
method can easily be adapted to apply to the determination of hours worked. Our index of “ability” is n;
the marginal rate of substitution of c for z is decreasing in n at all levels of c and z.12 To simplify the
model for the time being, we begin by assuming that individuals maximize utility subject to a static budget
constraint:
cnj = znj

Tj (znj )

(2)

where znj is realized earnings for an individual with ability n in state j. At an interior solution, the …rst-order
condition, (1

Tj0 (z))uc + uz

0, implicitly de…nes the earnings supply function (we suppress subscripts

here as shorthand).

2.1

Intensive Margin Responses

Given this setup, we brie‡y review the intensive margin e¤ect of a kink or notch. As shown in Saez (2010),
a kinked budget set leads to a discontinuity in the earnings density at the kink due to intensive margin
responses. Assuming a smooth distribution of ability n, a range of individuals who would earn between z
and z +

z in state 0 will respond in state 1 by reducing earnings to the kink at z . This is referred to as

12

This im plies a standard single-crossing prop erty assum ed in these m o dels, which generates rank preservation in earnings, conditional
on earning a p ositive am ount.

6

“bunching” at the kink. The reduction in earnings
earns the most, z +
the kink, d

1

z of the “marginal buncher”— i.e. the buncher who

z , in state 0— can be related to the size of the change in the marginal tax rate at
0,

in order to estimate an intensive margin elasticity (Saez, 2010).

In the case of a notched budget set, intensive margin responses are analyzed in Kleven and Waseem (2013).
Those who would earn between z and z + 4z N in state 0 bunch at z in state 1. In state 1, in the absence
of adjustment frictions no one will locate in the strictly dominated region above the notch. However, in the
presence of adjustment frictions, there may be “inert”individuals who remain in the dominated region rather
than bunching. In this case, the amount of bunching in combination with the share of earners remaining in
the dominated region can be used to estimate a structural intensive margin elasticity.

2.2

Extensive Margin Responses

In addition to the intensive margin response that much recent literature has focused on, individuals may also
respond at the extensive margin. In the model of a kink brie‡y described in Section 2.1 and exposited in
greater detail elsewhere such as Saez (2010), preferences and budget sets are convex, which restricts a small
tax change only to a¤ect the choice between zero and in…nitesimally small earnings supply (e.g. Kleven
and Kreiner, 2005). To capture the realistic pattern of potential entry to or exit from non-trivial levels of
earnings, we introduce a …xed cost of employment (Cogan, 1981; Eissa et al., 2008). Utility conditional on
working is now given by:
u (cnj ; znj ; n) = v (cnj ; znj ; n)

qnj 1 fznj > 0g

(3)

where j 2 f0; 1g indexes the state of the world, and the state-speci…c, additively separable …xed cost of
employment, qnj , is drawn from a distribution with CDF G ( qj n) and pdf g ( qj n). If an agent does not
work, she receives a reservation level of utility of u c0 ; 0; n = v 0 in either state of the world.13 ;14 We can
interpret our framework as accommodating extensive margin frictions in the form of a …xed cost, as such
frictions could be considered part of the …xed cost of working. We often refer to the …xed cost of employment
as the …xed cost of working.
We pay special attention to whether or not the individual locates at a corner, i.e. znj = 0. Let z~nj denote
the optimal level of earnings in state j conditional on working. This is chosen by maximizing u (c; z; n) subject
to (2). The individual works in state j if:
v (~
znj

Tj (~
znj ) ; z~nj ; n)

qnj > v 0

(4)

Our key behavioral response of interest is the extensive margin response to the presence of a kink or
notch. Here we de…ne an individual’s type by their optimal interior earnings conditional on working in state
0, i.e. z~n0 . (We will often refer to z~n0 as “counterfactual” or “desired” earnings.) An isomorphism exists
13
W ithout loss of generality, the outside option, v 0 , do es not vary with n or j. This is b ecause cross-sectional and state-sp eci…c
variation in the outside option is not separately identi…ed from the …xed cost of entry qnj . We therefore collapse all such variation into
the …xed cost of entry.
14
Writing the …xed cost q as separable from v, as in (3) ab ove, sim pli…es the exp osition. W ithout loss of generality, this m o del
is equivalent to a m odel in which these are not separable per se, and instead we express utility sim ply as v (c; z; n). Letting c0n b e
consum ption when not working, we can then p osit a discontinuity in v (c; z; n) at the b oundary of the supp ort of z that re‡ects the
…xed cost. Thus, we can de…ne a …xed cost qn as: qn
limz >0+ v c0n ; 0; n
v c0n ; z; n .

7

between this earnings amount and ability n, and for empirical purposes using an earnings amount is natural
to implement. The probability of working in state j conditional on type z~n0 is:
Pr ( znj > 0j z~n0 ) = Pr qnj

v (~
znj

v 0 z~n0 = G q nj n

Tj (~
znj ) ; z~nj ; n)

(5)

where:
q nj

v (~
znj

Tj (~
znj ) ; z~nj ; n)

v0

(6)

is the critical value for the …xed cost of employment that leaves the agent indi¤erent between working
and not working. We allow the G( ) function to vary across individuals so that we have two sources of
heterogeneity: (1) preferences captured by the v( ) function pin down intensive margin heterogeneity but
also a¤ect the extensive margin through q n1 , and (2) the unrestricted heterogeneity in the G ( ) function
allows for di¤erences in extensive margin responses independent of the v ( ) function.15 We make a number of
assumptions regarding smoothness in heterogeneity. First, we assume that G ( qnj j n) is continuous. Second,
we assume that the partial derivative of G ( qnj j n) with respect to qnj , g ( qnj j n), is continuous in qnj and
n. Third, we similarly assume that the partial derivative of G ( qnj j n) with respect to n, @G ( qnj j n) =@n, is
continuous in qnj and n. Finally, we assume that the CDF of n is continuously di¤erentiable.

2.3

Modeling Incentives with a Kink or Notch

To demonstrate the impact of a kink or notch on the decision to work, we illustrate the extensive margin
incentives created by a kink or notch in Figure 2. Here we plot the AN T R

1

[T (z)

T (0)] =z, as a

function of desired earnings. The ANTR measures the share of pre-tax income that is kept after taxes when
working and earning z. With a linear tax schedule, the ANTR is constant at 1

0.

With a kinked tax

schedule, the ANTR decreases above z , and the slope of the ANTR decreases discontinuously at z . With
a notched schedule, the level of the ANTR discontinuously decreases at z (and its slope changes as well).
In Figure 3 we illustrate the indi¤erence curves governing the extensive margin decision under the alternative tax schedules. We model the …xed cost of working visually by allowing agents to choose a level of
earnings along the prevailing tax schedule, or to earn zero and receive a level of consumption of c0 .16
Panels A and B show a kinked tax schedule, while Panels C and D show a notch. In Panels A and C the
agent’s optimal level of earnings conditional on working is z . In this case she prefers earning z to earning
zero. Her response to the kink or notch is simply a reduction in earnings. In Panels B and D the agent
similarly has optimal earnings of z conditional on having positive earnings. In this case the individual’s
preferences lead her to earn zero rather than earning at the kink. Next we formally explore such responses.
15
If extensive m argin resp onses were instead only driven by the value function v ( ), we m ight generate unexp ected predictions or
restrictions on the em ploym ent function. For exam ple, if G ( ) were hom ogeneous in our m o del, we would necessarily require that lab or
force participation b e upward sloping as a function of z~n0 .
16
For the purp oses of this …gure, we can rede…ne c0 using the following identity u c0 ; 0; n
v 0 + qnj .

8

2.4

Employment Probability with a Kink and Unconstrained Intensive Margin
Responses

In modeling the employment response to non-linear budget sets, we focus on the case of a kink because our
empirical application features a kink. We therefore begin with the kink setting, initially considering the
standard context in which individuals are free to adjust their earnings anywhere on the intensive margin.
In other words, individuals’ earnings, conditional on having positive earnings z~nj , may di¤er across the
two tax schedules, and earnings choices are subject to no constraints other than the budget constraint
c=z

T (z). Let the employment function in state 1, conditional on counterfactual, interior earnings in

state 0, be Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ). This is the probability of having zero earnings in state 1 as a function of the
level of earnings in state 0. We have shown that Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) = G ( q n1 j n). We now explore how this
function changes as z~n0 changes. In Appendix A, we prove the following result:
Proposition 1 If the individuals can freely adjust their earnings on the intensive margin, then the employment probability, as a function of earnings in state 0, will exhibit no …rst-order change in slope at z :
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
= lim
d~
zn0
z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
:
d~
zn0

(7)

Figure 1A illustrates this result. The x-axis measures counterfactual earnings in state 0 conditional
on having positive earnings, i.e. z~n0 . The y-axis plots an illustrative employment rate. The dashed line
represents a presumed smooth relationship between the employment rate in state 0 under a linear tax
schedule, i.e. Pr ( zn0 > 0j z~n0 ), and earnings conditional on having positive earnings, i.e. z~n0 : The dotted
line plots the employment rate in state 1 under a kinked tax schedule, Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ), while the x-axis
continues to plot z~n0 . In this case, we assume that individuals are unrestricted in their earnings choices.
We see that the employment function is unchanged at counterfactual earnings levels below z , as the tax
schedule remains the same in the two states. Above z we see a gradual decrease in the probability of positive
earnings in state 1 relative to state 0, due to the decrease in the ANTR (recall Figure 2A). Nonetheless, the
kink in the ANTR does not translate into a kink in the employment rate. Intuitively, the ability to adjust
on the intensive margin smoothes the …rst-order changes in the slope of the ANTR at z .

2.5

Employment Probability with a Kink and Constrained Intensive Margin
Responses

Although the kink in the budget set does not lead to a kink in employment when individuals are free to
adjust to any earnings level, a kink in the employment rate arises when frictions impede intensive margin
adjustment. To illustrate the ideas as simply and transparently as possible, we begin with the case that
individuals are completely restricted from earning other amounts at the intensive margin, so that z~n1

z~n0 .

Individuals are still allowed to vary their extensive margin choices across the two states. Numerous papers
have found evidence for such restrictions on labor supply or earnings, for example due to constraints on

9

hours or earnings choices, or …xed costs of adjustment that would prevent adjustment to the kink for those
in this region (e.g. Altonji and Paxson, 1988; Dickens and Lundberg, 1993; Chetty et al., 2007; Chetty et
al., 2011; Gelber et al., 2013). Modeling and estimating frictions that could give rise to such restrictions is
the focus of other work (Gelber et al. 2013); for the purpose of this paper it is not necessary to take a stand
on what speci…c process gives rise to such restrictions, as the existence of such restrictions is su¢ cient to
generate our results. In Appendix A, we prove the following result:
Proposition 2 If individuals are not able to adjust earnings on the intensive margin, i.e. z~n1

z~n0 , then

the employment probability, as a function of desired earnings conditional on employment in state 0, will
exhibit a …rst-order change in slope (i.e. a kink) at z . This kink is given by:
lim

z~n0 !z

where

n

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
=
d~
zn0

vc is the marginal utility of consumption, and q n 1 , n , and

d

n

n

g ( qn 1 j n )

(8)

all refer to the individual for

whom z~n0 = z .
Returning to Figure 1A, the solid line depicts the relationship between counterfactual earnings in state
0 and the probability of positive earnings when a kink is present in state 1 and z~n1

z~n0 . The slope of the

employment rate now discontinuously changes at z , where the ANTR also changes slope. We have closed
one of the channels through which individuals respond to the increase in tax liability, and thus the slope of
the employment rate decreases discontinuously at z . Equation (8) has an intuitive interpretation: the kink
in the employment rate is proportional to d , the size of the kink in the tax schedule;

n

, the marginal utility

of after-tax income; and g ( q n 1 j n ), the density of workers who are on the margin of entering employment in
state 0. These parameters apply to the individual earning z in state 0. Because the kink in the employment
rate we model is only detectable in the presence of frictions in intensive margin adjustment (whether due to
…xed costs or constraints on earnings), our method can therefore also provide an incidental test of whether
intensive margin frictions exist.
In Appendix B.1, we extend the model to allow for an arbitrary set of discrete earnings choices (other
than z for the constrained types), rather than the parsimonious and transparent— but more restrictive—
assumption of this section that z~n1

z~n0 .17 We show that there is a discontinuity in the slope of the

employment rate as long as individuals who earn near z in state 0 are constrained from making small
adjustments exactly to z in state 1. We also demonstrate in this case that the extensive margin behavior
for those near z is not a¤ected by the ability to make discrete adjustments to other earnings levels, e.g. a
part-time job.
17
In fact, one can allow for som e continuity in the choice set as long as, lo osely sp eaking, individuals cannot m ake adjustm ents exactly
to z . See App endix B.1 for details.

10

2.6

Estimating an Extensive Margin Elasticity with a Kink

When a kink is created in the employment rate due to a kink in the budget set, we may use this behavioral
response to estimate an extensive margin elasticity
[T (z)

for a given average net-of-tax rate 1

a

1

T (0)] =z. Using the fact that Pr (z > 0) = G (q), we have:
d Pr (z > 0) 1 a
@q
1 a
= g (q)
d (1 a) Pr (z > 0)
@ (1 a) Pr (z > 0)

For now we maintain the assumption of z~n1

z~n0 as in Section 2.5 and denote

the estimated discontinuity

at z in the slope of the employment probability. Given (8) and the fact that @ q /@ (1
= g ( qn 1 j n )
where

1 a
@q n 1
=
@ (1 a) Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z )

a) = z, we have:

1 a
Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z )

is the extensive margin elasticity for the individual earning z in state 0, and

the magnitude of the kink at z in the slope of the ANTR, 1

18

a.

(9)
=

d =z is

In other words, our model naturally

suggests an RKD approach to estimating the elasticity of extensive margin participation with respect to
the ANTR. Of course, although this approach yields a single elasticity, if the function g ( ) is heterogeneous
across di¤erent sub-groups then the elasticity may also vary across these sub-groups. Note also that although
our approach does not allow us to estimate the extent to which the marginal utility of income
…xed cost distribution g ( q n 1 j n ) separately contribute to

n

, the extensive margin elasticity

and the

on its own

can allow us to perform counterfactual simulations of the implications of di¤erent tax schedules (e.g. Eissa
et al., 2008).

2.7

Interpreting the Observed Elasticity with a Kink

Thus far we have derived an expression for the extensive margin elasticity under a kink assuming that
individuals cannot adjust on the intensive margin across tax schedules (or in Appendix B.1, assuming that
individuals can make adjustments anywhere, except that those near z in state 0 cannot make adjustments
in state 1 to z ). In fact, some individuals may be able to adjust on the intensive margin to z . Suppose that
under a kink we observe both intensive margin bunching (described in Section 2.1) and a discontinuity at
counterfactual earnings z in the slope of the employment rate. In this case we discuss how to interpret the
“observed”extensive margin elasticity, ^ = ^ =

(1

a) = Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z ), where ^ is the estimated

kink at z in the employment rate. Below we explore frameworks that allow for both bunching among some
individuals and a kink in the employment rate among others. We show that the observed elasticity, ^, can
be interpreted as a weak lower bound on the “structural” elasticity

, i.e. ^

, where “observed” and

“structural” are used in a sense analogous to Chetty (2012). Here the “observed” elasticity refers to what
we observe due to an increase in marginal tax rates above the kink among those earning near z , which
is in part a¤ected by the lack of an extensive margin response among those unconstrained at the intensive
margin. The “structural” elasticity refers to the elasticity we would hypothetically observe in response to a
18

1

To see this, note that b elow z , (1 a) = 1
a) =z = 0, while ab ove z , (1
0 and @ (1
a) =z = d z =z 2 . W hen z = z , this reduces to d =z .
1 + d z =z and @ (1

11

a) = 1

(

0z

+

1

(z

z )) =z =

change in average tax rates everywhere, among those earning near z and including both those constrained
and those unconstrained on the intensive margin.19
2.7.1

Model with Mixture of Types

One approach to capturing both bunching and a kink in the employment probability is to posit a model
with two types of individuals: Type A that can adjust on the intensive margin, and Type B that cannot
(e.g. Kleven and Waseem, 2013). We have shown that among Type A agents, the employment function has
a continuous slope. Among Type B agents, the slope is discontinuous at z . Let

B

= Pr ( Bj z~n0 = z ) be

the probability of being Type B conditional on having earnings at z in state 0. It follows that:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
=
d~
zn0

B

gB ( q n 1 j n )

d

(10)

where gB ( ) is the pdf of …xed costs among Type B agents. In this sense, our estimate of the extensive
margin elasticity is attenuated by a factor

B

and can therefore be considered a weak lower bound on the

elasticity among Type B agents with state 0 earnings z . Among Type A agents who earn above z in
state 0, there may also be a response to the kink that increases gradually above z as in Figure 1A, but our
method only picks up responses among Type B agents. Nonetheless, the observed elasticity is a lower bound
on the elasticity among all of those earning z in state 1:
^
1 a
= B
^=
Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z )

B

A

A

+

B

B

=

(11)

In principle it would be possible to use the observed elasticity ^, together with an estimate of the
fraction constrained
estimating

B

B,

to estimate the structural elasticity among constrained agents,

B

= ^=

B:

However,

requires more restrictive assumptions, including assuming that types A and B have the same

distribution of q and n, as we explain in Appendix B.2. Our observed elasticity remains of interest regardless
of the underlying proportion of agents displaying di¤erent types of behavior, both in the sense that policymakers are interested in the raw employment e¤ects of changing policy parameters like the average tax rate,
and in the sense that it re‡ects a lower bound on the structural elasticity.
2.7.2

Model with a Fixed Cost of Intensive Margin Adjustment

In an alternative model of intensive margin frictions, individuals face a …xed cost of adjusting earnings on the
intensive margin in response to variation in the tax schedule (see Gelber et al., 2013, for a detailed exposition
of this model). Such frictions could re‡ect a variety of factors, including lack of knowledge of a tax regime,
the cost of negotiating a new contract with an employer, or the time and …nancial cost of job search. With
a …xed intensive margin adjustment cost individuals will only adjust if the utility gain of intensive margin
adjustment exceeds the …xed cost. Recall that for individuals earning z~n0 < z there is no change in the tax
schedule from state 0 to state 1, and therefore z~n1 = z~n0 . Gelber et al. (2013) show that due to the …xed
cost of intensive margin adjustment individuals with z~n0 > z for whom z~n0 is su¢ ciently close to z will
also prefer to keep earnings …xed across the two tax schedules, i.e. z~n1 = z~n0 . The reason is that the utility
19
Although we use the term “structural elasticity,” the extensive m argin elasticity dep ends on the numb er of individuals who are just
indi¤erent b etween working and not working— i.e. g ( qj n )— which varies dep ending on the em ploym ent level.

12

gain from adjusting on the intensive margin converges to zero as z~n0 approaches z : the optimal level of
earnings is z in state 1 for this group. In this case, in a close enough neighborhood around z , individuals
behave as in Section 2.5, and our results from Section 2.5 follow. In other words, a …xed cost of intensive
margin adjustment can rationalize the assumption that some individuals do not adjust to z in state 1, and
it follows that the observed elasticity re‡ects the structural elasticity.20

2.8

Extensive Margin Response to a Notch

Our method can be extended to the case of a notch. As in the case of a kink, we …rst explore the setting in
which individuals are free to adjust earnings on the intensive margin. We then contrast this with a setting
with frictions on the intensive margin, as documented in Kleven and Waseem (2013). In Appendix A we
prove the following:
Proposition 3 If individuals can freely adjust their earnings on the intensive margin, then the employment
probability, as a function of earnings in state 0, will be continuous at z :
lim

z~n0 !z

+

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) =

lim

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) :

z~n0 !z

(12)

Furthermore, the employment probability, as a function of earnings in state 0, will exhibit no …rst-order
change in slope at z :
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
= lim
d~
zn0
z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
:
d~
zn0

(13)

This is illustrated in the dotted line in Figure 1B. Its slope is continuous at z :
Proposition 4 If individuals are not able to adjust earnings on the intensive margin, i.e. z~n;1 = z~n;0 , then
the employment probability, as a function of desired earnings in state 0, will exhibit a …rst-order change in
levels (i.e. a discontinuity) at z . This discontinuity is given by:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )

lim

z~n0 !z

where the critical earnings levels are de…ned as qn
v (z

T0 (z )

dT

d

z ; z ; n ) and

T1+

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) = G qn+ 1 n
0

(z )

v (z
limz!z

G ( qn 0 j n )

T0 (z ) ; z ; n ) v 0 and qn+ 1
+

v z

(14)
T1+ (z ) ; z ; n

T1 (z). Moreover, using a …rst-order approxi-

mation for the G ( ) and v ( ), we have:
lim

z~n0 !z

where

n

+

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )

lim

z~n0 !z

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )

[dT + d

z ]

vc is the marginal utility of consumption, and q +
n 1 , q n 0 , n , and

n

n

g ( qn 0 j n )

(15)

all refer to the individual

for whom z~n0 = z .
This is illustrated in the solid line in Figure 1B. This line shows a discontinuity in the level of employment
at z .
20

If there is heterogeneity in the …xed cost of intensive m argin adjustm ent, then as long as the …xed cost is strictly p ositive — i.e.
> 0 for all
— then the ab ove still holds in a neighb orho o d near z .

13

=

In the case of intensive margin frictions, the employment probability also features a discontinuity in slope,
due to the discontinuity in the ANTR shown in Figure 2b. The magnitude of this change in slope depends
on the functional form of the utility function and the distribution of …xed costs. As an example, in Appendix
A we provide a result after imposing some restrictions on both functions.
Compared to the case of a kink in the tax schedule, we continue to predict continuity in the level and slope
of the employment probability as a function of counterfactual earnings when intensive margin adjustment is
possible. However, once we introduce frictions on the intensive margin, the employment probability exhibits
a discontinuity in both levels and slope. This suggests using a Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD)
to recover our parameter of interest non-parametrically using the discontinuity in levels. If we estimate a
discontinuity D in the employment probability at z , we can use this to recover a discrete version of the
extensive margin elasticity:
N

=

G ( qn 0 j n ) G qn+ 1 n
4 Pr (z > 0) 1 a
=
4 (1 a) Pr (z > 0)
4 (1 a)

1 a
=
Pr (z > 0)

D
1 a
:
[dT =z + d ] Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z )
(16)

As in the case of a kink, with a notch and both constrained and unconstrained types, the observed elasticity
will re‡ect an attenuated version of the structural elasticity. This is governed by an analogous set of formulas
to (10) and (11) in the case of a kink.

3
3.1

Policy Environment
Annual Earnings Test (AET) Rules

We apply the kink framework from the prior section in the context of estimating responses to the kink
created by the AET. Social Security Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) provides annuity income to
older Americans and to survivors of deceased workers. Individuals with su¢ cient years of eligible earnings
can claim OASI bene…ts through their own work history as early as age 62, the Early Entitlement Age (EEA).
They can claim full bene…ts once they reach the Normal Retirement Age (NRA), which is 65 for individuals
in our sample. The AET reduces current OASI bene…ts in proportion to earnings above an exempt amount.
For example, consider a 63-year-old earning $23,040 in 2018, receiving $1,000 in monthly bene…ts, and facing
a $17,040 exempt amount. Her annual bene…ts would be reduced by $3; 000 = ($23; 040

$17; 040)

50%,

equal to 3 months of bene…ts. For those whose age is at the NRA and over, the real exempt amount is
substantially higher than for those below the NRA. Over the years we study, 1978 to 1987, the exempt
amount for those under NRA ranged from $9,787 to $11,517, while the exempt amount for those NRA and
over was on average around $3,600 higher than the amount for those under NRA. The exempt amount by
year and age range is shown in Appendix Figure 1. For those under the NRA but above the EEA— the main
group that our empirical work studies— the bene…t reduction rate (BRR) was 50 percent throughout the
period we study, 1978 to 1987. During our period, the AET applied to earnings from ages 62 to 71 during

14

1978 to 1982, and from ages 62 to 69 during 1983 to 1987.
During the period we study, the AET rules for married couples imply that the couple’s total bene…t is
reduced at the rate of one dollar for every two dollars that each spouse’s individual current earnings exceed
the exempt amount applying to each spouse. How this occurs depends on how bene…ts are claimed. If each
spouse is a primary OASI bene…ciary, then the AET reduces each spouse’s separate bene…t by the BRR
multiplied by that spouse’s individual current earnings in excess of the exempt amount. If one spouse is
a primary bene…ciary and the other is a secondary or dual-entitled bene…ciary, the couple’s total bene…ts
are reduced by the BRR multiplied by the primary bene…ciary’s current individual earnings in excess of the
exempt amount, and further reduced by the BRR multiplied by the secondary or dual bene…ciary’s current
individual earnings in excess of the exempt amount. In either case, the relevant amount for applying the
AET is each individual’s current annual earnings, which we observe in our data.
When current OASI bene…ts are lost to the AET, future scheduled bene…ts may be increased in some
circumstances. This is sometimes referred to as “bene…t enhancement.” For bene…ciaries below the NRA in
particular, the bene…t enhancement, known as the “actuarial adjustment,” raises future bene…ts whenever
a claimant earns over the AET exempt amount.21 Future bene…ts are raised by 0.55 percent per month of
bene…ts withheld for the …rst three years of AET assessment. Returning to the example above, consider
the 63-year-old receiving $1,000 in monthly bene…ts due to the AET. Upon reaching the NRA, her monthly
bene…ts would increase by around $16.50 = 0.0055 x 3 x $1,000. On average, this adjustment is roughly
actuarially fair when considering the timing of claiming OASI (Diamond and Gruber, 1999).

3.2

Applying the Model in our Policy Setting

Our theoretical model for kinks in Section 2 generally applies to any context with a kinked budget set,
and it is speci…cally applicable in the case of the kink the AET creates at the exempt amount. Following
previous literature (e.g. Friedberg, 1998; Friedberg, 2000), we model the AET as creating a positive implicit
MTR for some individuals above the exempt amount, consistent with the empirical …nding in this previous
literature that some individuals bunch at the exempt amount. The MTR we assume is the BRR associated
with the reduction in the family’s total bene…ts (as described above), as is appropriate in a unitary model
of family labor supply (Becker, 1976). Thus, we interpret our results within this model as the e¤ect of the
AET applying to a given spouse’s earnings (but potentially reducing both spouses’combined current OASI
bene…ts at the BRR) on that spouse’s employment.
Even after taking bene…t enhancement into account, there are a number of reasons that the AET could
create a positive implicit MTR, and therefore a¤ect earnings and employment decisions. Those whose
expected lifespan is shorter than average should expect to collect OASI bene…ts for less time than average,
implying that the AET is …nancially punitive. Liquidity-constrained individuals or those who discount
faster than average may also reduce work in response to the AET. Finally, many individuals also may not
21
So cial Security Adm inistration (2012); G rub er and Orzag (2003). Gelb er et al. (2013) show that there is no evidence of a bunching
resp onse to the upward notch created by this asp ect of the p olicy.

15

understand the AET bene…t enhancement or other aspects of OASI (Honig and Reimers, 1989; Liebman
and Luttmer, 2015; Brown et al., 2013). Indeed, the earnings test is widely viewed as a pure tax. Most
popular guides highlight the Earnings Test but do not note the subsequent adjustment in bene…ts (Gruber
and Orszag, 2003). During the period that we study, the popular guide Your Income Tax (J.K. Lasser
Institute, 1987), for example, warned readers that if “you are under age 70, Social Security bene…ts are
reduced by earned income,”but did not mention bene…t adjustment. This is consistent with survey evidence
showing that most older adults understand that the AET reduces current bene…ts but do not know that later
bene…ts may be a¤ected (Brown and Perron, 2011). We follow most previous work and do not distinguish
among the potential reasons for a response to the AET, though Gelber et al. (2013) explore some of these
potential mechanisms.22
Our policy setting has a number of speci…c features that can be incorporated into the method for estimating elasticities using kinks in Section 2. First, individuals are subject to the AET only when they
choose to claim OASI; this mirrors other transfer programs that must be claimed to receive bene…ts. In
Appendix B.4 we extend our model to show under mild assumptions that when claiming can respond jointly
with working, the kink in the probability of earning a positive amount will be less negative than in the case
in which claiming is exogenous. Nonetheless, we can recover the elasticity among those claiming OASI by
dividing the observed elasticity by the probability of claiming at z . In the most general case in which we
relax these mild assumptions, we can still obtain a lower bound on this employment elasticity by subtracting
the kink in claiming from the kink in the employment probability. This is one of several reasons discussed
over the course of the paper that we may estimate a lower bound on the structural elasticity.
Second, in Section 2 we examined a static setting in which individuals only consider the current period’s
budget set and incentives. In a dynamic setting we may observe individuals serially facing a linear tax
(corresponding to state 0), followed temporally by a tax that creates a convex kink (corresponding to state
1); indeed this is the case in our empirical application, in which individuals are not subject to the AET
initially and become subject later. In such a dynamic setting with two or more periods, our static framework
will hold only in a model with borrowing constraints, myopia, or no income e¤ects. In Appendix B.3 we
present a fully dynamic, multi-period model with a joint decision over saving and earnings, and we show
that under a set of empirically relevant assumptions our results for kinks still hold: if intensive margin
frictions exist, a change in the slope of the employment rate occurs at the budget set kink, and we can
still recover the elasticity using (9). This appendix also discusses the interpretation of the parameter our
elasticity represents, depending on whether the tax change is anticipated or unanticipated. If agents act as if
they do not anticipate the change in an initial period— consistent with our empirical …ndings in this sample
as well as the results in Gelber et al. (2013) and Gelber et al. (2016)— then we can interpret the results as
22
Our fram ework provides certain secondary contributions relative to existing theoretical treatm ents of the AET (Blinder et al., 1980;
Burkhauser and Turner, 1978; Vrom an, 1985; Burtless and M o¢ tt, 1985; Gustm an and Steinm eier, 1985; Honig and Reim ers, 1989;
Gustm an and Steinm eier, 1991; Friedb erg, 1998). First, we fo cus on the AET’s extensive m argin e¤ects; in m any cases, existing m o dels
fo cus on the AET’s intensive m argin incentives. Note, however, that Vrom an (1979) and Friedb erg and Webb (2009) describ e inform ally
how constraints on lab or supply could lead the AET to have extensive m argin e¤ects. Second, and m ore im p ortant, we intro duce a
new m etho dology that exploits the sharp changes in incentives around the AET exem pt am ount to estim ate extensive m argin e¤ects.
We do not m o del shifts from the form al lab or m arket to “o¤-the-b o oks” em ploym ent as discussed in Christensen (1990).

16

re‡ecting the impact of an unanticipated change in policy. Third, after presenting a basic dynamic model in
Appendix B.3, we extend this model to tailor it to our particular policy setting by showing that our method
still applies when reductions in current bene…ts due to the AET can lead to increases in later bene…ts, as
under bene…t enhancement.

4

Empirical Strategy

Our empirical strategy is tailored to our empirical context, involving the kink in the budget set created by
the AET. Our model indicates that to estimate the extensive margin e¤ect of the kink, we should seek to
estimate the change in the slope of employment at the kink, which can be accomplished with an RKD. We
therefore focus on the empirical implementation of our method for kinks using an RKD. In the context of a
budget set notch, it would be possible to estimate the discontinuity in the level of the employment probability
in (14) using an RDD (see the survey in Lee and Lemieux, 2010), in which case parallel implementation
considerations would arise to those discussed below.

4.1

Regression Kink Design

Recent work on RKDs shows that under certain conditions, a change in the slope of the treatment intensity
can be used to identify local treatment e¤ects by comparing the relative magnitudes of the kink in the
treatment variable and the induced kink in the outcome variable (Nielsen et al., 2010). Under smoothness
assumptions that parallel the smoothness assumptions of our model, the estimates can be interpreted as a
treatment-on-the-treated or “local average response” parameter (Card et al., 2015).
In our context, the treatment intensity is the e¤ective ANTR for individual i at time t, AN T Rit , and
the primary outcome variable is the probability of positive earnings after becoming subject to the AET,
Pr (Lit = 1), where Lit is a dummy for positive earnings (and where Pr (Lit = 1) in the empirical model
corresponds to Pr (zn1 > 0) in the theoretical model). The AN T Rit is a function of earnings conditional on
working, which we take as desired earnings on a linear budget set z~i0t (corresponding to z~n0 in the model in
Section 2 above). Consistent with Figure 2, the AET creates a discontinuity at the exempt amount in the
slope of the ANTR as a function of z~i0t . In this case, we can estimate the causal e¤ect of the AET on the
employment rate by estimating the change at the exempt amount in the slope of the employment rate as a
function of z~i0t , in comparison to the change at the exempt amount in the slope of the ANTR. Speci…cally,
using the RKD we can estimate the marginal e¤ect of the ANTR on the employment probability as:
=1j~
zi0t )
=1j~
zi0t )
lim @ Pr( L@itz~i0t
lim @ Pr( L@itz~i0t
@ Pr (Lit = 1)
z~i0t !z +
z~i0t !z
=
zi0t )
@AN T Rit (~
zi0t )
it (~
@AN T Rit z~i0t =z
lim + @AN T@ zR
lim
~i0t
@ z~i0t
z~i0t !z

(17)

z~i0t !z

That is, the marginal e¤ect we can estimate is the change at the exempt amount in the slope of the employment probability as a function of desired earnings, divided by the change at the exempt amount in the slope
of the ANTR as a function of desired earnings.
The numerator of (17) can be estimated by relating Pr (Lit = 1) to desired earnings:

17

Pr (Lit = 1) =

J
X

j

(~
zi0t

j

zt ) + D

j=0

where D = 1 f~
zi0t

J
X

j

(~
zi0t

j

zt ) +

t

+ "it

zt g is an indicator for being above the exempt amount, the

"it is an error term, and

1

(18)

j=0

t

are time …xed e¤ects,

is the change in the slope of Pr (Lit = 1) at the exempt amount. We calculate

Pr (Lit = 1) at the individual level by averaging an indicator for employment over a range of ages, speci…cally
ages 63 and 64 in our main speci…cation. We retain the t subscript to allow for the fact that in di¤erent
speci…cations we may investigate employment over di¤erent time periods. This RKD yields a non-parametric
estimate of the e¤ect, because asymptotically the estimator uses only data arbitrarily close to the exempt
amount and is unbiased without any functional form restriction on the underlying function to be estimated
(Card et al., 2015). Our model in Section 2 makes no speci…c functional form assumptions, and expression
(9) for the elasticity only relies on expectations and partial derivatives, all of which can be estimated nonparametrically. Similarly, in the case of a budget set notch, an RDD would yield estimates that are nonparametrically valid (Lee and Lemieux 2010).
Identi…cation of the e¤ect of the AET on employment relies on two key assumptions (Card et al., 2015).
First, in the neighborhood of the exempt amount there is no discontinuity in the slope of age 63 to 64
employment that occurs for reasons unrelated to the AET. For example, bene…ciaries’ earnings could in
principle be a¤ected by other public programs, or by their human capital or work experience as manifested
in their hourly wage. Married bene…ciaries’earnings could also be a¤ected by their spouses’e¤ective MTRs.
We follow Saez (2010) and subsequent literature studying the e¤ects of public programs in assuming that
these factors jointly would have a smooth e¤ect on earnings in the neighborhood of z .23 Second, conditional
on unobservables, the distribution of the assignment variable, z~i0t , is smooth (i.e. the p.d.f. is continuously
di¤erentiable) in this neighborhood. These assumptions may not hold if we observe sorting in relation to
the exempt amount, as indicated by a discontinuous change at the exempt amount in the slope or level of
the density of the assignment variable, or in the distribution of predetermined covariates.

4.2

Measuring the ANTR

We would like to measure the ANTR in period t (i.e. ages 63 to 64) using the rules of the AET and the
earnings level z~i0t , the counterfactual level of earnings the individual would choose if there were a linear tax
schedule in period t. We do not observe this counterfactual level of earnings, because earnings at ages 63
to 64 (analogous to z~n1 from the model above) are endogenous to the AET, and furthermore earnings are
not observed for those who are not employed at those ages. Because of this endogeneity, actual observed
23
The 1978 and 1986 am endm ents to the Age Discrim ination in Em ploym ent Act (ADEA) extended the ages at which age discrim ination in em ploym ent was prohibited, but this did not have a discontinuous e¤ect on elderly work incentives at the exem pt am ount.
The 1977 So cial Security Am endm ents increased the Delayed Retirem ent Credit for those 65 to 69 b eginning in 1982, and the m aximum
age to which the AET applied decreased from 71 to 69 in 1983, but again neither of these should confound our RKD strategy. Other
program s, such as M edicaid, Supplem ental Security Incom e, Disability Insurance (DI), or taxes such as unem ploym ent insurance payroll
taxes distort earnings incentives at low earnings levels. We elim inate essentially all DI recipients from our sam ple through the restriction
to those who claim ed at 62 or later. The kinks created by other program s are typically at least several thousand dollars away from
the AET convex kink, and we verify that the kink in em ploym ent at the AET exem pt am ount in particular is statistically signi…cant
relative to placeb o kink lo cations.

18

earnings at ages 62, 63, or 64 cannot serve as adequate proxies for this counterfactual earnings level.
Many other papers have grappled with the issue of how to proxy for earnings or wages if individuals
choose to work, and thus how to proxy for the incentive to work. Given that the econometrician does not
directly observe counterfactual earnings, there is no alternative to making some assumption. One solution is
a selection correction in the context of the e¤ect of wages on labor supply, which generally requires functional
form assumptions (Heckman, 1979) or very powerful instruments (Powell, 1994). Another solution is to use
demographics to impute earnings if an individual works (e.g. Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001), which is more
di¢ cult in settings such as ours with a limited number of demographic variables in our administrative data.
Our solution to this issue is to estimate a bound on the elasticity by assuming that the ANTR an
individual would face at age 63 or 64 at her desired earnings level is the same as the ANTR she would face
given her age 60 earnings level. Thus, we proxy for desired earnings conditional on working at ages 63 and
64 in the absence of the AET, z~i0t , using actual earnings at age 60, zi60 . Individuals do not face the AET
kink at age 60, and therefore at age 60 their budget set is on average approximately linear in the region
of the exempt amount. We use earnings at age 60, rather than 61, to avoid any anticipatory manipulation
of earnings, and we show that there is no evidence for anticipatory manipulation in age 60 earnings in our
sample. Age 60 is the closest age to 63-64 that our data show is not subject to concerns about manipulation,
and therefore serves as the best proxy for counterfactual earnings. In our baseline RKD speci…cation, our
running variable is the distance between age 60 earnings in a given year and the exempt amount applying
to those aged 62 to 64 in that year.
The use of a proxy variable and the inability to observe AN T Rit raise challenges in the estimation of
the …rst stage of a “fuzzy RKD” (see Battistin and Chesher, 2014, on measurement error in the general
average treatment e¤ect framework). In our case, we rely on an analytic expression for the denominator of
equation (17). Speci…cally, we calculate the kink in AN T Rit using the AET rules, i.e.
d is the BRR. Next, we must address the use of a proxy for desired earnings,

zi60 ,

d =z , where

which may su¤er from

measurement error. Following Card et al. (2015), we model the measurement error in our proxy as:
zi60 = z~i0t + pit vit ;

(19)

where vit is a continuously distributed random variable, and pit is an indicator variable that equals zero
with probability

(~
zi0t ; vit ) > 0. Thus, the error in our observed proxy is a composite of a continuously

distributed variable and a mass point at zero. This implies that with some positive probability, , earnings
at age 60 equals desired earnings conditional on working in period t under a linear tax schedule. Note that
we need not assume that the measurement error is mean zero, only that the distribution of vit , conditional
on zi60 , is a smooth function of z 60 and that
Importantly, if

(~
zi0t ; vit ) > 0.

(~
zi0t ; vit ) < 1, so that desired earnings are variable from age 60 to ages 63 to 64, then

our procedure should overestimate the absolute value of the change in the ANTR at the exempt amount in
the …rst stage, and therefore we should estimate a lower bound on the elasticity. We show this formally in
Appendix A; this is an implication of Card et al. (2015). Since the lower bound we estimate will be large,
19

our conclusion will be that the elasticity is large. If there is no such persistence in desired earnings, then
we would not see a kink in the employment rate; thus, we can test whether

(~
zi0t ; vit ) > 0. In principle,

it would be possible to put assumptions on the structure of the measurement error, but these assumptions
would be unveri…able.
Although we use lagged earnings as a proxy for desired earnings in our speci…c context, this need not be a
feature of our method in general. As a general matter in the potential outcomes framework, we need a proxy
for counterfactual desired earnings. This can be achieved in a number of ways; for example, in the context
of a randomized experiment we may be able to generate this counterfactual by comparing to a control group
that is una¤ected by a policy, thus allowing a researcher to estimate the elasticity itself more directly (see
Kline and Tartari, 2016, for such an approach using a randomized experiment to generate counterfactuals
under alternative budget constraints).

4.3

Comparison to Other Identi…cation Strategies

Our method involves a di¤erent set of assumptions than existing approaches for estimating extensive margin
elasticities. As noted, relative to discrete choice methods or a selection correction, our method is valid
non-parametrically in the context of the economic model we specify. Our method also allows transparent
identi…cation through the RKD (or RDD) approach, relying on clear graphical depiction of the results.
Relative to the di¤erence-in-di¤erences approach that has often been used (e.g. Eissa and Liebman, 1996;
Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Eissa and Hoynes, 2004; Gelber and Mitchell, 2012), our formal model allows us
to be explicit about the population and parameter that our elasticity refers to, as in the distinction between
the “observed” and “structural” elasticities discussed in Section 2.7. Our paper estimates an observed
elasticity driven by individuals who face intensive margin frictions, much as previous papers have implicitly
estimated observed extensive margin elasticities that could be driven in part by responses among constrained
individuals. Our model highlights that extensive margin elasticities, in the presence of kinked budget sets
such as the ones created by the AET or Earned Income Tax Credit, can re‡ect “observed” elasticities that
can be in‡uenced by the non-response on the extensive margin of those who bunch at the kink.
Using the RKD approach, one avoids the assumptions of di¤erence-in-di¤erences (DD). Suppose the
employment probability is a function of the ANTR, which varies across groups and time due to policy
changes. We can use this variation to perform a DD estimate of the e¤ect of the ANTR (or a transformation
thereof) on the employment rate (or a transformation thereof), for example using the policy variation as
an instrument for the ANTR under a DD instrumental variables approach. However, to do so we must
postulate some parametric relationship— whether linear, log, semi-log, etc.— between employment and the
ANTR. Our RKD approach does not require any such parametric assumption. A DD estimator also makes
other assumptions, including the “parallel trends”assumption, that are not required for our RKD. In Gelber
et al. (2017), we are investigating the e¤ects of the AET using a DD approach comparing those below and
above the exempt amount before and after age 62, allowing estimates applying to a broader sample. This

20

requires the assumptions above, as well as panel data over more than two time periods: in the DD context
counterfactual (i.e. lagged) earnings must be observed prior to both the pre-62 employment observation, as
well as the post-62 employment observation. Thus, our RKD setting requires fewer time periods of data —
two rather than at least three.
Our method also has potential disadvantages relative to a DD design. For example, in many cases
estimating a precise RKD may require large sample sizes of the sort we have obtained in our SSA data.
Furthermore, like other empirical work that exploits sharp discontinuities in incentives, our estimate is local
to those near the kink. In general, it may be possible to address this to some extent— for example, in principle
one could investigate whether estimates are heterogeneous when the kink is placed in di¤erent locations. In
comparison, the DD approach also may identify local e¤ects— those in the region of policy variation— that
may not apply more broadly. Our RKD approach also makes the assumptions above, including the continuity
of the …rst derivative. As Card et al. (2015) note, it is also possible to probe the underlying smoothness
assumption by testing for kinks in predetermined variables. We are also able to address these assumptions
by assessing how our results compare to those in a placebo sample that is not subject to the AET (of course,
placebos may also be available in a DD context).
Ultimately, our approach o¤ers a new and di¤erent method, with both potential advantages and disadvantages relative to other methods. At the least, our new approach both allows an explicit understanding of
the interpretation of the extensive margin parameter we estimate, and enlarges the set of existing strategies
for estimating extensive margin responses, thus complementing existing strategies. We view our approach as
particularly well suited to settings in which it is possible to obtain precise kink estimates and convincingly
verify the smoothness assumptions.

4.4

Additional Speci…cation Considerations

Implementation of an RKD requires a number of choices regarding speci…cation. For our main results, we
implement the Calonico et al. (2014) data-driven method for bandwidth selection. We report con…dence
intervals corrected for bias following Calonico et al. (2014), and we use a triangular kernel to weight the
data near the exempt amount. Card et al. (2015) use both linear and quadratic speci…cations in their
analysis. Calonico et al. (2014) propose an RKD estimator in which the quadratic speci…cation can be used
to correct for the bias in the linear estimator, while Ganong and Jäger (2015) advocate a cubic speci…cation.
We implement linear, quadratic, and cubic versions of (18), to investigate the robustness of our results. We
use the linear speci…cation without additional controls as our baseline because it minimizes the corrected
Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) for our main outcome
(the employment rate at ages 63 to 64), as well as for nearly every other outcome.
We must also decide whether to allow a discontinuity at the exempt amount in the level of the outcome
variable and whether to control for covariates (Ando, 2013). We allow for a discontinuity, although the
results are virtually unchanged if we do not. We present results with and without controlling for covariates.

21

Thus, for each sample or outcome we can produce estimates using six regressions: the linear, quadratic, and
cubic regressions; and a version of each further adding predetermined covariates using Calonico et al. (2016).
Finally, we focus primarily on employment outcomes at ages 63 and 64, even though the AET begins
to apply as early as age 62 and remains in e¤ect at ages 65 and older in the period we study. We make
this choice due to the following considerations. The AET …rst applies to claimants when they reach OASI
eligibility at age 62, but it does not make sense to examine the e¤ect of the AET on whether an individual
has positive earnings in the calendar year she turns age 62. The reason is that we observe calendar year
earnings, and we measure “age”in a given calendar year coarsely as the highest age a person attains during
that calendar year. If an individual claims OASI during the calendar year she turns age 62, the AET only
applies to earnings in the calendar months after the individual claims. If the claimant earns at all during
this calendar year— even during months prior to claiming OASI— then she will have positive earnings in this
calendar year. Thus, a person who is induced by the AET to stop earning after claiming would appear in
the data with positive earnings during this calendar year, and therefore would appear to have no measured
response to the AET. As a result, it appears highly unlikely that we would observe a measurable employment
response to the AET at age 62 as we measure it in the data, even if the AET has a substantial impact on
employment. We expect measurable e¤ects only to appear as early as age 63. We choose 64 as the oldest
age at which to examine employment e¤ects because age 60 earnings are a better proxy for desired earnings
at ages 63 to 64 than for older ages. Moreover, at age 65 individuals with earnings near the under-NRA
exempt amount are only exposed to this exempt amount— as opposed to the much higher exempt amount
applying to those at NRA and above— for part of the year.

4.5

Mapping the Estimates to the Model

The RKD statistical model can be related directly to our theoretical model. First, the smoothness conditions
imposed on preferences and heterogeneity in Section 2 are analogs to the assumptions in Card et al. (2015)
that allow us to interpret the RKD estimate as a treatment-on-the-treated parameter. Second, the RKD
coe¢ cients map directly to the parameters of our model. The parameter
the

1

from (18), and we calculate

elements of equation (9), 1

in equation (9) corresponds to

analytically, as described above. We can then calculate the remaining

a and Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 = z ), using data on individuals who have age 60

earnings near z . Moreover, just as the RKD returns an estimate that is local to agents located at the kink,
our theoretical model identi…es parameters that apply to agents located at the kink.
As described in Section 4.2, we will use earnings at age 60 to proxy for desired earnings at ages 63
and 64 in the absence of the AET, positing equation (19). Thus, in terms of our model in Section 2, we
require that the ability distribution remain relatively stable between ages 60 and 63 to 64. We still allow
(~
zi0t ; vit ) < 1 in Section 4.2, i.e. we do not require this distribution to be absolutely static across this time
span. Furthermore, this assumption places no restrictions on the evolution of the …xed cost distribution,
G ( qj n), over time. We observe a declining employment rate between ages 60 and 63 to 64, which can be

22

accommodated by a rightward shift in the distribution G ( qj n) at older ages. While we use age 60 earnings
to proxy for desired earnings at ages 63 to 64 as above, our RKD e¤ectively uses the employment rate at
ages 63 to 64 for those with age 60 earnings just under the exempt amount to re‡ect state 0 employment
rates, while the employment rate at ages 63 to 64 for those with age 60 earnings just over the exempt amount
re‡ects state 1 employment rates. In our model, we require that the distribution G ( qj n) is the same across
states 0 and 1. The empirical analogue is thus a requirement that the distribution of …xed costs G ( qj n) is
same for those with age 60 earnings just below and just above the exempt amount.

5

Data

We implement our RKD estimation strategy using the restricted-access Social Security Administration Master Earnings File (MEF) linked to the Master Bene…ciary Record (MBR). The data contain Federal Insurance
Contributions Act (FICA) pre-tax earnings for all Social Security Numbers (SSNs) in the U.S. in each calendar year.24 Separate information is available on self-employment and non-self-employment earnings. The
data are from W-2s, mandatory forms …led with the Internal Revenue Service for each employee for whom
the …rm withholds taxes and/or to whom remuneration exceeds a modest threshold. Thus, we have data on
earnings regardless of whether an employee …les taxes. The data longitudinally follow individuals over time.
The MBR contains information on exact date of birth, exact date of death, month and calendar year of
claiming OASI, race, and sex. In the calendar year after an individual dies, earnings and employment appear
in the dataset as zeroes. Thus, some of an e¤ect on employment could in principle be mediated through an
e¤ect on mortality, which would a¤ect the interpretation— but not the validity— of our results. The e¤ects
we estimate are relevant to policy, in the sense that they re‡ect the overall e¤ect on employment.
The AET is applied to pre-tax OASI bene…ts; this a¤ects the results negligibly relative to measuring aftertax bene…ts, because OASI bene…ts only became taxable in 1984, and after 1984 bene…ts were only taxable
above an income threshold much higher than the AET exempt amount. By examining pre-tax bene…ts, we
answer a policy-relevant question: how a given change in the AET BRR would a¤ect employment. After-tax
bene…ts are slightly smaller than pre-tax bene…ts— and the bene…t reduction rate associated with after-tax
bene…ts should change by slightly less at the exempt amount— suggesting that the e¤ect of the pre-tax BRR
should if anything re‡ect a lower bound on the e¤ect of the after-tax BRR, and again strengthening our case
that we will estimate a lower bound on the elasticity.
Due to institutional considerations and computational constraints, we focus on a speci…c set of cohorts
observed over certain calendar years. We focus on a sample that is subject to the AET in 1978 and after.
The reason is that we observe only calendar year earnings, and the AET has e¤ectively applied to calendar
year earnings beginning in 1978 (Gelber et al., 2013, Appendix A). Before 1978, the AET was applied to
24
Data are also available on total W -2 earnings, as opp osed to FICA earnings that are capp ed at the m aximum taxable earnings
level. We use FICA earnings b ecause in 1978 to 1980 the data on total W -2 earnings are sub ject to m easurem ent error that is not an
issue in the FICA earnings data (Utendorf, 2001/2002; Kop czuk, Saez, and Song, 2010). The cap on FICA earnings at the m aximum
taxable earnings level does not a¤ect our results: the AET exem pt am ount was far b elow the m aximum taxable earnings level, so the
FICA earnings data are capp ed at a level far ab ove the top of the range included in our bandwidth.

23

quarterly earnings, which we do not observe in the data. This limits our focus to individuals born in 1918
or later, who turned age 60 in 1978 or later. Due to computational constraints, we were able to obtain data
on individuals born from 1918 until 1923, and due to these constraints it was also necessary to draw a 25
percent random sample of this group. This leaves 3,629,183 sampled individuals; we included data on these
individuals for all calendar years in the panel. We observe these individuals until they turn 64, which occurs
as late as 1987 (in the 1923 birth cohort).
Next, from this initial sample, we drop individuals who claimed OASI or Disability Insurance prior to
age 62— usually those claiming on a spouse’s record— so that our measure of earnings prior to 62 is not
a¤ected by potential contemporaneous impacts of the AET (19.5 percent of the sample); those with missing
values for gender (0.049 percent of the remaining sample); those with positive self-employment earnings at
age 60 (7.82 percent of the remaining sample), as these earnings are often subject to manipulation (e.g.
Chetty et al., 2013); and those with negative measured earnings at some point between ages 50 and 70
(0.035 percent of the remaining sample). Since the key running variable is earnings at age 60, we restrict
attention to individuals with positive earnings at age 60 (47.05 percent of the remaining sample). We include
all remaining individuals, including those who collect bene…ts as retired workers, auxiliary bene…ciaries, or
survivors. This leaves us with a sample of 1,424,667 individuals. We use data on individuals from ages 57 to
64, or eight calendar years per person, so that the total number of individual-year observations is 11,397,336.
We do not limit the sample in any given year to individuals claiming in that year, since claiming OASI is
potentially endogenous to the AET. Our data extract does not link spouses to one another.25
Several features of the data merit discussion. First, these administrative data are subject to little measurement error. Second, earnings as measured in the dataset are not subject to manipulation through
tax deductions, credits, or exemptions, and they are subject to third-party reporting (among the non-selfemployed). Third, like most other administrative datasets, the data do not contain information on hours
worked, hourly wage rates, amenities at individuals’ jobs, underground earnings, assets, savings, or consumption. They also do not contain data on unearned income or marital status.
Table 1 shows summary statistics for our sample. The main sample shown is restricted to the 95,960
individuals who have positive age 60 earnings within $2,797 of the exempt amount and who satisfy the other
sample restrictions. This bandwidth, $2,797, is the one we choose in our regressions for our main outcome
using the procedure of Calonico et al. (2014). Our main outcome in our regressions is the mean annual
employment rate among 63 to 64 year-olds, i.e. the percent of the corresponding calendar years when the
individual has positive earnings; the mean level of this variable in the main sample is 56.53 percent.
The exempts amounts during our period, ranging from $9,787 to $11,517, are close to mean annual
25
A non-convex kink in the budget set occurs where the AET has com pletely phased out the OASI b ene…t, and therefore the BRR
jum ps from p ositive to zero. We are not able to investigate the e¤ects of this non-convex kink in a reliable way. First, we do not
directly observe an individual’s OASI b ene…ts in each year in our data extract. Second, the e¤ect of the non-convex kink should b e
spread throughout the earnings distribution, b ecause the non-convex kink occurs at a di¤erent earnings level for each individual. Thus,
we would not exp ect any sharp change in aggregate b ehavior at any particular average earnings level due to this non-convex kink. It is
also not p ossible use individual-level data, b ecause we are not able to link sp ouses. If a sp ouse is claim ing on a prim ary b ene…ciary’s
record, then the non-convex kink o ccurs at the earnings level at which the fam ily’s entire b ene…t is com pletely phased out; thus, we
would need inform ation on whether a sp ouse is claim ing on the prim ary b ene…ciary’s record to observe the non-convex kink accurately.

24

earnings, $10,977, at ages 63 to 64 in the full sample of those with positive or zero age 60 earnings (not
restricted to being close to the exempt amount); and close to median earnings, $9,166, at ages 63 to 64
among those with positive age 60 earnings (not restricted to being close to the exempt amount). Thus, our
estimates apply to a group near the exempt amount that is close to this mean and median in these broader
populations; this is relevant for interpreting the regression results. Mean earnings (including zeroes) at ages
63 to 64 is $5,814 in our main sample. The mean age of claiming OASI is 63.13. This sample is 67.99 percent
female; the large female percentage is a consequence of focusing on individuals near the exempt amount at
age 60. For comparison we also show the full sample of those with positive earnings at age 60, not restricted
to those around the exempt amount but satisfying the other sample restrictions. Throughout the paper,
dollar …gures are expressed in real 2010 terms.

6

Empirical Results

6.1

Preliminary Analysis

We begin our analysis with initial validity checks of our empirical method, demonstrating that individuals
do not appear to sort around the exempt amount when choosing their earnings at age 60. First, Figure 4
shows that the density of earnings at age 60 (solid circles) appears continuous around the exempt amount.
The regressions in Table 2 con…rm that the density of observations is smooth in the region of the exempt
amount. Following Landais (2015), in these regressions we use the procedure of McCrary (2008) to estimate
discontinuities in the level and slope of the density function at the exempt amount, allowing for linear,
quadratic, or cubic functions of the running variable. To test further for sorting, we also test for bunching at
the exempt amount. Figure 4 shows that the density of earnings at age 60 appears smooth near the exempt
amount, and that the amount of bunching, calculated using a method similar to Chetty et al. (2011) — and
described in detail in Appendix C — is statistically insigni…cant.
For comparison, Figure 4 also shows the earnings distribution at age 62 (hollow circles), when claimants
are subject to the AET. At age 62 we see a markedly di¤erent pattern than at age 60, with a large, statistically
signi…cant spike in the age 62 earnings density near the exempt amount. Recalling our model in Section 2,
this is evidence that some individuals do not face frictions in adjusting at the intensive margin to the exempt
amount.
Similarly, Figure 5 shows that there is no clear visual discontinuity in the slope of predetermined covariates
(sex, birth year, and probability of being white). In this …gure and subsequent …gures, the x-axis measures
our running variable, earnings at age 60. The range of the x-axis is [-$3,000, $3,000], which corresponds
roughly to the Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth of $2,797. On the y-axis is the outcome in question, taking
means within $500 bins. The data are pooled across all years of the sample. Table 2 con…rms that in the
baseline linear speci…cation, there is no signi…cant discontinuity in the slope of the fraction white or female,
although there is a small, signi…cant discontinuity in the slope of the year of birth. Nonetheless, there is
no signi…cant discontinuity in year of birth in the cubic speci…cation, in which we will still …nd a signi…cant
25

discontinuity in our main outcome, the age 63 to 64 annual employment rate. Moreover, the signi…cance of
the discontinuity in the slope year of birth does not survive a Bonferroni correction that is relevant here since
we have no theoretical presumption of a change in slope. Finally, controlling for these covariates, including
year of birth, will have no material e¤ect on the results. Note that although we show our data aggregated
by bin means, our regressions here and elsewhere are run using individual-level data as in (18). All of this
evidence of covariate smoothness shows that agents act as if they do not anticipate the imposition of the
AET at age 60, consistent with this version of our dynamic model in Appendix B.3 (and consistent with the
evidence in Gelber et al., 2013, and Gelber et al., 2016, of no reaction to OASI, and the AET in particular,
until closer to when individuals are a¤ected by it).
To support the validity of using age 60 earnings as a proxy for age 63 to 64 desired earnings, we show that
desired earnings remain stable across a “placebo” set of ages. Speci…cally, we show that the distribution of
real earnings growth from one period to a subsequent period exhibits a spike at zero, as postulated in (19).
Figure 6 shows that from age 59 to age 60— a placebo set of ages near the EEA during which our sample is
not subject to the AET— a noticeable spike in real earnings growth does occur near zero percent growth, as
workers’wages grow at exactly the rate of CPI in a substantial fraction of cases.
Although we focus on the case of the AET in this paper, it would also be possible to use our method
to estimate extensive margin responses in other contexts.

It seems natural that the assumption that

(~
zi0t ; vit ) > 0— an assumption that allows our method to be used as explained above— would apply when
using lagged earnings to predict desired earnings for workers in other contexts as well. This is bolstered by
Appendix Figure D.2, which shows a large spike at zero nominal earnings growth from one year to the next
in the SSA data to which we have access, covering the 1918 to 1923 cohorts over calendar years 1951 to 1984
and encompassing ages 28 to 59. Thus, it should be possible to use our method, implemented in this case
through using lagged earnings to proxy for desired earnings, when studying extensive margin responses to
other policies applying in other age ranges.

6.2

Main Results Documenting a Kink in Employment

Having passed these validity tests, we proceed to our main results. In Figure 7 we see a sharp decrease
at the exempt amount in the slope of the annual employment rate at ages 63 to 64: under the exempt
amount the slope appears positive and steep, whereas above the exempt amount the slope appears to change
immediately to nearly ‡at. Appendix Figure D.3 shows that this visual pattern— a sharp decrease in slope
at the exempt amount— is also clear with a wider bandwidth of $6,000. Table 3, Column 1, reports the
estimated coe¢ cient

1

from (18), con…rming that the change in the slope is statistically signi…cant and

substantial in the baseline linear speci…cation that uses a Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth of $2,797.
Even without estimating an elasticity, these results constitute a novel source of evidence that the AET
causes an extensive margin e¤ect.26 In the context of our model in Section 2, evidence of a kink in the
26
Sim ilarly, it would b e p ossible to investigate whether the AET causes m ovem ent to other sp eci…c earnings levels. For exam ple,
for those constrained at the intensive m argin the AET could cause m ovem ent to part-tim e work with earnings b elow the exem pt
am ount. However, the level of earnings associated with this part-tim e work could b e di¤erent for di¤erent individuals and is likely

26

employment rate also implies that some individuals face frictions in adjusting earnings on the intensive
margin. Thus, these results support the assumptions necessary to estimate the elasticity.
Our estimates represent the e¤ects of the AET while holding other factors constant. We do not interpret
the discontinuity in the slope of earnings at the exempt amount as re‡ecting changes in demand by …rms,
since such demand changes should have been materially similar on either side of the exempt amount as
should any general equilibrium e¤ects of the policy change more broadly. Like other papers based on local
variation, including others in the AET literature, our identi…cation strategy does not attempt to address
general equilibrium impacts of the AET. We interpret our measured responses as potentially including the
e¤ects of misperception of substitution incentives or other frictions that could a¤ect adjustment.

6.3

Robustness and Validity Checks

These basic results pass several robustness and validity checks. The estimates remain signi…cant in Table 3
under the quadratic and cubic speci…cations, with moderately larger estimates. The results are also robust
to controls for demographics in Column 2 (dummies for sex, year of birth, and race groups). In Figure 8 we
demonstrate that the size of the estimated kinks remains relatively stable across di¤erent bandwidths.
As a “placebo” test in the period prior to being subject to the AET, Figure 9, Panel A shows no clear
visible change in the slope of employment at ages 56 and 57, as a function of age 60 earnings. Like ages 63
and 64, ages 57 and 56 are respectively three and four years away from age 60, the age at which the running
variable is measured. In Table 3, Column 4 we present the estimates from a corresponding regression in
which the dependent variable is the annual employment rate at ages 56 to 57. We maintain the same running
variable as earlier, i.e. age 60 earnings, since we would like to test for a spurious relationship between earnings
at age 60 and lagged employment. Across all three polynomial speci…cations, mean annual employment at
ages 56 to 57 shows an insigni…cant change in slope.27
Furthermore, in Figure 9, Panel B and Table 4 we show that the kink arises precisely at ages 63 and
64— not earlier— which we consider our single most convincing evidence that we have uncovered a true e¤ect
of the AET. Figure 9, Panel B shows the employment probability by single year of age from 61 to 64. There
is no clear kink at ages 61 and 62, and a visible kink only arises at ages 63 and 64. Recall that no kink
should appear at age 62 because the AET only applies for part of the year. Table 4 con…rms that the kink
estimates are insigni…cant at ages 61 and 62, but they are substantial and highly signi…cant at ages 63 and
64. We are particularly reassured by the small and insigni…cant kink at ages 61 and 62. This placebo check
provides further evidence that nonlinearities in the probability of employment (conditional on earnings at
spread relatively sm o othly throughout the p opulation, m aking it di¢ cult to p erform a form al test of this hyp othesis given that SSA
only has data on earnings, not hours worked. A dataset with inform ation on hours worked could allow a b etter test of this hyp othesis,
if part-tim e work tends to require com m on numb ers of hours (e.g. 20 hours p er week).
27
As a “placeb o” exercise, with ideal data it would b e p ossible to exam ine whether individuals show a kink in the em ploym ent rate as
a function of age 60 earnings even after the AET has b een elim inated for ages NRA and ab ove after 2000. However, this is di¢ cult to
im plem ent for three reasons. First, by the year 2000 when the AET was elim inated for those NRA and ab ove, the birth cohorts in our
sam ple are very old (age 77 or older) and have very low em ploym ent rates. Second, even with the necessary data, age 60 earnings m ay
b e a p o or proxy for desired earnings at ages NRA and ab ove. Third, b oth b efore and after 2000, individuals face the AET when they
claim b efore NRA. If extensive m argin resp onses have p ersistence, then we m ight exp ect a p ersistent kink even after NRA. At ages 65
and over in our sam ple, individuals face a higher exem pt am ount, and age 60 earnings represents a weaker proxy for desired earnings,
so it is less straightforward to interpret the results. However, we do see som e evidence of a p ersistent resp onse (available up on request).

27

age 60) do not drive our kink estimates. The absolute value of the kink grows substantially from age 63 to
age 64, from 1.60 to 1.98, only a modest fraction of which can be explained by the higher fraction claiming at
64 (79.5 percent) than at 63 (74.5 percent). This is consistent with gradual adjustment to the AET, which
Gelber et al. (2013) document at the intensive margin.
As another assessment of the validity of our approach, we conduct a permutation test in the spirit of
Ganong and Jäger (2015). In particular, we estimate a set of placebo changes in slope in the age 63 to 64
employment rate, using the same speci…cation as our main estimates except that we examine the change in
slope at placebo locations of the exempt amount away from the true exempt amount. In Figure 10, we show
that the point estimate recovered from the actual exempt amount is located well below the distribution of
placebo estimates, reinforcing the view that we are detecting a true e¤ect of the AET. This permutation test
shows a signi…cant kink (p = 0:025).28 Following Landais (2015), we show in Figure 11 that the R-squared
of the regression in the baseline linear speci…cation is maximized at the actual location of the kink, rather
than at placebo kink locations, again consistent with our …nding a true e¤ect of the AET.29

6.4

Estimating an Extensive Margin Elasticity

Our model allows us to go beyond documenting the e¤ects of the AET by estimating an elasticity using
equation (9). In this equation we require an estimate of the average marginal tax rate; we use a marginal tax
rate incorporating the AET BRR as well as the average federal and state income and payroll marginal tax
rates, calculated using the TAXSIM calculator of the National Bureau of Economic Research and information
on individuals within the bandwidth distance from the kink in the Statistics of Income data in the years we
examine. Table 5 shows that the elasticity estimated using the full sample in the baseline linear speci…cation
is 0.49. As discussed above, we interpret this as a lower bound on the elasticity. Since the lower bound is
large, our main conclusion is that the elasticity is large.
Separating the regressions by demographic group, the elasticity for women is 0.49, and the elasticity for
men is 0.25, consistent with the typical stylized fact that women have larger employment elasticities than
men.30 Whites and non-whites show similar employment elasticities, although the estimate is much more
precise in the larger white population. It is also of interest how the elasticity may vary depending on an
individual’s mean prior earnings, which we measure from ages 40 to 59. The elasticity point estimates are
similar among those with mean prior earnings that are above the median vs. below the median, although
the elasticity estimate is more precise in the below-median group.
A variety of considerations indicate that these estimated elasticities are robust; that if anything they
28

Relative to our baseline sp eci…cation, we also …nd sim ilar, statistically signi…cant results when we run our regressions using data
at the $50 bin m ean level (or within bins of other sizes). This is an alternative way of dem onstrating that the results are signi…cant
and robust to …ltering out within-bin correlations; however, these results are sup erseded by the p ermutation test results as the latter
dem onstrate that the kink is statistically unusual relative to the distribution of placeb o estim ates.
29
Recall that our running variable m easures earnings relative to the exem pt am ount applying to OASI claim ants when an individual
is age 60. Since the exem pt am ount is rising m o destly over tim e (Figure D.1), the exem pt am ount individuals face rises slightly from
age 60 to ages 63 and 64 when we m easure em ploym ent. However, it rises by only $75.77 on average, far sm aller than the bin size of
$500 that we use in our …gures. Thus, our statistical and graphical results are sim ilar to the baseline when we instead m easure our
running variable as age 60 earnings relative to the exem pt am ount that later applies to the sam e individual at ages 63 to 64.
30
Our study of wom en as well as m en di¤ers from the pre-2003 em pirical literature on the em ploym ent e¤ects of the AET cited ab ove,
as well as Baker and Benjam in (1999) and Haider and Loughran (2008), all of which fo cus on studying only m en. Grub er and Orszag
(2003) …nd suggestive evidence of an im pact am ong wom en but not am ong m en.

28

re‡ect lower bounds; and that these large elasticities make sense given that we are studying older workers,
who have marginal attachment to employment in many cases. Appendix Table D.1 shows that the elasticity
is modestly larger in the quadratic or cubic speci…cations, reaching 0.66 in the quadratic and 0.82 in the
cubic. The results are similar with or without controls. In the baseline …rst stage, we calculated the exact
change in slope of the ANTR, under the assumption that desired earnings are …xed at their age 60 level; to
show that the results are robust to instead running a …rst stage regression analogous to the reduced form
regression, in Appendix Table D.2 we show that the elasticities are similar when we assume that desired
earnings are …xed at their age 60 level but estimate the change in the slope of the ANTR using a regression
whose bandwidth is chosen using Calonico et al. (2014).
The elasticity calculations are mechanically a¤ected by how we specify the …rst stage. Given that the
stringency of the AET, and therefore the e¤ective ANTR, is potentially a¤ected by bene…t enhancement,
we consider our elasticity estimates to be illustrative, as the scaling of the …rst stage could be a¤ected by
accounting for bene…t enhancement. However, it is also important to note that if we took bene…t enhancement
into account, the …rst stage absolute value of the change in the ANTR at the exempt amount would be
smaller, and thus the estimated elasticity would be larger. As a result, if anything we would estimate larger
elasticities, strengthening our conclusion that the lower bound on the elasticity is large. Moreover, the kink
estimates in Table 3 and Table 4 are una¤ected by the scaling, and our counterfactual estimates of the e¤ect
of policy changes on employment would be una¤ected by the scaling of the …rst stage. Finally, if individuals
(mis-)perceive the AET as a pure tax (without taking bene…t enhancement into account), then we have
speci…ed the …rst stage in a way that accurately captures their perceptions.
We noted earlier that the …rst stage also could be a¤ected by error in using lagged earnings to measure
desired earnings. As an illustration of the magnitude of this factor, the signal-to-noise ratio is 0.61 based on
the coe¢ cient from a regression of an individual’s earnings at age 61 on the individual’s earnings at age 58
and a constant term, for those with age 58 earnings within $3,000 of the exempt amount. From ages 50 to
58, the signal-to-noise ratio from age t to t + 3 varies in a similar range, from 0.57 (t=56) to 0.63 (t=51).
This suggests that a moderate degree of upward adjustment to our elasticity estimates would be entailed
based on the signal-to-noise ratio, again strengthening our case that we have estimated a large lower bound
on the elasticity.
The relatively large elasticities we estimate are within the range of elasticities estimated using microdata
for groups with low employment attachment, though they fall outside the range of some previous surveys
of extensive margin elasticities for the full population estimated using microdata. Chetty et al. (2012)
report Hicksian and Frisch (i.e. constant-marginal-utility-of-wealth) extensive margin elasticities of 0.25, in
a meta-analytic synthesis of microdata estimates not speci…c to particular population groups.31 Saez (2002)
discusses that the Negative Income Tax (NIT) experiments …nd small extensive margin elasticities for males
of about 0.2, but …nd participation elasticities for those groups less attached to the labor force— e.g. second
31
In a survey of m acro econom ic literature, Chetty et al. (2012) …nd average Hicksian elasticities of 0.17 and average Frisch elasticities
of 2.77.

29

earners, single household heads, and the young— between 0.5 and 1. Our setting studying older workers
at or near retirement age is most comparable to estimates for groups with low employment attachment,
and therefore our estimates are comparable to previous results for such groups. Indeed, a small group of
theoretical and empirical studies has found relatively large labor supply or earnings responses among the
elderly in particular (French, 2005; Laitner and Silverman, 2012; Alpert and Powell, 2014), but none using
our non-parametric method based on discontinuities (and applied to administrative data).

6.5

Accounting for Claiming Behavior

Among those with age 60 earnings within our baseline bandwidth relative to the exempt amount, 75 and
80 percent of the sample has claimed by ages 63 and 64, respectively. The fact that some have not claimed
OASI a¤ects the interpretation of the elasticity we estimate. In particular, the elasticity we have estimated
so far should be interpreted as the elasticity inclusive of the impact of the fact that some individuals have
not yet claimed. We estimate this elasticity in the baseline because this is policy-relevant, in the sense that
it informs us how a given change in policy would a¤ect employment in this group, given the e¤ects of the
percentage of our sample that claims.
At the same time, an alternative elasticity concept is also of interest: the “conditional” elasticity among
those in the sample claiming OASI (i.e. we “condition” on claiming OASI). In estimating this conditional
elasticity, the smaller the fraction that claims by 63 or 64, the smaller the implied …rst stage will be, and
thus the larger the conditional elasticity estimate will be. Since we are estimating a lower bound on the
unconditional elasticity above, perhaps the simplest way to address estimation of the conditional elasticity—
given endogenous claiming behavior— is to note that if anything the estimated conditional elasticity would
be still larger than the unconditional elasticity, if the …rst stage were attenuated due to the fact that some
individuals have not claimed by 63 or 64.
Beyond noting this, we can divide the unconditional elasticity by the share claiming, as shown in Appendix
B.4, to calculate a conditional elasticity. Here we can use the claiming behavior of those with zi60 just below
the kink to impute the percentage claiming among those at the kink, i.e. those to whom the elasticity
estimates apply. Using the percent claiming at ages 63 and 64, this method implies that to estimate the
conditional elasticity, we would in‡ate the elasticity estimates by 29.9 percent relative to those shown in
Table 5.32 Thus, for example, the baseline elasticity would be 0.63 rather than 0.49. Appendix Table D.3
shows the elasticities and standard errors calculated in this way.
In principle it would also be possible to adjust the conditional elasticity estimates further to account
for the fact that the fraction that claims may be directly a¤ected by the AET itself, as in Appendix B.4.
However, we show in the Appendix that if the AET has no e¤ect on the fraction claiming, then no further
adjustment is necessary to estimate a lower bound on the conditional elasticity. Appendix Figure D.4 shows
that the probability of claiming shows no clear change in slope at the exempt amount, and corresponding
regressions show no robust e¤ect of the AET on claiming at these ages: a placebo test parallel to our previous
32

We calculate 29.9 p ercent as 100

(1=[(0:795 + 0:745)=2]

1).

30

test in the spirit of Ganong and Jäger (2015) shows p = 0:15 for the two-sided test of equality of the coe¢ cient
with zero.33 Because there is no evidence for an e¤ect on claiming, there is little case for implementing our
most ‡exible adjustment for endogenous claiming in Appendix B.4.3, though this bounding technique is in
principle more applicable in other OASI settings that may feature a clear e¤ect on the claiming probability.

6.6

Counterfactual Simulations

We can use our elasticity estimates to understand the e¤ect of changing the parameters of the AET, under the
assumption that our extensive margin elasticity estimates apply throughout the earnings range shown in our
graphs, from age 60 earnings $3,000 under the exempt amount to $3,000 over. One key issue for policy-makers
is the impact of eliminating the AET (Tergesen, 2016). We simulate the increase in the employment rate
among 63 and 64 year-olds that would result from eliminating the AET entirely, using our baseline elasticity
estimate of 0.49 in Table 5. As before we assume that at ages 63 and 64, desired earnings conditional on
employment in the absence of the AET is given by earnings at age 60. To calculate the baseline probability
of participation at ages 63 to 64 at di¤erent earnings levels, we bin the earnings distribution into $500 bins as
in our …gures and calculate this probability, Pr(P E0i ). For each age 60 earnings bin, we calculate the mean
percent change in the average net-of-tax rate associated with moving from the AET’s current 50 percent
BRR to the ANTR associated no AET (but keeping other taxes in place), (AN T R1i

AN T R0i )=AN T R0i .

We then use our estimated elasticity ^ to calculate the predicted change in the employment rate if the AET
were eliminated, ^[(AN T R1i

AN T R0i )=AN T R0i ] Pr(P E0i ), and we aggregate across bins (weighting by

the fraction of the population in each bin).
This calculation shows that eliminating the AET would increase the employment rate by 1.4 percentage
points in the group with age 60 earnings within $3,000 of the exempt amount, or a 2.5 percent increase. We
consider this a lower bound for the several reasons described earlier. This counterfactual exercise illustrates
that the observed elasticity can be useful for counterfactual predictions about employment levels under
alternative AET parameters.
We can also use our elasticity estimates to calculate the change in earnings due to the AET, as well as
the fraction of the change that is due to extensive margin responses. We use our baseline extensive margin
elasticity estimate of 0.49. To calculate the intensive margin response, we assume quasilinearity as in much
recent literature on earnings responses to kinked budget sets (e.g. Saez, 2010; Chetty et al., 2011; Kleven
and Waseem, 2013; Kleven et al. 2014). For simplicity we assume that the intensive margin elasticity with
respect to the marginal net-of-tax share is a constant 0.35, and that the intensive margin adjustment cost
is $278, corresponding to the Gelber et al. (2013) baseline point estimates. We calculate the increase in
earnings associated with the elimination of the AET through each channel, intensive and extensive. For an
33
Our evidence is com patible with Grub er and Orszag’s (2003) evidence on claim ing: our results p ertain to 63-64 year olds, whereas
Grub er and Orszag (2003) …nd an e¤ect of the AET on claim ing am ong older groups.

31

individual i, the estimated total earnings response
Ei

=

Pr(P Eno;i )zno;i

=

Pr(P EAET;i )(zno;i

Ei is:

Pr(P EAET;i )zAET;i
zAET;i ) + [Pr(P Eno;i )

Pr(P EAET;i )]zno;i

(20)

where Pr(P EAET ) and zAET are the probability of positive earnings under the AET and earnings under
the AET, respectively, and Pr(P Eno ) and zno refer to the levels of these variables once the AET has been
eliminated. The second line shows that the total response can be decomposed into an intensive margin
response (the …rst term) and an intensive margin response (the second term).
Our results show that in the group within $3,000 of the exempt amount, mean annual earnings at ages
63-64 (including zeroes) increase by 9.8 percent ($579) due to eliminating the AET, and 27.6 percent of the
increase in earnings is due to the extensive margin e¤ect on the employment rate. Focusing only on the
intensive margin impact would overlook over one quarter of the total earnings response.
Our speci…c predictions are in‡uenced by multiple factors: the elasticity is sizeable; the change in the
BRR due to eliminating the AET is large; but for those near the AET exempt amount that we study, the
change in the ANTR is relatively small. The elasticity could also be di¤erent at other points in the earnings
distribution, and moreover some individuals may tend to be unresponsive (e.g. those with zero earnings at
age 60) while others might be more responsive (e.g. those with age 60 earnings farther above the exempt
amount who experience a larger change in the ANTR, but not so far that the e¤ect of the AET on the ANTR
greatly diminishes). Ultimately, our calculations do demonstrate that eliminating the AET can cause large
increases in earnings and employment, even using our lower bound point estimates.

7

Conclusion

We develop a method for estimating the extensive margin e¤ect of budget sets kinks or notches, relying on
empirically estimable quantities and a transparent empirical design based on predictions from an economic
model that does not require parametric or distributional assumptions. Using this method applied in the
case of a kink, we show that the AET has a large impact on extensive margin earnings decisions. Under our
preferred speci…cation, the point estimate shows that the elasticity of the employment rate with respect to
the ANTR is at least 0.49. We interpret this as a lower bound on the elasticity for several reasons. Estimating
this large lower bound is useful because it clearly distinguishes our study from previous literature that largely
…nds the AET has little e¤ect on employment.
This large response suggests that the AET can have important e¤ects on the employment of older
workers. Our point estimates would imply that eliminating the AET would increase the employment rate
among a¤ected older workers by 1.4 percentage points (2.5 percent) in the group we study, and would
increase earnings by 9.8 percent. 27.6 percent of the aggregate earnings increase due to eliminating the AET
is associated with extensive margin decisions, demonstrating that focusing on intensive margin responses, as
in Saez (2010) and much other literature, can abstract from an important component of the earnings impacts

32

of tax and transfer programs. These estimates also suggest that the impact of eliminating the AET on the
budget is more positive than the budget-neutral estimates of the Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2000), which
abstracted from extensive margin e¤ects anywhere (including in the group around the kink we study).
Estimates of the full response to taxation must also capture responses that could move an individual
from above to below a convex kink, including moving to zero earnings. Indeed, our empirical approach
could be easily extended to estimate the e¤ect of a kink on the probability of locating at any location or set
of locations below the kink (not only at zero earnings but also at positive earnings levels below the kink),
perhaps due to frictions like a limited earnings menu. If anything this would strengthen our conclusion that
the earnings losses due to the AET are large.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that some individuals are constrained from adjusting on
the intensive margin. The presence of frictions is consistent with recent literature including Chetty (2012),
Kleven and Waseem (2013), or Gelber et al. (2013). It is also consistent with Abraham and Houseman’s
(2005) …ndings from a self-reported survey that suggest frictions among older workers in particular, and
Baker and Benjamin’s (1999) …ndings consistent with frictions in Canada. Our model points out that as a
result of these frictions, the observed extensive margin elasticity in our setting need not re‡ect the structural
elasticity, but the observed elasticity generally provides a lower bound.
This work could usefully be extended in a number of directions. First, in this paper we apply our method
in the case of the AET kink. Future work could fruitfully …nd an empirical application of our method in the
case of a budget set notch.
Second, in the context of the earnings decision, the estimation method requires: (1) a kinked or notched
budget set; (2) information on earnings or labor supply; and (3) a proxy for desired earnings on a linear
budget set. Thus, it appears that our method is applicable in many other contexts in which individuals make
extensive margin employment decisions, even outside of the AET, particularly because lagged earnings can
proxy for current desired earnings in a broad range of ages as we show. Although in our context we …nd
large e¤ects of the marginal incentive to earn, our results do not imply that such e¤ects are as large in all
settings as the literature suggests older individuals’ labor supply may be particularly elastic. It would be
fruitful to use our method to estimate employment elasticities in other contexts.
Third, Eissa et al. (2008) show that knowledge of both extensive and intensive margin elasticities are
necessary to calculate the deadweight cost of tax wedges. Thus, the extensive margin estimates in this paper
could be used to inform such calculations. However, to apply our results in this setting more directly, it
would be necessary to add frictions of the sort we have modeled to the Eissa et al. (2008) framework. As
this paper focuses on methodology and estimation, we leave this worthy exercise for future work.
Fourth, future work could also attempt to investigate how to adjust elasticity estimates for error in measuring desired earnings, whether through a context with a randomized experiment or through assumptions
that put additional structure on the measurement error. Fifth, future work could also further examine responses to kinks when individuals mis-perceive their incentives. Sixth, we are also currently investigating

33

the mortality e¤ect of the AET using a similar strategy.
Finally, although we have modeled employment as a key …rst context, our method could be used to
estimate the elasticity of other extensive margin consumption decisions in the presence of non-linear pricing:
the slope of the extensive margin consumption decision should track the slope of the average price, inducing an
estimable kink or discontinuity in demand. Since non-linear pricing is found in many economic applications,
our method should have considerable scope to be adapted in other economic contexts.

34

References
Aaronson, S., Cajner, T., Fallick, B., Galbis-Reig, F., Smith, C., and Wascher, W. “Labor
Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2014(2), 197-275.
Abraham, K., and Houseman, S. (2005). “Work and Retirement Plans among Older Americans.”
In Reinventing the Retirement Paradigm, R. Clark and O. Mitchell, eds. Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford
University Press, 70-91.
Abraham, K., and Kearney, M. (2017). “The Factors Behind the Decline in U.S. Employment Rates:
A Review of the Evidence.” University of Maryland Working Paper.
Alpert, A., and Powell, D. (2014). “Estimating Intensive and Extensive Tax Responsiveness: Do
Older Workers Respond to Income Taxes.” RAND Working Paper.
Altonji, J. G. and Paxson, C. H. (1988). “Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Constraints, and HoursWage Trade-O¤s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 254-276.
Brown, S.K, and Perron, R. (2011). “Assessing Current and Future Bene…ciaries’ Knowledge of
Social Security Bene…ts,” American Association of Retired Persons research report.
Ando, M. (Forthcoming). “How Much Should We Trust Regression-Kink-Design Estimates?”Empirical
Economics.
Baker, M., and Benjamin, D. (1999). “How do retirement tests a¤ect the labor supply of older men?”
Journal of Public Economics, 71, 27-51.
Battistin, E., and Chesher, A. (2014). “Treatment E¤ect Estimation with Covariate Measurement
Error.” Journal of Econometrics, 178(2), 707-715.
Becker, G. (1976). “Altruism, Egoism, and Genetic Fitness: Economics and Sociobiology.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 14(3), 817-826.
Bernheim, B. D., Fradkin, A., and Popov, I. (2015). “The Welfare Economics of Default Options
in 401(k) Plans,” American Economic Review, 105(9), 2798-2837.
Bitler, M. P., Gelbach, J. B., and Hoynes, H. W. (2006), “What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional
E¤ects Of Welfare Reform Experiments,” American Economic Review, 96(4), 988-1012.
Blinder, A. S., Gordon, R. H., and Wise, D. E. (1980). “Reconsidering the Work Disincentive
E¤ects of Social Security.” National Tax Journal, 33(4), 431-442.
Blomquist, S., Kumar, A., Liang, C.-Y., and Newey, N. (2015). “Individual Heterogeneity,
Nonlinear Budget Sets, and Taxable Income.” Uppsala University Working Paper.
Blundell, R., French, E. and Tetlow, G. (2016). “Retirement Incentives and Labor Supply.” In
Handbook of the Economics of Population Aging, John Piggott and Alan Woodland, eds., 457-566. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Blundell, R., and MaCurdy, T. (1999). “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches.” In
Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D., eds., Handbook of Labor Economics 3A, 1560-1695. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Blundell, R. and Shephard, A. (2012). “Employment, Hours of Work and the Optimal Taxation of
Low-Income Families.” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 481-510.
Brown, J., Kapteyn, A., Mitchell, O., and Mattox, T. (2013). “Framing the Social Security
Earnings Test.” Wharton Pension Research Council Working Paper.
Burkhauser, R. V., and Turner, J. A. (1978). “A Time Series Analysis on Social Security and the
Market Work of Men at Younger Ages.” Journal of Political Economy, 86(4), 701-715.
Burtless, G., and Hausman, J. A. (1978). “The E¤ect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating the
Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment.”Journal of Political Economy, 86(6), 1103-1130.
Burtless, G., and Mo¢ tt, R. A. (1985). “The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and Postretirement
Hours of Work.” Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 209-236.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M., and Titiunik, R. (2014). “Robust Nonparametric Con…dence Intervals
for Regression-Discontinuity Designs.” Econometrica, 82(6), 2295-2326.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M., Farrell, M. and Titiunik, R. (2016). “Regression Discontinuity
Designs Using Covariates.” University of Michigan Working Paper.
Card, D., Lee, D., Pei, Z., and Weber, A. (2015). “Inference on Causal E¤ects in a Generalized
Regression Kink Design.” Econometrica, 83(6), 2463-2483.

35

Card, D., Johnston, A., Leung, P., Mas, A., and Pei, Z. (2016). “The E¤ect of Unemployment
Bene…ts on the Duration of Unemployment Insurance Receipt: New Evidence from a Regression Kink Design
in Missouri, 2003-2013.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5), 126-130.
Chetty, R. (2012). “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions.”Econometrica, 80(3), 969-1018.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Olsen, T., and Pistaferri, L. (2011). “Adjustment Costs, Firm
Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records.”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 126, 749-804.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., and Saez, E. (2013). “Using Di¤erences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American Economic Review, 103(7), 2683-2721.
Chetty, R., Guren, A., Manoli, D., and Weber, A. (2012). “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the
Di¤erence Between Mciro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities.” In
Acemoglu, D., Parker, J., and Woodford, M., eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012 (Vol. 27, pp. 1-56).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chetty, R., Looney, A. and Kroft, K. (2007), “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
NBER Working Paper No. 13330.
Christensen, K. (1990). “Bridges Over Troubled Water: How Older Workers View the Labor Market,”
in P. Doeringer, ed., Bridges to Retirement: Trends in the Labor Market for Older Workers (pp. 175-207).
Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, Cornell University.
Cogan, J. (1981). “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 49, 945-963.
Congressional Budget O¢ ce. (2000). Pay-As-You-Go Estimate: H.R. 5, Senior Citizens’ Freedom
to Work Act of 2000. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing O¢ ce.
Diamond, P. (1980). “Income Taxation with Fixed Hours of Work.” Journal of Public Economics,
13(1), 101-110.
Diamond, P., and Gruber, J. (1999). “Social Security and Retirement in the United States.” In
Gruber, J. and Wise, D., eds., Social Security and Retirement around the World (pp. 437-473). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Dickens, W., and Lundberg, S. (1993). “Labor Supply with Hours Restrictions.” International
Economic Review, 34(1), 169-192.
Disney, R., and Smith, S. (2002). “The labour supply e¤ect of the abolition of the earnings rule for
older workers in the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal, 112, C136-C152.
Eissa, N., and Hoynes, H. W. (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples:
the Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10), 1931-1958.
Eissa, N., Kleven, H., and Kreiner, C. (2008). “Evaluation of four tax reforms in the United States:
Labor supply and welfare e¤ects for single mothers.” Journal of Public Economics, 92(3-4), 795-816.
Eissa, N., and Liebman, J. (1996). “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 605-637.
Engelhardt, G., and Kumar, A. (2014). “Taxes and the Labor Suplly of Older Americans: Recent
Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test.” National Tax Journal, 67(2), 443-458.
Figinski, T., and Neumark, D. (2015). "Does Eliminating the Earnings Test Increase the Incidence
of Low Income Among Older Women?" NBER Working Paper No. 21601.
French, E. (2005). “The E¤ects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and Retirement
Behaviour,”Review of Economic Studies, 72, 395-427.
Friedberg, L. (1998). “The Social Security Earnings Test and Labor Supply of Older Men.” In Poterba,
J. M., ed., Tax Policy and the Economy (pp. 121-150). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedberg, L. (2000). “The Labor Supply E¤ects of the Social Security Earnings Test.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 82, 48-63.
Friedberg, L., and Webb, A. (2009). “New Evidence on the Labor Supply E¤ects of the Social
Security Earnings Test.” In Brown, J.R., and Poterba, J. M., eds., Tax Policy and the Economy (pp. 1-35).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ganong, P., and Jäger, S. (2015). “A Permutation Test for the Regression Kink Design.” Harvard
University Working Paper.
Gelber, A., and Mitchell, J. (2012). “Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from Single Women and
Men.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 863-897.

36

Gelber, A., Isen, A., and Song, J. (2016). “The E¤ect of Pension Income on Elderly Earnings:
Evidence from Social Security and Full Population Data.” UC Berkeley Working Paper.
Gelber, A., Jones, D., and Sacks, D. (2013). “Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Evidence from the
Social Security Earnings Test.” NBER Working Paper No. 19491.
Gelber, A., Jones, D., Sacks, D., and Song, J. (2017). “The Labor Force Participation E¤ects of
the Social Security Earnings Test.” Indiana University Working Paper.
Gelber, A., Moore, T., and Strand, A. (Forthcoming). “The E¤ect of Disability Insurance Payments
on Bene…ciaries’Earnings.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Gruber, J., and Orzag, P. (2003). “Does the Social Security Earnings Test A¤ect Labor Supply and
Bene…ts Receipt.” National Tax Journal, 56, 755-773.
Gruber, J., and Wise, D. (1999). “Introduction and Summary.” In Gruber, J., and Wise, D., eds.,
Social Security and Retirement Around the World (pp. 1-35). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gustman, A., and Steinmeier, T. (1985). “The 1983 Social Security Reforms and Labor Supply
Adjustment of Older Individuals in the Long Run.” Journal of Labor Economics, 3(2), 237-253.
Gustman, A., and Steinmeier, T. (1991). “Changing the Social Security Rules for Work after 65.”
Industrial Labor and Relations Review, 44(4), 733-745.
Haider, S., and Loughran, D. (2008). “The E¤ect of the Social Security Earnings Test on Male Labor
Supply: New Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1), 57-87.
Hausman, J. (1981). “Labor Supply.” In Aaron, H. J. and Pechman, J. A., eds., How Taxes A¤ ect
Economic Behavior (pp. 27-71). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Heckman, J. (1979). “Sample Selection Bias as a Speci…cation Error.”Econometrica, 47(1), 153-161.
Honig, M., and Reimers, C. (1989). “Is it Worth Eliminating the Retirement Test?” American
Economic Review, 79(2), 103-107.
Hoynes, H. W. (1996). “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare Participation Under AFDC-UP.” Econometrica, 64, 295-332.
Ito, K. (2014). “Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear electricity
pricing.” American Economic Review, 104(2), 537-563.
J. K. Lasser Institute (1998). Your Income Tax: 1998. New York: Macmillan General Reference.
Keane, M. P. (2011). “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4),
961-1075.
Keane, M. P. and Mo¢ tt, R. (1998). “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program Participation
and Labor Supply.” International Economic Review, 39, 553-589.
Kleven, H. (2016). “Bunching.” Annual Review of Economics, 8, 435-464.
Kleven, H., and Kreiner, C. (2005). “Labor Supply Behavior and the Design of Tax and Transfer
Policy.” Danish Journal of Economics, 143, 321-358.
Kleven, H., Landais, C., Saez, E., and Schultz, E. (2014). “Migration and Wage E¤ects of Taxing
Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in Denmark.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
129(1), 333-378.
Kleven, H. J., and Waseem, M. (2013). “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frcitions and
Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2),
669-723.
Kline, P., and Tartari, M. (2016). “Bounding Labor Supply Responses to a Randomized Welfare
Experiment: A Revealed Preference Approach.” American Economic Review, 106, 972-1014.
Kopczuk, W., and Munroe, D. (2015). “Mansion Tax: The e¤ect of Transfer Taxes on the Residential
Real Estate Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2), 214-257.
Kopczuk, W., Saez, E., and Song, J. (2010). “Earnings Inequality and Mobility in the United
States: Evidence from Social Security Data since 1937.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,125(1), 91-128.
Laitner, J., and Silverman, D. (2012). “Consumption, Retirement, and Social Security: Evaluating
the E¢ ciency of Reform that Encourages Longer Careers.” Journal of Public Economics, 96, 615-634.
Landais, C. (2015). “Assessing the Welfare E¤ects of Unemployment Bene…ts Using the Regression
Kink Design.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4), 243-278.
Lee, D. S., and T. Lemieux (2010). “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 48, 281-355.

37

Leonesio, M. V. (1990). “The E¤ects of the Social Security Earnings Test on the Labor-Market Activity
of Older Americans: A Review of Empirical Evidence.” Social Security Bulletin, 53(5), 2-21.
Liebman, J., and Luttmer, E. (2015). “Would People Behave Di¤erently If They Better Understood
Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment.”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1),
275-99.
Manoli, D., and Weber, A. (2016). “The E¤ects of the Early Retirement Age on Retirement Decisions.” NBER Working Paper 22561.
Manoli, D., and Weber, A. (Forthcoming). “Nonparametric Evidence on the E¤ects of Financial
Incentives on Retirement Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Manski, C. (2014). “Identi…cation of Income-Leisure Preferences and Evaluation of Income Tax Policy,”
Quantitative Economics, 5, 145-174.
McCrary, J. (2008). “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity Design: A
Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698-714.
McDonald, J. F., and Mo¢ tt, R. A. (1980). “The Uses of Tobit Analysis.” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 62(2), 318-321.
Meyer, B. D., and Rosenbaum, D. T. (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 1063-1114.
Mo¢ tt, R. (1983). “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.” American Economic Review, 73(5),
1023-1035.
Nielsen, H. S., Sorensen, T., and Taber, C. (2010). “Estimating the E¤ect of Student Aid on
College Enrollment from a Government Grant Policy Reform.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2(2), 185-215.
Figinski, T. and Neumark, D. (2018). "Does eliminating the Earnings Test increase the incidence of
low income among older women?" Research on aging, 40(1), 27-53.
Powell, J. L. (1994). “Estimation of Semiparametric Models.”In Engle, R. F., and McFadden, D., eds.,
Handbook of Econometrics (pp. 2443-2521). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rubin, D. B. (1974). “Estimating Causal E¤ects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized
Studies.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 66.5, 688-701.
Saez, E. (2002). “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), 1039-1073.
Saez, E. (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2, 180-212.
Saez, E., Slemrod, J. and Giertz, S. (2012). “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to
Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1), 3-50.
Social Security Administration. (2012). Social Security Handbook. Washington, D.C.: SSA.
Song, J. G. (2004). “Evaluating the Initial Impact of Eliminating the Retirement Earnings Test.” Social
Security Bulletin, 65(1), 1-15.
Song, J. G., and Manchester, J. (2007). “New Evidence on Earnings and Bene…t Claims Following
Changes in the Retirement Earnings Test.” Journal of Public Economics, 91, 669-700.
Tergesen, A. (2016). “How to Get People to Delay Retirement.” Wall St. Journal, March 21.
Turner, L. (2014). “The Road to Pell is Paved with Good Intentions: The Economic Incidence of
Federal Student Grant Aid.” University of Maryland Working Paper.
Utendorf, K. (2001/2002). “The Upper Part of the Earnings Distribution in the United States: How
Has It Changed?” Social Security Bulletin, 64 (3), 1-11.
Viscusi, K. (1979). Welfare of the Elderly: An Economic Analysis and Policy Prescription. New York,
NY: John Wiley and Sons.
Vroman, W. (1985). “Some Economic E¤ects of the Retirement Test.” In Ehrenberg, R., ed., Research
in Labor Economics (Vol. 7, pp. 31-89). Greenwich, CT: Jai Press, Inc.

38

Figure 1: Extensive Margin Response by State 0 Counterfactual Earnings for a Kink (Panel A) and a Notch
(Panel B)
Panel A: Kinked Tax Schedule

Panel B: Notched Tax Schedule

Notes: The …gures illustrate features of the model described in Section 2. The x-axes show desired income if employed on a
linear budget set in state 0, i.e. z
~0 . The y -axes show a hypothetical probability of employment, under three scenarios: a linear
schedule in state 0 (dashed line); a kinked or notched tax schedule in state 1 when individuals can make intensive margin
adjustments (dotted line); and a kinked (Panel A) or notched (Panel B) tax schedule in state 1 when individuals cannot make
intensive margin adjustments (solid line).
refers to the change in slope at the exempt amount of the employment probability
as a function of desired earnings when a kink is present. D refers to the discontinuity at the exempt amount under a notch.

39

Figure 2: Extensive Margin Incentives for a Kink (Panel A) and a Notch (Panel B)
Panel A: Kinked Tax Schedule

Panel B: Notched Tax Schedule

Notes: The …gures show the ANTR (y -axes) as a function of before-tax income (x-axes). In both panels, incentives under a
linear tax schedule in which the ANTR is equal to 1
0 everywhere are represented by a dashed line. In Panel A, incentives
under a kinked tax schedule in which the ANTR is equal to 1
0 below the kink point z , and 1
1 +d z =z above z ,
are represented by a solid line. In Panel B, incentives under a notched tax schedule in which the ANTR is 1
0 below z
and 1
dT =z
1 above z are likewise represented by a solid line. Panel A shows that under a kink, the slope of this
graph discontinuously decreases at the kink point z , due to the imposition of the marginal tax on earnings above z . Panel
B shows that under an notch, the ANTR discontinuosly drops at z (and its slope discontinuously rises). 1
a is de…ned as
the average net-of-tax rate, i.e.

1

a = 1 [T (z) T (0)] =z .

40

41
Panel D

Panel B

analogous patterns in the case of a notch.

Notes: The …gure depicts potential responses to a kinked or notched budget set. In Panel A the agent reduces earnings to the kink at z , preferring this to the outside level of
consumption. In Panel B the agent prefers the outside option of earning zero to the optimal level of earnings z conditional on being employed. Panels C and D show

Panel C

Panel A

Figure 3: Intensive and Extensive Margin Responses to a Kink (Panels a and b) or Notch (Panels c and d)

2.5

Figure 4: Pre-AET Earnings Distribution and Intensive Margin Response to the AET

1

Probability in Bin
1.5
2

Age 60, excess mass = -92.76 (SE = 107.27)
Age 62, excess mass = 768.13 (SE = 76.72)

-10

0
10
20
Distance to exempt amount ($1000s)

30

Notes: The …gure shows the actual earnings density (dotted plot) and smooth …t (solid or dashed line). The data shown are
means within bins of width $500. The exempt amount is normalized to zero and shown with the vertical line at zero.
Following Chetty et al. (2011), the smooth density is estimated using a seventh-order polynomial, excluding the region within
a $3,000 bandwidth of the exempt amount. The source is a 25 percent random sample of the Social Security Administration
Master Earnings File linked to the Master Bene…ciary Record. See the Appendix for a description of how we estimate excess
mass. The sample consists of individuals with age 60 earnings that are positive and within $40,000 of the exempt amount,
born 1918 to 1923, with no self-employment income at age 60, and excluding individuals who ever have negative earnings at
ages 50-57 or 63-70.

42

Figure 5: Predetermined Covariates
Panel B. Pr(White)

82

66

Pr(White)
83
84

Pr(Female)
67
68

69

85

Panel A. Pr(Female)

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

m6

Month in 1920
m7
m8

m9

Panel C. Birth year

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($1000s)

Note: The …gure shows the bin means of predetermined covariates as a function of the distance to the age 60 exempt amount.
The …gure demonstrates that there are no clear visual changes in slope in any of these covariates at the age 60 exempt
amount, consistent with the assumptions necessary for the validity of the regression kink design.

0

5

Probability in bin
10
15

20

25

Figure 6: Histogram of Percent Real Earnings Growth, Ages 59 to 60

-50

-25
0
25
Percent real earnings growth, 59 to 60

.495

Notes: This histogram shows that there is a large mass near zero percent real earnings growth across a “placebo” set of ages,
59 and 60, when individuals do not face the AET. This indicates that a substantial mass of individuals have no growth in
desired real earnings, consistent with the assumptions necessary for our RKD to estimate a lower bound on the elasticity as
described in the main text. Real earnings in each year are calculated using the CPI-U. See other notes to Figure 4.

43

52

Pr(Positive earnings), ages 63-64
54
56

58

Figure 7: Employment Rate Near the Exempt Amount, Ages 63 to 64

-3

-1.5
0
1.5
Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($1000s)

3

Notes: The …gure plots the mean annual employment rate, i.e. the probability of positive earnings, at ages 63 to 64 averaged,
as a function of the distance of age 60 earnings from the exempt amount. The sample is individuals with positive age 60
earnings and no age 60 self-employment income, born 1918 to 1923. See other notes to Figure 4.

4

Figure 8: Kink Estimate by Bandwidth

-2

0

Kink estimate

2

Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth

2

4

6
8
Bandwidth ($1000s)

10

12

Notes: The …gure shows that as a function of the bandwidth, the estimated change in slope at the exempt amount of the
mean annual probability of age 63 to 64 employment is relatively stable. The solid line shows the point estimates, and the
dashed lines show the 95 percent con…dence intervals. See other notes to Figure 4.

44

Figure 9: Placebo Tests

82

Pr(Positive earnings), age 56-57
84
86
88

Panel A: Probability of Positive Earnings, Ages 56 to 57

-3

-1.5
0
1.5
Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($1000s)

3

Panel B: Probability of Positive Earnings by Single Year of Age, Ages 61 to 64

72
69

82
79

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

55
49

56

52

62

58

Age 64

65

Age 63

59

Pr(Positive earnings)

85

75

78

Age 62

88

Age 61

-3

-1.5

0

1.5

3

-3

Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($1000s)
Notes: Panel A plots the annual probability of positive earnings at ages 56 to 57, as a function of the distance of age 60
earnings from the exempt amount. In Panel B, each …gure plots the probability of positive earnings for each single year of age
from 61 to 64. See other notes to Figure 4.

45

20

Figure 10: Permutation Test

0

5

Probability in bin
10

15

Kink estimate = -1.85
p = 0.025

-3

-2

-1
Placebo kink estimate

0

1

Notes: The …gure plots the histogram of placebo kink estimates from a permutation test in the spirit of Ganong and Jäger
(2015). We estimate a set of placebo changes in slope in the mean annual age 63 to 64 employment rate, using the same
speci…cation as our main estimates except that we examine the change in slope at placebo locations of the exempt amount
away from the true exempt amount. The …gure shows that the point estimate recovered from the actual exempt amount,
shown by the vertical line in the …gure, is located well below the signi…cant majority of the distribution of placebo estimates,
reinforcing the view that we are detecting a true e¤ect of the AET. This permutation test shows a signi…cant kink (p=0.025).
See other notes to Figure 4.

.0049

.005

.0051

R

2

.0052

.0053

.0054

Figure 11: R-Squared by Placebo Kink Location

-6

-3
0
3
Placebo kink location ($1000s from exempt amount)

6

Notes: The …gure plots the R-squared of our baseline speci…cation against the “placebo” kink location relative to the exempt
amount, following Landais (2015). The vertical line denotes the actual location of the exempt amount. As described in the
text, we estimate a set of placebo changes in slope in the mean annual age 63 to 64 employment rate, using the same
speci…cation as our main estimates except that we examine the change in slope at placebo locations of the exempt amount
away from the true exempt amount. The …gure shows that the R-squared is maximized at the true location of the placebo
kink, supporting our hypothesis that we have found a true kink in the data rather than a spurious underlying nonlinearity in
the relationship between the yearly employment rate at ages 63 to 64 and age 60 earnings. See other notes to Figure 4.

46

Table 1: Summary Statistics
(1)
Within $2,797 of
Exempt Amount
Percent of years with positive
56.53
earnings, ages 63 to 64
(45.92)
Annual earnings, ages 63 to 64
$5,813
(including zeroes)
($8,134)
Claim age (if claimed)
63.13
(2.61)
Percent female
68.00
(46.65)
Percent white
83.96
(36.70)
Year of birth
1920.62
(1.68)
N
95,960

(2)
Full Earnings
Range
63.27
(44.05)
$20,115
($24,599)
63.68
(2.14)
41.85
(49.33)
89.30
(30.91)
1920.52
(1.69)
1,425,600

Notes: The table shows the means of each variable shown in the row headings, with the standard deviation in parentheses,
from a 25 percent random sample of the Social Security Administration Master Earnings File and Master Bene…ciary Record.
The sample is all individuals born 1918-1923 with positive earnings at age 60, and satisfying the other sample restrictions
described in the main text. In Column 1, the bandwidth relative to the AET exempt amount, $2,797, corresponds to the
bandwidth used in our main regressions. For comparison, Column 2 shows individuals from the full range of earnings.
Earnings are in thousands of real 2010 dollars. N’s refer to the number of individuals.

Linear
N
Quadratic
N
Cubic
N

Table 2: Initial Tests of Smoothness
(1)
(2)
(3)
Estimated Kink
White
Female
Density (Indicator) (Indicator)
-0.057
-0.0005
-0.035
(0.067)
(0.36)
(0.34)
141,110
172,383
330,556
-0.26
-0.074
0.0069
(0.36)
(1.48)
(0.28)
141,110
696,139
348,920
-0.26
-0.98
-2.25
(0.36)
(0.69)
(0.72)***
141,110
282,460
362,174

(4)
Year of
Birth
0.052
(0.018)***
102,640
0.074
(0.017)***
304,306
0.038
(0.028)
308,690

Notes: The table presents tests for the smoothness of the earnings density, and of three pre-determined covariates (indicators
for being white or female, and year of birth). The table reports coe¢ cients corresponding to 1 in equation (18), re‡ecting
the change in slope in the outcome at the age 60 exempt amount, as a function of age 60 earnings relative to the exempt
amount. The column headings indicate the outcome variable, while the row headings indicate the speci…cation of the running
variable (linear, quadratic, or cubic). The number of individuals N in each regression is shown below the standard error. In
Columns 2 to 4, robust standard errors following Calonico et al. (2014) are reported in parentheses, and the bandwidth is also
chosen using Calonico et al. (2014). The resulting di¤erence in bandwidths is the reason for the discrepancy across
speci…cations in the number of individuals included in these regressions. The N’s are the same across the speci…cations for the
density outcome in Column 1 because following previous literature, we use the McCrary (2008) procedure to calculate the
bandwidth, bin size, and standard error for the density outcome. Here and in the following tables, *** indicates p<0.01; **
indicates p<0.05; and * indicates p<0.10, all from two-tailed tests of equality with zero. See other notes to Table 1.

47

Table 3: Main Results Documenting Kink in Employment
(1)
(2)
(3)
Main
With
Age 56-57
RKD
Controls (Placebo)
Linear
-1.85
-1.68
-0.59
(0.72)*** (0.66)***
(0.37)
N
95,960
104,665
106,241
Quadratic
-2.47
-2.27
0.11
(1.02)*** (0.89)***
(0.53)
N
160,785
172,979
277,187
Cubic
-3.11
-2.57
-0.27
(1.07)*** (1.04)***
(0.59)
N
273,241
326,782
407,773
Notes: The table shows regression kink estimates showing the change at the age 60 exempt amount in the slope of the mean
annual probability of positive earnings at ages 63 and 64 as a function of age 60 distance to the exempt amount, corresponding
to 1 in equation (18). Column 1 is our main speci…cation described in the main text. In Column 1, the Calonico et al. (2014)
bandwidth is $2,797 for the linear speci…cation, $3,047 for the quadratic, and $3,093 for the cubic. Column 2 adds indicators
for demographic categories (sex, race groups, and year of birth). Column 3 shows a placebo test in which the mean probability
of positive earnings at ages 56 and 57 is the dependent variable. Robust standard errors, following Calonico et al. (2014), are
in parentheses. The number of individuals in each regression is shown below the standard error. See other notes to Table 2.

Table 4: RKD Estimates by Single Year of Age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Age 61 Age 62
Age 63
Age 64
Estimate of slope
-0.33
-0.90
-1.60
-1.98
discontinuity
(0.81)
(0.91)
(0.72)** (0.74)***
N
80,148 244,465 105,871
98,502
Notes: The table presents regression kink estimates showing the change at the age 60 exempt amount in the slope of the
probability of positive earnings at each age separately from 61 to 64, as a function of the age 60 distance to the exempt
amount, corresponding to 1 in equation (18). We our use our baseline linear speci…cation. The age in question is shown in
each column heading. See other notes to Table 2.

Elasticity
N

(1)
Full
Sample
0.49
(0.19)***
95,960

Table 5: Elasticity Estimates
(3)
(4)
(5)
NonMen
Women
White
White
0.25
0.49
0.47
0.41
(0.19) (0.21)** (0.18)*** (0.43)
68,971
66,251
93,722
39,271
(2)

(6)
High Prior
Earnings
0.48
(0.48)
19,574

(7)
Low Prior
Earnings
0.40
(0.16)***
101,709

Notes: The table presents the estimates for the full sample and various subgroups, from the baseline linear speci…cation. The
“high prior earnings” and “low prior earnings” subgroups refer to individuals for whom mean earnings from ages 40 to 59 were
above the median and below the median, respectively. The elasticity is calculated as described in the text, using the AET
rules to calculate analytically the …rst stage change in slope of the ANTR at the exempt amount; averaging across calendar
years, the mean …rst stage change in the slope of the ANTR at the exempt amount is -4.88. N’s refer to the number of
individuals included in each “reduced form” regression (18). The N’s di¤er across speci…cations both because the samples
di¤er, and because the the Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidths di¤er across samples. See other notes to Table 2.

48

Appendix: For Online Publication
A

Proofs of Propositions and Other Claims

Proposition 1: In general the slope of

d Pr( zn1 >0j~
zn0 )
d~
zn0

will be given by:

dq n;1
d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
@G ( q n1 j n) dn
= g ( q n1 j n)
+
d~
zn0
d~
zn0
@n
d~
zn0

(A.1)

Focusing on the …rst term in the expression for d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) =d~
zn0 in (A.1), we have:
dq n;1
d~
zn0

=
=

@v (~
zn1
@v (~
zn1

T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) d~
zn1
@v (~
zn1
+
@ z~n1
d~
zn0
T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) dn
@n
d~
zn0

T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) dn
@n
d~
zn0
(A.2)

When agents are unrestricted in their intensive margin earnings choice, we can set the …rst term on the right
side of (A.2) to zero. For those with z~n0 < z or z~n0 > z + z , @v (~
zn1 T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) =@ z~n1 = 0 due
to the envelope theorem.34 For those with z
z~n0
z + z , we have d~
zn1 =d~
zn0 = 0, since z~n1 = z
for everyone in this set— i.e. these agents bunch at z . Substituting for dq n1 =dzn0 in (A.1) using (A.2), we
have:
d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
@v (~
zn1 T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) dn
@G ( q n1 j n) dn
= g ( q n1 j n)
+
(A.3)
d~
zn0
@n
d~
zn0
@n
d~
zn0
when individuals are able to adjust on both the intensive and extensive margins.
Our smoothness assumptions imply that this slope is continuous, and in particular it is continuous at z
since n, q n1 , z~n1 , T1 ( ) and @G ( qnj j n) =@n are all continuous in z~n0 at z . Furthermore, g ( ) and @v=@n
are likewise continuous in their arguments. Thus, we have:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
= lim
d~
zn0
z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

(A.4)

That is, the employment probability does not exhibit any …rst-order change in slope at z , even though the
ANTR does feature such a discontinuity.
Proposition 2: If z~n1
z~n0 , the general expression for d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 ) =d~
zn0 from (A.1) still holds.
However, we now have a slightly di¤erent expression for the critical level of …xed costs, which is now evaluated at z~n0 , implying q n1 v (~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) v 0 . Accordingly, we have a di¤erent expression for
dq n1 =d~
zn0 relative to (A.2). Since z~n1 = z~n0 for everyone, we have:
@v (~
zn0
dq n1
=
d~
zn0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) @v (~
zn0
+
@ z~n0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) dn
@n
d~
zn0

(A.5)

where the key di¤erence is that @v=@z and @v=@n are evaluated at z~n0 instead of z~n1 . For those with
z~n0 < z , since T1 ( ) = T0 ( ) and z~n1 = z~n0 , it is still the case that @v (~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) =@ z~n0 = 0 due
to the envelope theorem. However, the …rst term in (A.5) for those with z~n0 > z is now:
@v (~
zn0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
@ z~n0

=

(1

=

n

1 ) vc

(1

+ vz

1)

+

vz
vc

(A.6)

where n
vc , and vc and vz are the partial derivatives of v ( ) with respect to c and z, respectively,
evaluated at (~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n).
3 4 In

this and other similar expressions elsewhere we evaluate the partial derivative of v with respect to z allowing both
earnings and consumption to change via the budget constraint, but holding n constant.

49

Thus, we now have:
(
@G( q n1 jn) dn
T1 (~
zn0 );~
zn0 ;n) dn
g ( q n1 j n) h@v(~zn0
d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
@n
@n
d~
zn0 ;
h
i d~zn0 +
i
=
@v(~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 );~
zn0 ;n) dn
vz
d~
zn0
g ( q n1 j n) n (1
1 ) + vc +
@n
d~
zn0 +
Note also that:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

vz (~
zn0
vc (~
zn0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
=
T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)

(1

where we have used the …rst order condition for z~n;0 and the fact that
have the following expression for the di¤erence in slopes at z :
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

=

if z~n0 < z
@G( q n1 jn) dn
@n
d~
zn0 ;

0)

(A.8)

lim T1 (~
zn0 ) = T0 (z ). We now

z~n0 !z

lim + g ( q n1 j n)

z~n0 !z

n

(1

= g ( q n 1 j n ) n [(1
1)
=
d
g ( qn 1 j n )
n
where q n 1 , n , and

n

if z~n0 z
(A.7)

1)

(1

+

vz
vc
0 )]
(A.9)

all refer the individual for whom z~n0 = z .*

Proposition 3: To illustrate the …rst part of the result, note that z~n;1 = z for everyone with z~n;0 2
z ; z + 4z N , i.e. the set of bunchers. Thus, as we cross z , there is no discontinuous change in after-tax
income or optimal earnings, conditional on working, and thus no discontinuous change in the employment
probability. To show the second result, our proof proceeds almost step-for-step as in the case of a kink. The
key step of that proof is that the following term from (A.2) continues to vanish:
@v (~
zn1

T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) d~
zn1
=0
@ z~n1
d~
zn0

(A.10)

For those with z~n0 < z or z~n0 > z + z N , @v (~
zn1 T1 (~
zn1 ) ; z~n1 ; n) =@ z~n1 = 0 due to the envelope theorem.35 For those with z
z~n0
z + z N , we have d~
zn1 =d~
zn0 = 0, since z~n1 = z for everyone in this
set— i.e. these agents bunch at z . The result then follows as in the case of a kink.
Proposition 4: The result follows immediately from the fact that utility just to the left and right of the
notch will be v (z
T0 (z ) ; z ; n ) and v z
T1+ (z ) ; z ; n , respectively. We also use the following
…rst-order approximations:
G ( qn 1 j n )

v z

G ( qn 0 j n )

T1+ (z ) ; z ; n

g ( qn
= g ( qn

v (z

;0 j n

) [qn 1
;0 j n ) v z

qn 0 ]
T1+ (z ) ; z ; n
@v
z
@c

T0 (z ) ; z ; n )
=

n

v (z

T1+ (z )
[dT + d

z ]

T0 (z ) ; z ; n ) (A.11)

z + T0 (z )
(A.12)

Proposition 5 Assume that the utility function is quasi-linear in consumption and that the density of …xed
costs is locally constant in the neighborhood of z , i.e. g ( qn 0 j n ) = g qn+ 1 n . Then the employment
probability, as a function of desired earnings in state 0, will exhibit a …rst-order change in slope (i.e. a kink)
3 5 In this and other similar expressions elsewhere we evaluate the partial derivative of v with respect to z allowing both
earnings and consumption to change via the budget constraint, but holding n constant.

50

at z . The kink is given by:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

=

d
"

g ( qn 0 j n )
@G ( qn 0 j n )
@n

@G qn+ 1 n
@n

#

dn
d~
zn0
(A.13)

Moreover, if we use a …rst-order approximation for @G=@n, we have:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

d

g ( qn 0 j n )

[dT + d

z ]

@g ( qn 0 j n ) dn
(A.14)
@n
d~
zn0

Proof 5: Again, the proof proceeds as in the case of a kink above. However, the notch introduces
discontinuities in a number of the elements of equation (A.7). In particular, we now have:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

qn1 = q +
n 1 6= q n

0

=

lim q n1

(A.15)

z~n0 !z

However, if we assume that the density of …xed costs is locally constant in q at n , then:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

g ( qn1 j n) = g ( qn 1 j n ) = g ( qn 0 j n ) =

lim g ( qn1 j n)

z~n0 !z

(A.16)

Furthermore, if we assume quasilinearity, we have:

lim

z~n0 !z

@v (~
zn0
+

lim + vz (~
zn0

z~n0 !z

n = vc = 1
T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
@v (~
zn0
=
lim
@n
z~n0 !z
T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) =
(1
0)

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
@n
(A.17)

The second and third lines follow because the quasilinearity assumption breaks the relationship between the
level of consumption and the disutility of labor. Thus, a discontinuity in after-tax income doesn’t e¤ect the
marginal disutility of labor. In the third line, we also use the …rst-order condition for z~n0 . Using these above
results, the …rst part of the proposition follows. The second part of the proposition can be shown using the
following …rst-order approximation:
@G qn+ 1 n
@n

@G ( qn 0 j n )
@n
=

@ 2 G ( qn 0 j n ) +
qn 1 qn 0
@q@n
@g ( qn 0 j n )
[dT + d z ]
@n

Estimation of Kink with Measurement Error: In Section 4.2, we argue that in the case of measurement
error, i.e.
(~
z0 ; vit ) < 1, we estimate a lower bound on our elasticity. Here we formally demonstrate
this result. Recall that our relationship between earnings at age 60 and desired earnings at ages 63-64 is
z 60 = z~0it + pit vit . We assume that the joint distribution of (p; v), conditional on z 60 , is continuous and
continuously di¤erentiable in z 60 at z 60 = z . Consider the estimated kink in employment, as a function of
earnings at age 60, i.e. the numerator in equation (17), using z 60 as the running variable. Denote this as
RKD
:
@ Pr Lit = 1j zi60
@ Pr Lit = 1j zi60
RKD
lim
lim
60
@zi
@zi60
zi60 !z +
zi60 !z
Let the potential deviation in desired earnings, v, have a distribution with the CDF M ( vj z) and pdf

51

m ( vj z), conditional on z 60 = z. We have the following:
#
"
Z
60
60
@
Pr
L
=
1j
z
@
Pr
L
=
1j
z
it
it
i
i
RKD
lim
m ( vj z ) dv
=
(z ; v) 60lim
@zi60
@zi60
zi60 !z
zi !z +
"
#
Z
@ Pr Lit = 1j zi60
@ Pr Lit = 1j zi60
+ (1
(z
v; v)) 60lim
lim
m ( vj z ) dv
@zi60
@zi60
zi !z +
zi60 !z
Z
@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
=
(z ; v)
lim +
lim
m ( vj z ) dv
60
@ z~i0t
@ z~i0t
z~i0t !z
zi !z
Z
@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
lim
m ( vj z ) dv
+ (1
(z
v; v))
lim
+
@ z~i0t
@ z~i0t
z~i0t !z
vit
z~i0t !z
vit
Z
1
(z
v; v) ^
^ (z ) + (1
=
)
(z
v) m ( vj z ) dv
1
where
=
^ (z)

=

Z

(z ; v) m ( vj z ) dv
lim

z~i0t !z

@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
@ z~i0t

lim

z~i0t !z

@ Pr ( Lit = 1j z~i0t )
@ z~i0t

That is,
is the probability that pit = 0 among individuals with zi60 = z and ^ (z) is a the kink in
employment at z that would estimated if desired earnings, z~i0t , were observed.
Given our assumptions on smoothness in heterogeneity and assuming the only relevant kink in the tax
schedule is at z , we have:
if z = z
^ (z) =
0 if z 6= z
Here

is the kink in employment among those who face a kink, as de…ned in equation (9). Thus, we have:
RKD

=

It follows that if (z; v) < 1, i.e. we have measurement error in desired earnings when using z 60 as a proxy,
then we estimate a lower bound on our elasticity when using the formula in equation (9). In other words,
the estimated kink among those with age 60 earnings near z re‡ects a weighted average of the subset of
individuals who will actually face the kink at ages 63-64 and the subset who will not. Furthermore, when
(z; v) = 0, i.e. there is no persistence in earnings from age 60 to ages 63-64, we expect no employment
kink. Note, we only require that the distribution of v be smooth as a function of z 60 . Thus, we can allow
for cases where v is not mean zero, e.g. where there is a systematic change in mean desired earnings from
age 60 to ages 63-64. Note as well that we can relax the assumption that the only kink in the tax schedule
is at z and can instead assume that the set of other possible kinks is of measaure zero.

B
B.1

Model Extensions
Extension to Two or More Discrete Job Choices

We begin by focusing on two key options within the menu of positive earnings: one at the interior optimum
in state 0, z~n0 , and another “next-best” job at an alternative level of earnings, z~nnb . This allows for an
arbitrary number (whether …nite or in…nite) of discrete choices that are less preferred than the “next-best”
job. The model can also be easily extended to allow for the possibility that multiple earnings levels give the
same “next best” utility level as z~nnb .
Before showing this result more formally, we brie‡y illustrate the intuition. Consider an individual whose
optimal earnings under a linear tax, i.e. in the absence of the kink, is just above z . For the moment,
suppose this person can either earn just above z or exit. Now, we introduce a kink at z . The e¤ect of the

52

kink on the average tax rate for the person just above z is very vanishingly small. So, if this person now
decides to exit, they must have been virtually indi¤erent between z and exiting prior to the kink. Now, lets
suppose instead that a part-time job is available at some earnings partway between 0 and z . Also, suppose
that in the absence of the kink, the person continues to earn just above z , rather than exiting or taking
the part-time job. By revealed preference, we learn that the job earning just above z is preferred to the
part-time job. Furthermore, since we have establised that this person is virtually indi¤erent between earning
just above z or exiting, it follows that exiting is also preferred to the part-time job. Thus, when we again
introduce the kink, the features of the part-time job are irrelevant for the decision to exit or not. If, in the
absence of the kink, exiting is preferred to the part-time job, it will continue to be preferred once the kink
is introduced.
Formally, let vnnb be the utility level associated with the next-best level of earnings:
vnnb

v z~nnb

T z~nnb ; z~nnb ; n

(B.18)
z~nnb

As it is possible that the kink lowers utility at z~n0 while leaving utility at
una¤ected, the probability of
working in state 1 is one minus the probability that non-employment is preferred to both the earnings level
z~n0 and the earnings level z~nnb of the next-best job:
Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )

=
=
=

1

Pr v 0

vnnb

qn1 and v 0

1

Pr v

0

qn1 q n1 < qn1

Pr (q n1 < qn1 )

Pr v

0

vnnb
vnnb

qn1 q n1 < qn1

[1

1

v (~
zn0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
G ( qn1 j n)]

qn1
(B.19)

The slope of the employment function is now a more complex expression:
d Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 )
d~
zn0

d Pr v 0

=

+ Pr v 0

vnnb qn1 jq n1 < qn1
[1
d~
zn0
vnnb

G ( q n1 j n)]
dG ( q n1 j n)
d~
zn0

qn1 q n1 < qn1

(B.20)

We now explore under what conditions this slope reduces to that of our earlier model in Section 2.5, in
which intensive margin earnings in state 1 are constrained at their state 0 level. We will show in general
that this is true for those with state 0 earnings below z . Next, we show that for those with state 0 earnings
just above z , the slope is likewise una¤ected relative to the model in Section 2.5, as long as the next-best
job o¤ers a level of earnings that is discretely di¤erent than the new interior optimum z .
Consider individuals earning below z in state 0. We …rst focus on the term Pr v 0
We can show the following for the agents in this set for whom q n1 < qn1 :
v0

> v (~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
= v (~
zn0 T0 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)
> vnnb qn1

vnnb

qn1 jq n1 < qn1 .

qn1
qn1
(B.21)

where in the …rst line we used the fact that q n1 < qn1 and the de…nition of q n1 . In the second line we
used the fact that T1 (~
zn0 ) = T0 (~
zn0 ) for individuals with z~n0 < z . In the third line we used the fact that
v (~
zn0 T0 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) vnnb due to revealed preference in state 0. It follows that:
Pr v 0
)

d Pr v

vnnb
0

vnnb

qn1 q n1 < qn1 ; z~n0 < z
qn1 q n1 < qn1 ; z~n0 < z
d~
zn0

=1
=0

(B.22)

In other words, if an individual with state 0 earnings below z prefers the outside option in the absence of
the next-best job, she would continue to prefer it in the presence of the next-best job.

53

Using the results in (B.22), we can simplify the expression in (B.20), for those with z~n0 < z :
d Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
d~
zn0

dG ( q n1 j n)
d~
zn0
@v (~
zn0
= g ( q n1 j n)
=

@G ( q n1 j n) dn
T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n) dn
+
@n
d~
zn0
@n
d~
zn0

(B.23)

where the second line follows from equation (A.7). Thus, the presence of a menu of discrete options does not
a¤ect the results for those with z~n0 < z . Intuitively, after the introduction of a kink, the individual’s state
0 optimal earnings amount z~n0 is still available and is the only positive earnings level relevant for extensive
margin decisions.
Now consider individuals with z~n0
z and recall that we are ultimately interested in the change in
slope of the employment rate at z . Any change in the slope of the employment function at z will depend
on the following limit:
"
#
d Pr v 0 vnnb qn1 q n1 < qn1
d Pr ( zn1 > 0j zn0 )
=
lim
[1 G ( q n 1 j n )]
lim
dzn0
d~
zn0
z~n0 !z +
z~n0 !z +
+

lim

z~n0 !z

+

Pr( v 0

vnnb

qn1 q n1 < qn1 )

dG( q n 1 j n )
d~
zn0

(B.24)

Note the following:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

Pr v 0

vnnb

qn1 q n1 < qn1

=

lim

z~n0 !z

+

= Pr v 0
= 1

In the second line, we used the fact that

Pr v 0
vnnb

vnnb
qn

1

qn1 v 0
v0

v (z

v (~
zn0

T1 (~
zn0 ) ; z~n0 ; n)

T0 (z ) ; z ; n )

qn

qn1

1

(B.25)

lim z~n0 = z and T1 (z ) = T0 (z ) , and the …nal line follows

z~n0 !z

from revealed preference: z was initially chosen over the next-best job.
We require that in the neighborhood of z the earnings level o¤ered at the next-best job be discretely
di¤erent than that of the state 0 job; thus, we assume that:
lim z~nnb 6= z

z~n0 !z

(B.26)

This assumption rules out alternative jobs that can be made arbitrarily close to the level of state 0 earnings.
Intuitively, if this were not so then individuals earning just above z in state 0 would be able to replicate
intensive margin adjustment, which we have shown smooths out any kink in the employment function that
would otherwise exist.
The assumption in (B.26) implies that the limit in (B.25) is reached at some level of state 0 earnings
strictly above z . That is, as we approach z from above, the probability that preferring the outside option
without an alternative job implies preferring it in the presence of the next-best job plateaus at 1 at some
point before reaching z . Thus, we have:
d Pr v 0 vnnb qn1 q n1 < qn1
=0
(B.27)
lim +
d~
zn0
z~n0 !z

54

As before, (B.25) and (B.27) can be used to simplify (B.24) as follows:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 )
d~
zn0

=

lim

z~n0 !z

+

dG ( q n1 j n)
d~
zn0

= g ( qn 1 j n )
+

d

n

+

@v (~
zn

0

T1 (~
zn 0 ) ; z~n 0 ; n ) dn
@n
d~
zn0

dG ( q n 1 j n ) dn
dn
d~
zn0

(B.28)

where the second line follows from equation (A.7). Combining (B.28) and (B.23), we have the same result
as equation (8) of Section 2.5, i.e. our earlier model with z~n1 = z~n0 . Note that this result features as a
special case the scenario in which the agent has the choice among a full-time job at z~n0 , a part-time job as
some lower level of earnings, or not working. Furthermore, this result can be extended beyond a setting with
multiple, discrete earnings options to allow for some continuity in the choice set, as long as the options all
strictly di¤er from z among those with state 0 earnings near z .

B.2

Jointly Estimating the Structural Elasticity among Constrained Types and
B

In the model presented in Section 2.7, we may wish to estimate the structural elasticity among constrained
types, B . We may be able to use data on extensive margin responses between states 0 and 1 along with
evidence on intensive margin responses in state 1 to perform this decomposition. In particular, we continue
to draw on the kink in employment in state 1. We also use the amount of bunching in the second period,
which is related to intensive margin response among those who are not constrained. In addition, we estimate
a second kink, this time in the average tax rate in state 1. The idea is that we have an analytical expression
for the kink under complete friction. The extent to which the observed kink in the averate tax rate deviates
from that quantity is a function of the share of the sample that faces intensive margin frictions. Finally, this
method will require more restrictive assumptions on the underlying primitives, as explained below.
For notational convenience, de…ne the set R = f nj z < zn;0 < z + 4z g as the set of individuals in
state 0 with earnings in the range that bunches under a kink in the absence of intensive margin frictions.
De…ne NR;0 as the number of individuals in this range in state 0. As before, denote Type A earners as those
who can adjust on the intensive margin and Type B earners as those who cannot, in state 1. De…ne NRA;0
and NRB;0 as the number of Type A and Type B earners in the set R, respectively. It follows that:
NR;0 = NRA;0 + NRB;0
Similarly, de…ne NR;1 as the number of individuals in the set R that are still employed in state 1. That is
f nj z < zn;0 < z + 4z ; zn;1 > 0g. Again, de…ne NRA;1 and NRB;1 as the number of Type A and Type B
earners in the set R that are also employed in state 1. Again, we have:
NR;1 = NRA;1 + NRB;1
Finally, de…ne NBunch as the number of individuals in the set R that bunch in state 1. Note that:
NBunch = NRA;1
We can show the following:
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j z < zn;0 < z + 4z )

= Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R)
= (1
B ) Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A)
+ B Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B)

De…ne N0 as the total number of people in the labor force in state 0 and de…ne N1 as the number of these
people also in the labor force in state 1. If we de…ne B as the share of all such earners bunching in state 1,

55

then we have:
B

NBunch
N1
NRA;1
N1
NRA;1 NRA;0 NR;0 N0
NRA;0 NR;0 N0 N1
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A) (1
Pr (z < zn;0 < z + 4z )
B)
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j zn;0 > 0)

=
=
=
=

In addition, if we assume that Type A and Type B individuals have the same preferences and di¤er only
in the ability to adjust to z , then the only di¤erence in employment exit between the two groups is due to
the lack of intensive margin adjustment on the part of the Type B agents. In this case, we can show the
following:
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B)

=

Z

z +4z

z

=

Z

z +4z

z

=

Pr ( zn;1

d Pr ( zn;1 > 0j zn;0 = ; B)
h0 ( ) d
dzn;0
d Pr ( zn;1 > 0j zn;0 = ; A)
vz
+ n (1
g ( qn;1 j n) h0 ( ) d
1) +
dzn;0
vc
Z z +4z
vz
g ( qn;1 j n) h0 ( ) d ;
> 0j n 2 R; A) +
n (1
1) +
vc
z

where
h the secondi line follows from equation (A.7). We will use a …rst-order approximation, assuming
vz
n (1
1 ) + vc g ( qn;1 j n) is constant in the set R. Then we have:
Z

z +4z

n

(1

1) +

z

vz
g ( qn;1 j n) h0 ( ) d
vc

d

n

g ( qn

;1 j n = n )

RKD

Z

z +4z

h0 ( ) d

z

Pr (z < zn;0 < z + 4z )

=
B

Generally, n and vz =vc are decreasing over this range. If g ( qn;1 j n) is also weakly decreasing, then we will
be overstating the di¤erence between Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B) and Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A).
Now, consider estimating the following:
lim

zn;0 #z

dE [ 1

[T1 (zn;1 )

T1 (0)] =zn;1 j zn;0 ; zn;1 > 0]
dzn;0

lim

dE [ 1

[T1 (zn;1 )

zn;0 "z

T1 (0)] =zn;1 j zn;0 ; zn;1 > 0]
dzn;0

which is the di¤erence at the exempt amount z in the slope of the average net-of-tax rate in state 1, as
a function of state 0 earnings, among the set of individuals who do not exit employment between states 0
and 1. Note that since Type A individuals bunch, the average tax rate is constant for this group. Thus, the
di¤erence in the slope will be zero for this group. For the Type B individuals, the di¤erence will be:
d (1

[T1 (z) T1 (0)] =z)
dz

d (1

[T0 (z) T0 (0)] =z)
dz

0

=
z=z

T1 (z ) T1 (z ) T00 (z )
+
2 +
z
z
(z )
0

=
=

56

0

T1 (z )

T0 (z )
z

d
z

T0 (z )
(z )

2

As a result, the average in the di¤erence in slopes for the total group will be:
AT R

=
=
=

NRA;1
NRB;1
d
0+
NR;1
NR;1
z
NR;0 NRB;0 NRB;1
d
NR;1 NR;0 NRB;0
z
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B) B
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j z < zn;0 < z + 4z )

d
z

We thus have four equations:
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j z < zn;0 < z + 4z ) = (1
B=

B ) Pr ( zn;1

> 0j n 2 R; A) +

B

Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B)

Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A) (1
Pr (z < zn;0 < z + 4z )
B)
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j zn;0 > 0)
RKD

=

AT R

Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B) Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A)
Pr (z < zn;0 < z + 4z ) = B
=

Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B) B
Pr ( zn;1 > 0j z < zn;0 < z + 4z )

d
z

and four unknowns: 4z , B , Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; A) and Pr ( zn;1 > 0j n 2 R; B). We do not have a closed
form solutions for either Pr ( zn;1 > 0j z < zn;0 < z + 4z ) or Pr (z < zn;0 < z + 4z ).
However, if we estimate a ‡exible polynomial for the employment rate and for the density in state 0, we
can numerically solve for B . This can be combined with ^ to recover B . However, this requires additional
assumptions relative to our non-parametric estimate of the observed elasticity, which is a non-parametric
lower bound on the structural elasticity; for example, as noted above, to recover B we would need to assume
that types A and B have identical preferences.

B.3

Fully Dynamic Extension of the Model

In this section we brie‡y demonstrate under what conditions our results continue to hold once our model
is extended to a multi-period setting with forward-looking agents. We again have two states of the world,
state 0 and state 1. In this multi-period model, the tax schedule is the same across the two states for
periods 1; : : : ; t 1. However, in period t, the tax schedule is linear in state 0 and has a convex kink at
z in state 1. The tax schedules are once again the same across the two states during periods t + 1; : : : ; T .
(For simplicity we assume here that the tax schedules across the two states are once again the same during
periods t + 1; : : : ; T , but the model can be easily extended to assume that in each of these periods the tax
schedule is linear in state 0 and has a kink at z in state 1:)
We assume that preferences and the economic environment yield a dynamic programming problem as
follows. In each period, individuals maximize:
ut (cnjt ; znjt ; n) = v (cnjt ; znjt ; n)

qnjt 1 fznjt > 0g + Vt (Anjt ; znjt ; n)

(B.29)

+ znjt

(B.30)

subject to a dynamic budget constraint:
cnjt = (1 + rt

1 ) Anj;t 1

Tj (znjt )

Anjt

where Anjt is the level of assets at the end of period t. The value function for the next period, Vt ( ), may
depend on the level of assets passed forward and potentially the level of earnings in the current period. For
example, working today may have some e¤ect on the choice set in the next period.
57

We once again index individuals by their counterfactual earnings in period t in state 0, and we focus on
the probability of having positive earnings in period t in state 1, conditional on the counterfactual earnings
level in state 0: Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t ). In addition to the assumptions we have made above in Section 2.4, we
assume that the value function Vt ( ) is C 1 in A, z, and n. Agents choose c, z, and A to maximize utility.
The outside value of not working in period t, v 0 (Anj;t 1 ), depends on the current level of assets and includes
the continuation value of future periods. Finally, the distribution of …xed costs of working, G ( qj n; t), now
depends on the time period as well.
The …rst-order conditions when earnings are positive are now:
vz + Vz
vc

=
(1
= VA =

T 0 (z))
(B.31)

where is the marginal utility of wealth. Using these conditions, we can show that there will still be bunching
in response to a kink among those who can adjust on the intensive margin. As before, individuals will work
if the utility conditional on working exceeds that of not working:
v (~
cnjt ; z~njt ; n) + Vt A~njt ; z~njt ; n

v 0 (Anj;t

1)

qnjt > 0

(B.32)

where the “ ”denotes optimal levels conditional on working. The probability of working in period 1 is still:
Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t ) = G ( q n1t j n; t)

(B.33)

where now:
v (~
cn1t ; z~n1t ; n) + Vt A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n

q n1t

v 0 (An1;t

1)

(B.34)

We now show under what conditions our main results still hold in this dynamic setting. First, the slope
of the employment rate will still be:
dq
dG ( q n1t j n; t) dn
d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
= g (q n1t jn; t) n1t +
d~
zn0t
d~
zn0t
dn
d~
zn0t

(B.35)

We will have a new expression for the …rst term on the right of equation (B.35). After substituting for c~n1t
in (B.34) using the dynamic budget constraint in (B.30) we have:
dq n1t
d~
zn0t

2

= 4

@v (1 + rt

+ z~n1t

T1 (~
zn1t )

2

@v (1 + rt

2

@v (1 + rt

2

@v (1 + rt

+4
+4
[(1

~

1 ) An1;t 1

+ z~n1t

T1 (~
zn1t )

@ A~n1t
~

1 ) An1;t 1

+ z~n1t

T1 (~
zn1t )

@n
~

1 ) An1;t 1

+ z~n1t
@ A~n1;t

T10 (z)) vc + vz + Vz ]

A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n

@Vt A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n

T1 (~
zn1t )
1

3

zn1t
5 d~
d~
zn0t
3
A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
@Vt A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
~
5 dAn1t
+
d~
zn0t
@ A~n1t
3
A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
@Vt A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
5 dn
+
@n
d~
zn0t
3
A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
@v 0 A~n1;t 1
5 dAn1;t 1
@An1;t 1
d~
zn0t
+

@ z~n1t

+4

=

~

1 ) An1;t 1

@ z~n1t

d~
zn1t
dA~n1t
dn
+ [ v c + VA ]
+ [vn + Vn ]
+ (1 + rt
d~
zn0t
d~
zn0t
d~
zn0t

1 ) vc

0
vA

dAn1;t 1
d~
zn0t
(B.36)

For those with z~n0t < z or z~n0t > z + z , we can use the …rst-order conditions in (B.31) to show that the
…rst term in (B.36) equals zero when agents are able to adjust on the intensive margin as in Section 2.4. For
58

those with z
z~n0t
z + z , the …rst term in (B.36) equals zero: d~
zn1t =d~
zn0t = 0 since z~n1t = z for
everyone in this latter set due to bunching. Additionally, the second term in (B.36) equals zero for everyone,
due to the …rst-order condition in (B.31) for saving.
Thus, when agents are able to adjust on both the intensive and extensive margin we have:
02
3
@Vt A~n1t ; z~n1t ; n
@v
(~
c
;
z
~
;
n)
d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
n1t
n1t
5 dn
= g (q n1t jn; t) @4
+
d~
zn0t
@n
@n
d~
zn0t
3
1
2
@v 0 A~n1;t 1
dA
dG ( q n1t j n; t) dn
@v
(~
c
;
z
~
;
n)
n1;t 1 A
n1t n1t
5
+
+ 4(1 + rt 1 )
@~
cn1t
@An1;t 1
d~
zn0t
dn
d~
zn0t

(B.37)

Note that n, q~n;1 , z~n;1 , A~n;1 , and T1 ( ) are all continuous in z~n0t at z . Furthermore, our smoothness
assumptions imply that g ( ), @v=@n, @V =@n, @n=@ z~n0t , and @G q n;1 n; t are likewise continuous in their
arguments. We additionally assume that @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t is continuous at z ; we discuss below the conditions
under which this assumption holds and argue that they are satis…ed in our setting. Given these assumptions,
our original result follows when there are intensive margin adjustments:
lim

z~n0t !z

+

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
d~
zn0t

lim

z~n0t !z

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
=0
d~
zn0t

(B.38)

We now turn to the case in which we make the same assumptions, except that individuals are not able
to adjust on the intensive margin, as in Section 2.5. We now have:
2
3
~n1;t 1 + z~n0t T1 (~
~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
@v
(1
+
r
)
A
z
)
A
@V
A
t
1
n0t
t
dq n1t
5
= 4
+
d~
zn0t
@ z~n0t
@ z~n0t
3
2
@Vt A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
@v (1 + rt 1 ) A~n1;t 1 + z~n0t T1 (~
zn0t ) A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
~
5 dAn1t
+
+4
d~
zn0t
@ A~n1t
@ A~n1t
2
3
@v (1 + rt 1 ) A~n1;t 1 + z~n0t T1 (~
zn0t ) A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
@Vt A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
5 dn
+4
+
@n
@n
d~
zn0t
3
2
@v (1 + rt 1 ) A~n1;t 1 + z~n0t T1 (~
zn0t ) A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
@v 0 A~n1;t 1
5 dAn1;t 1
+4
@An1;t 1
d~
zn0t
@ A~n1;t 1
=

[(1

T10 (z)) vc + vz + Vz ] + [ vc + VA ]

dA~n1t
dn
+ [vn + Vn ]
+ (1 + rt
d~
zn0t
d~
zn0t

1 ) vc

0
vA

dAn1;t 1
d~
zn0t
(B.39)

where the primary di¤erence from (B.36) is that earnings are …xed at z~n0t . We still have the second term
dropping out of the expression in (B.39), as assets, A~n1t , are optimally chosen even when earnings are …xed.
Furthermore, for those with z~n0t z we have T1 = T0 , and thus the …rst term also drops out among this
group due to the envelope theorem. Note that for those with z~n0t z we can rewrite:
(1

T10 (z)) vc + vz + Vz =

59

(1

1)

+

vz + Vz
vc

(B.40)

Similar to our less dynamic model above in Section 2.5, we therefore have:
8
>
g (q n1t jn; t) [vn + Vn ] d~zdn
>
>
n0t
>
>
>
0 dAn1;t 1
n1t jn;t) dn
>
+ dG( qdn
> + (1 + rt 1 ) vc vA d~zn0t
d~
zn0t
<
d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
=
i
h
>
d~
zn0t
>
vz +Vz
>
+ [vn + Vn ] d~zdn
g
(q
jn;
t)
(1
)
+
>
n
1
n1t
vc
>
n0t
>
>
>
: + (1 + rt 1 ) vc v 0 dAn1;t 1 + dG( qn1t jn;t) dn
A
d~
zn0t
dn
d~
zn0t

if z~n0t < z
(B.41)
if z~n0t

z

We note the following limit, making use of the …rst-order condition in (B.31):

vz (1 + rt
lim

z~n0t !z

+

~

1 ) An1;t 1

vc (1 + rt

+ z~n0t

T1 (~
zn0t )

~

+ z~n0t

1 ) An1;t 1

A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n + Vz A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n
T1 (~
zn0t )

=

A~n1t ; z~n0t ; n

(1

0)

(B.42)

Maintaining our smoothness assumptions for this section, we thus have our original result when earnings in
state 1 are constrained (~
zn1t = z~n0t ):
lim

z~n0t !z

+

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
d~
zn0t

lim

z~n0t !z

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
d~
zn0t

=
=

lim

z~n0t !z

d

+

g ( q n1t j n; t)

n

g ( qn

1t j n

n

(1

1)

+

vz + Vz
vc

; t)
(B.43)

As in Appendix B.1, this result easily generalizes to the case of multiple, discrete job options away from z .
The kink in this case can be used to calculate an extensive margin elasticity, as in equation (9).
Returning to our assumption that @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t is continuous at z~n0t = z , we view this as a natural
assumption in our setting. First, if agents act as if the tax change is unanticipated, then this is assumption
holds: in this case the slope of expected lifetime wealth is continuous at the kink. Many contexts will
feature unanticipated changes in taxes. In our empirical application, Gelber et al. (2013) show that prior
to being subject to the AET, individuals do not appear to act as if they anticipate the later imposition of
the AET (consistent with the myopia suggested in Gelber, Isen, and Song, 2016). If the tax change were
anticipated they would bunch at z in anticipation of the later imposition of the kink (due to the …xed cost
of adjustment), but empirically we do not observe such behavior. Thus, they do not appear to anticipate
its imposition, so our empirical application appears consistent with this case. Moreover, in our setting, we
test for kinks in predetermined or placebo outcomes, including measures of the employment rate at ages 56,
57, 60, and 61, as well as demographic variables. We show in Section 6.3 that predetermined variables as a
function of age 60 earnings do not exhibit systematic discontinuities in their slopes at the exempt amount,
consistent with our assumption of continuity in @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t at z~n0t = z .
Second, even if some individuals in our context acted as if the imposition of the AET were anticipated,
if the AET is also actuarially fair and other sources of lifetime wealth are also smooth, then @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t
should be smooth at z~n0t =z : It is commonly understood that the AET is approximately actuarially fair
(e.g. Diamond and Gruber, 1999), and thus this assumption should approximately hold. Note that even
if the AET is actuarially fair on average— but better than actuarially fair in expectation for some types
and worse for others— it is possible that @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t is continuous at z~n0t = z , even though we also we
observe a non-zero substitution e¤ect of the incentives created by the AET when individuals are later subject
to it. For example, if the AET is worse than actuarially fair for those who are particularly responsive to the
substitution incentives created by the AET, then we could see a reduction in earnings or employment due to
a bunching or extensive margin response to the substitution incentives created by the AET once individuals
have claimed, even though @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t is continuous at at z~n0t = z :
Third, in the case that the imposition of the tax change is anticipated— which could be consistent with
60

the data if the AET is actuarially fair on average— we could interpret our estimated elasticity as a marginalutility-of-wealth-constant elasticity. In this case our paper then can …t into a broader literature estimating
Frisch elasticities (see Chetty et al., 2013, for a review), and provides a novel estimate of a Frisch elasticity
using transparent variation from the RKD. (Following Chetty et al. (2012) we call this extensive margin
elasticity, holding the marginal utility of lifetime wealth constant, a Frisch elasticity, while recognizing that
extensive margin Frisch elasticities are technically not de…ned because non-participants do not locate at an
interior optimum.)
Fourth, even in the case in which the AET is not actuarially fair, we can estimate an elasticity that
represents the response to a parametric shift in the entire wage pro…le; as Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) and
others point out, this is the most relevant for policy evaluation of the impacts of permanent shifts in the entire
wage pro…le and will re‡ect a combination of income and substitution e¤ects. We have run several numerical
simulations to gauge the quantitative importance of anticipatory savings for the continuity of @An1;t 1 =@ z~n0t
at z~n0t = z , and we …nd that extensive margin estimates using this method are little a¤ected by a lack of
smoothness in An1;t 1 .36 Furthermore, since predetermined variables do not show systematic discontinuities
in their slopes as a function of age 60 earnings, this issue again does not appear to a¤ect the validity of the
smoothness assumption underlying our empirical design. We view our method as most easily applicable in
settings in which the data are consistent with such interpretations of the parameters and the smoothness
assumptions appear to be satis…ed.
B.3.1

Explicitly Modeling Actuarial Adjustment in the Context of the Dynamic Model

Thus far, we have abstracted from the impact of actuarial adjustment of future bene…ts on the behavioral
response to the AET. In this section, we explicitly incorporate this feature of the AET and highlight how
our estimator is a¤ected. We maintain the setup of the dynamic model above with the following alterations.
First, the dynamic program now involves choosing earnings to maximize:
ut (cnjt ; znjt ; n) = v (cnjt ; znjt ; n)

qnjt 1 fznjt > 0g + Vt (Anjt + Bnjt (znjt ) ; znjt ; n)

(B.44)

Relative to our previous case, the value function, Vt ( ) ; is now a function of total assets, i.e. the sum of
savings, Anjt , and the present discounted value of all future OASI bene…ts, Bnjt (znjt ). These bene…ts are
potentially a¤ected by the current level of earnings. Additionally, the new dynamic budget constraint is as
follows:
cnjt = (1 + rt 1 ) Anj;t 1 + znjt T (znjt ) + bjt (znjt ) Anjt
(B.45)
where we have now decoupled the ‡ow of OASI bene…ts from the tax schedule. The tax schedule no longer
varies across states and is simply T (znjt ) = 0 znjt . The ‡ow of bene…ts, bjt (znjt ), does potentially vary
across states, due to the presence of the AET in state 1. The …rst-order conditions are now:
vz + Vz
vc

T 0 (z) + [b0 (z) + B 0 (z)])

=
(1
= VA =

(B.46)

where b0jt (z) is the marginal e¤ect of earning more on the current ‡ow of bene…ts, i.e. the bene…t reduction
rate (BRR). It takes the following form in state 1:
b0 (z) =

0
d

if z < z
if z z

(B.47)

Finally, B 0 (z) is the e¤ect of increasing current earnings on the future stream of bene…ts from OASI. B 0 (z)
similarly takes the form:
0 if z < z
B 0 (z) =
(B.48)
db if z z
3 6 Results from our simulations are available upon request. We continue to recover the extensive margin elasticity in a
dynamic model when intensive margin adjustment is constrained and we observe the correct, counterfactual running variable.
We estimate an attenuated version of the true elasticity when intensive margin adjustment is constrained and we use lagged
earnings as a proxy for the running variable, though our simulations show that the extent of attenuation is slight. If anything,
this slight attenuation again strengthens our case that the elasticity is large, as the lower bound we estimate is itself large.

61

Note that when the adjustment is actuarially fair, we have db = d . In this version of the model, we also
express the outside utility as a function of savings and OASI bene…ts:
v 0 = v 0 (Anj;t

1 ; Bnj;t 1 )

(B.49)

Using similar steps as in the basic dynamic model above, we have the following expression for the
(potential) kink in the employment rate at z , when intensive margin earnings are constrained:
lim

z~n0t !z

+

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
d~
zn0t

lim

z~n0t !z

d Pr ( zn1t > 0j z~n0t )
=
d~
zn0t

(d

db)

n

g ( qn

1t j n

; t)

Here we make explicit that an additional necessary condition for …nding a kink in the employment rate is that
db 6= d , either because the AET is not actually fair, or perhaps, because individuals do not pay attention
to actuarial adjustment. The sign of db is non-negative, as the actuarial adjustment never reduces future
bene…ts, but db can be smaller than d if adjustment is not full. It can also be larger than d for those with
high life expectancies, in which case there will be a positive kink in the slope of the employment function. In
our applications above, we have e¤ectively assumed db = 0 for illustrative purposes and following previous
literature, although our method can easily accomodate alternative assumptions. Since we do …nd a kink in
the employment rate empirically (and also …nd intensive margin bunching), this assumption is validated.

B.4

Model Extension: Joint Claiming and Employment Decision

A speci…c feature of our empirical application to an OASI context— which will not always be true when
applying our method for estimating elasticities in other contexts— is that whether or not individuals face a
kink is endogenous. That is, if an agent does not claim, she faces the linear budget set. We now extend
the model to our particular empirical application, so that the model includes this trade-o¤ between facing
a kink or delaying claiming. To model claiming, we introduce additional notation. We model claiming in a
somewhat “reduced form”fashion, but our model easily generalizes to the previous dynamic setting, in which
we can explicitly incorporate the e¤ects of claiming OASI on the timing and magnitude of OASI bene…ts in
di¤erent periods, as well as the resulting e¤ects on wealth and savings. In our case, when j = 0 an individual
faces a linear tax schedule whether or not she claims. However, when j = 1 an individual faces a kinked tax
schedule when claiming OASI or a linear schedule when not claiming OASI. We focus on our version of the
model in which intensive margin adjustments are constrained, i.e. z~n1 z~n0 , and we will determine whether
a kink in the probability of working still occurs when claiming is endogenous.
v(~
zn0 T0 (~
zn0 ); z~n0 ; n) as the ‡ow utility (net of the …xed cost of working)
First, we will denote vn0
when earning z~n0 , facing a linear tax schedule T0 ( ), and claiming in state 0. Next, we denote vn1
v(~
zn0 T1 (~
zn0 ); z~n0 ; n), i.e. the net ‡ow utility when earning z~n0 , facing the kinked tax schedule T1 ( ), and
claiming in state 1. As before, v 0 is the utility received when claiming OASI and not working, in either state
0 or state 1. Next, we specify utility when claiming is delayed. The payo¤ when not working and not claiming
OASI is v 0 + n , in both state 0 and state 1. Likewise, the payo¤ when working and not claiming OASI
is vn0 + n , again in either state 1 or state 0. Thus, the parameters and capture the relative change in
utility when claiming is delayed. These can be considered to capture the income e¤ect of delaying claiming.
We leave these parameters relatively unrestricted, and thus they may represent an increase in lifetime wealth
when delaying claiming increases lifetime bene…ts (for example due to the actuarial adjustment being better
than actuarially fair), or they may represent a utility decrease for those facing liquidity constraints, for
example.
In addition to n we now have three parameters that capture unobserved heterogeneity, ( ; ; q). We allow
these variables to have a relatively unrestricted, joint distribution, which we represent with a conditional,
joint density of and , m( ; jq; n) and our previous marginal density of q, g(qjn). The joint density of
( ; ; q) is therefore m( ; jq; n) g(qjn). We extend our assumption of smoothness in unobserved heterogeneity
to the joint distribution of ( ; ; q), conditional on n .
In State 1, our model will now feature comparisons among four discrete choices: (1) working while
claiming, vn1 qn ; (2) not working while claiming, v 0 ; (3) working while not claiming vn0 + n qn ; and
62

(4) not working while not claiming, v 0 + n . We will additionally denote critical values of our unobservable
parameters, which arise when comparing the various discrete options. As before, when comparing working
while claiming to not working while claiming, the expression for indi¤erence is vn1 qn = v 0 , which implies
a critical value for q, q n vn1 v 0 . Similarly, when comparing working while not claiming to not working
while not claiming, the expression for indi¤erence is vn0 + n qn = v 0 + n . We can write this in terms of
(vn0 v 0 ) = n + qn q 0n , where q 0n vn0 v 0 is an analogous critical value for q in
n as n = n + qn
state 0 when claiming.
Furthermore, for those who are indi¤erent between working while claiming and not working while not
claiming, we have vn1 qn = v 0 + n . This implies a critical value for n : n = q n qn . Symmetrically,
for those who are indi¤erent between not working while claiming and working while not claiming, we have
v 0 = vn0 + n qn , with a critical value for n : n = q 0n qn . Indi¤erence between working while
claiming and working while not claiming implies vn1 qn = vn0 + n qn , and a critical value for n is:
1
vn0
vn . Finally, indi¤erence between not working while claiming and not working while not
n = vn
claiming implies v 0 = v 0 + n or n = 0.
Using our previous results, the envelope theorem implies the following:
@q 0n
@vn0
=
=0
@ z~n0
@ z~n0

(B.50)

Additionally, we have:
8
>
>
<

B.4.1

n

@ vn
@vn1
@ qn
=
=
=
>
@ z~n0
@ z~n0
@ z~n0
>
:

h
(1

h
n (1

Claiming Decision

0)

1)

+

vz
vc

+

vz
vc

i
i

if z~n0 < z
(B.51)
if z~n0

z

We now characterize the claiming probability and derive an expression for a kink in the claiming probability
at z~n0 = z . The probability of claiming can be expressed as follows:
Pr ( claimj z~n0 )

=

Z
+

q
1

Z

q

Z

1

q q
1

Z

0

Z

1

Z

v
1

m ( ; j q; n) g ( qj n) d d dq

q q0
1

m ( ; j q; n) g ( qj n) d d dq

(B.52)

The …rst term integrates over the values of q for which working while claiming is preferred to not working
while claiming, q 2 [ 1; q]. The next two integrals restrict attention to values of that render not working
while not claiming dominated by working while claiming, i.e. 2 [ 1; q q] and values of that similarly
render working while not claiming dominated by working while claiming, i.e.
2 [ 1; v]. The second
term integrates over values of q for which not working while claiming is preferred to working while claiming,
q 2 [q; 1]. Over this range we restrict analysis to 2 [ 1; 0] and 2 [ 1; q q], i.e. values that render
not claiming dominated by not working while claiming.
Consider the slope of Pr ( claimj z~n0 ), which can now be expressed as:
@ Pr ( claimj z~n0 ) @ Pr ( claimj z~n0 ) dn
d Pr ( claimj z~n0 )
=
+
d~
zn0
@ z~n0
@n
d~
zn0

(B.53)

Given our assumptions regarding smoothness and our results above, we know that the second term will be

63

continuous at z~n0 = z . We therefore focus on the …rst term in this expression. Leibniz’s rule implies:
@ Pr ( claimj z~n0 )
@ z~n0

Z

Z

q

q q

@ vn
m ( vn ; j q; n) g ( qj n) d d dq
~n0
1
1 @z
"Z
#
Z q
v
@q n
m ( ; q qj q; n) d g ( qj n) dq
+
~n0
1 @z
1
"Z
#
v
0 Z
@q n
m ( ; j q; n) d d g ( qj n)
+
@ z~n0
1
1
Z 1Z 0
@q 0n
m q q 0 ; q; n g ( qj n) d dq
@
z
~
n0
1
q
#
"Z
v
0 Z
@q n
m ( ; j q; n) d d g ( qj n) :
@ z~n0
1
1

=

Rearranging terms, and using the fact that @q 0 =@ z~n0 = 0 and @q=@ z~n0 = @ v=@ z~n0 =
have:
@ Pr ( claimj z~n0 )
@ z~n0

=

(1
(Z

)+

q
1

"Z

vz
vc

q q
1

m ( v; j q; n) d +

Z

v

m( ;q

qj q; n) d

1

(B.54)

h
(1

#

)+

g ( qj n) dq

vz
vc

i

, we

)
(B.55)

Finally, the kink in the probability of claiming can be expressed as:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

@ Pr ( claimj z~n0 )
@ z~n0

lim

z~n0 !z

@ Pr ( claimj z~n0 )
=
@ z~n0

(B.56)

where
=
=

lim

z~n0 !z

d

+

n

(1
(Z

q

vz
)+
vc
"Z
q

1

1

(Z

q
1

"Z

q q
1

m ( v; j q; n) d +

q

m ( 0; j q; n ) d +

Z

Z

v

m( ;q
1

0

m( ;q

qj q; n ) d

1

and where we used the results from Section 2.5 and the fact that

lim

z~n0 !z

#

qj q; n) d

g ( qj n ) dq

)

#

g ( qj n) dq

)

(B.57)

vn = 0.

The two integrals in the expression can be interpreted as joint probabilities. The …rst is the joint
probability that (1) working while claiming is preferred to not working while claiming, (2) working while
claiming is preferred to not working while not claiming, and (3) the individual is indi¤erent between working
while claiming and working while not claiming, i.e. n = vn = 0. The second term is the joint probability
that (1) working while claiming is preferred to not working while claiming, (2) working while claiming is
preferred to working while not claiming, and (3) the individual is indi¤erent between working while claiming
and not working while not claiming, i.e. n = q n
qn . Note that the probabilities are conditional on
n=n .
Thus, there will be a downward kink in the probability of claiming, which increases with the size of the
kink and the size of two key sets of marginal claimants. The …rst set are on the margin of moving from
working while claiming to working while not claiming, and the second set are on the margin of moving from
working while claiming to not working while not claiming. Finally, note that the kink only a¤ects claiming
64

among those for whom working while claiming is optimal. Therefore, the only relevant shifting is from
working while claiming to either state of not claiming.
B.4.2

Extensive Margin Response with Endogenous Claiming

We now consider the extensive margin choice of whether to work, allowing for an endogenous claiming
response. The probability of having positive earnings in state 1 is now:
"Z
#
Z
Z
Z
Z
q

Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )

1

q q

=

1

+

Z

1

Z

1

q

0
1

Z

1

m ( ; j q; n) d d +

1

m ( ; j q; n) d d +

q q0

1

1

+q q 0

q q

Z

1

0

Z

m ( ; j q; n) d d

1

+q q 0

g ( qj n) dq

m ( ; j q; n) d d

g ( qj n) dq
(B.58)

The probability is comprised of four terms. The …rst two terms correspond to values of q that render working
while claiming preferable to not working while claiming. The …rst term in this set captures individuals for
whom working while claiming also dominates not working while not claiming. In this case, the individual
will always work, regardless of the value of . The second term captures individuals for whom not working
while not claiming dominates working while claiming. In this case, only those who prefer working while not
claiming to not working while not claiming will work. The second set of terms likewise covers the two settings
in which not working while claiming dominates working while claiming, but the individual still decides to
q) > max(v 0 ; v 0 + ).
work. Put another way, an agent will work when max(vn1 q; vn0 +
As in the case of claiming above, we focus on the discontinuity in the partial derivative of this probability,
@ Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 ) =@ z~n0 . Leibniz’s rule again implies:
@ Pr ( zn1 > 0j z~n0 )
@ z~n0

=

Z

q
1

+

Z

@q n
@ z~n0
1

q q

@q
+
@ z~n0
Z 1
+
q

@q
@ z~n0

Z

1

@q 0n
m
@ z~n0
Z 0 Z
1

@ q0
@ z~n0
Z 0 Z
1

m( ;q

Z

qj q; n) d

1

+q
1
1
Z 0
1

4v

q0 ;

q; n d

q0 ;

m( ;q

qj q; n) d

v

g ( qj n) dq

m ( ; j q; n) d d +
m q

1

Z

1

0

Z

q; n d d +

1

m ( ; j q; n) d d +

Z

0

1

Z

1
+4v
Z 1

0
1

+4v

m ( ; j q; n) d d
m

+q

q0 ;

m ( ; j q; n) d d

g ( qj n)
q; n d d

g ( qj n) dq

g ( qj n) :
(B.59)

h
i
(1
) + vvzc , we can
Once again relying on the fact that @q 0 =@ z~n0 = 0 and @q=@ z~n0 = @ v=@ z~n0 =
rearrange terms to yield:
("Z
#
0 Z 4v
@ Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 )
vz
=
(1
)+
m ( ; j q; n) d d g ( qj n)
@ z~n0
vc
1
1
)
Z q Z 4v
+
m ( ; q qj q; n) g ( qj n) d dq :
(B.60)
1

1

The kink in the probability of having positive earnings can now be expressed as:
lim

z~n0 !z

+

d Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 )
d~
zn0

lim

z~n0 !z

65

d Pr (zn1 > 0j~
zn0 )
= ;
d~
zn0

(B.61)

where
=

lim

z~n0 !z

+
=

Z

d

(1

+

q
1

Z

4v

("Z

vz
)+
vc

m( ;q

g ( qn j n )

d

Z

n

q
1

and where again we have used the fact that

1

Z

4v
1

m ( ; j q; n) d d

qj q; n) g ( qj n) d dq

1

n

0

Z

0

|

Z

0
1

Z

)

#

g ( qj n)

0
1

m ( ; j qn ; n ) d d
{z
}

Pr( claimjn ;qn =qn )

m( ;q

qj q; n ) g ( qj n ) d dq;

(B.62)

1

lim

z~n0 !z

vn = 0.

The …rst term in this expression is an attenuated version of our previous kink in the probability of
working. The extra term can be interpreted as the probability of claiming among the marginal labor force
participants, i.e. those for whom qn = q n . The integral covers the range of values for and that render
working while claiming preferable to either not working while not claiming or working while not claiming.
Since the individual is indi¤erent between working while claiming and not working while claiming, this
also implies that claiming is preferable to not claiming among this set of agents. The second term may be
recognized as one component of the kink in claiming. In particular, the integral captures individuals who
prefer working while claiming to not working while claiming, and prefer working while claiming to working
while not claiming, but are indi¤erent between working while claiming and not working while not claiming.
The kink in the budget set while working and claiming shifts this marginal individual to not claiming, at
which point not working becomes optimal.
Thus, endogenizing claiming has two e¤ects on the kink in the probability of positive earnings. First,
it attenuates this behavioral response, because the kink only a¤ects those who claim. Second, it ampli…es
the behavioral response if there are individuals who are shifted to not claiming, and prefer to not work
conditional on not claiming, but to work conditional on claiming. In this case, we cannot generally conclude
whether our estimate of the participation elasticity is a lower bound or an upper bound. However, we detail
below two approaches for establishing an upper bound on the (negative) behavioral response of participation
under certain restrictions on the parameters (i.e. a lower bound on the absolute value of the participation
response).
B.4.3

Bounding the Behavioral Response

One method for establishing a bound involves imposing an additional restriction on unobserved heterogeneity.
In particular, we can assume that n n 0, i.e. the signs of and are the same. In this case, delaying
claiming must cause utility when working and not working to either both increase or both decrease, although
the absolute value of the change in utility can be di¤erent across the two states. This assumption makes
intuitive sense, as we are restricting analysis to the case in which earnings are …xed at z~n0 . In this case,
delaying claiming does not a¤ect employment, and delaying claiming only a¤ects utility through its direct
e¤ect on either current disposable income, or (in a dynamic setting) lifetime bene…ts. This would be the
case, for example, if delaying claiming has the same e¤ect on wealth, regardless of working status. The
assumption rules out cases in which, for example, working a¤ects life expectancy in a way that changes the
sign of the e¤ect of delaying claiming on lifetime bene…ts, or a case in which working relaxes a borrowing
constraint and the e¤ect of delaying claiming on utility therefore changes sign, conditional on working.
If our assumption holds, we can show the following:
Z

q
1

Z

0

m( ;q

qj q; n ) g ( qj n ) d dq = 0

1

66

(B.63)

The reason why this probability becomes zero is as follows. First, we are restricting attention to values of
q. In addition, we are …xing the value of = q q
0. However, we are also restricting analysis to
q
individuals for whom
0. Given our assumption that the signs of and must be the same, this set must
be of measure zero.
In this case, we can simplify our two kinks above as follows:
=
=

d
d

n

n

Z

q
1

Z

q q
1

g ( qj n )
|

Z

m ( 0; j q; n ) g ( qj n ) d dq
0
1

Z

(B.64)

0
1

m ( ; j qn ; n ) d d
{z
}

(B.65)

Pr( claimjn ;qn =qn )

The kink in participation we estimate is now a weak upper bound on a negative kink (i.e. the absolute value
of the kink in participation we estimate is a lower bound on the kink that would obtain absent a claiming
response). This implies that our observed elasticity will be a lower bound. Note that the probability of
claiming that attenuates the behavioral response is local to marginal labor force participants, i.e. q = q, and
thus is not the same as the population probability of claiming at z~n0 = z .
If we are not willing to impose the above restrictions on the joint distribution of
achieve a lower bound. Using the results from the previous two sections, we have:
Z 0 Z 0
=
d
g ( qn j n ; t)
m ( ; j qn ; n ) d d
n
+d

n

Z

q

1

Z

1

q q
1

and , we can still

1

m ( 0; j q; n ) g ( qj n ) d dq

(B.66)

Again, this di¤erence in kinks provides an upper bound on the negative kink in participation. Note that
this bound is not guaranteed to be negative. However, in cases in which the kink in claiming is relatively
negligible— as appears to be the case in our empirical application— it is possible to establish a non-trivial
upper bound on the kink and, by extension, a lower bound on the employment elasticity. Furthermore, if
there is no detectable kink in claiming, then simply rescaling the kink in employment by the share claiming
is su¢ cient to adjust for endogenous claiming.

C

Procedure for estimating excess mass

As we explain in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2013), we seek to estimate the “excess mass”at the kink, i.e. the
fraction of the sample that locates at the kink under the kinked tax schedule but not under the linear tax
schedule. Following a standard procedure in the literature (e.g. Saez, 2010; Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and
Pistaferri, 2011), we estimate the counterfactual density (i.e. the density in the presence of a linear budget
set) by …tting a smooth polynomial to the earnings density away from the kink, and then estimating the
“excess” mass in the region of the kink that occurs above this smooth polynomial.
Speci…cally, for each earnings bin zi , we calculate pi , the proportion of the sample with earnings in the
range [zi k=2; zi + k=2). The earnings bins are normalized by distance-to-kink, so that for zi = 0, pi is the
fraction of all individuals with earnings in the range [0; k). To estimate bunching, we assume that pi can be
written as:
D
k
X
X
d
pi =
(z
)
+
1fzi = jg + "i
(C.67)
i
d
d=0

j= k

and run this regression (where 1 denotes the indicator function and j denotes the bin). This equation
expresses the earnings distribution as a degree D polynomial, plus a set of indicators for each bin within k
of the kink, where is the bin width. In our empirical application, we choose D = 7, = 500 and k = 6
as our baseline (so that six bins are excluded from the polynomial estimation). We control for a baseline

67

seventh-degree polynomial through the density following Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri (2011).
The parameter re‡ects the excess density near the kink.
^ = 2k , the estimated excess probability of locating at the kink (relative
Our measure of excess mass is M
to the polynomial term). This measure depends on the counterfactual density near the kink, so to obtain a
measure of excess mass that is comparable at the kink, we scale by the predicted density that we would obtain
if there were a linear budget set. This is just the constant term in the polynomial, since zi is the distance
^ = M^ . We calculate standard errors using the
to zero. Thus, our estimate of normalized excess mass is B
^
0
delta method. We calculate the density in each bin by dividing the number of bene…ciaries in the bin by the
total number of bene…ciaries within the bandwidth; note that this normalization should not a¤ect the excess
normalized mass or the estimated density, because dividing by the total number of bene…ciaries within the
^ ) and denominator (i.e. ^ 0 ) of the expression for B
^ = M^ in equal
bandwidth a¤ects the numerator (i.e. M
^
0
b
proportions and therefore should have no impact on B.

68

D

Appendix Figures and Tables

69

Real Earnings Test Exempt Amount
11000
13000
15000

Appendix Figure D.1: Earnings Test Real Exempt Amount, 1978 to 1987

Age
>= 65

9000

Age
< 65

1978

1981

1984

1987

Year

Notes: The …gure shows the real value of the exempt amount over time among those 62-64 years old (labeled “Age<65” in the
graph) and those above (labeled “Age>=65”). The AET applied to earnings of claimants from ages 62 to 71 from 1978 to
1982, but only to claimants aged 62 to 69 from 1983 to 1989. All dollar …gures are expressed in real 2010 dollars.

Appendix Figure D.2: Histogram of Percent Earnings Growth, Ages 28 to 59

Notes: This histogram shows that there is a large mass near zero percent nominal earnings growth from one year to the next
in a wider set of ages, 28 to 59, than we focus on in the main analysis. This indicates that among a broad set of ages, a
substantial mass of individuals have no growth in desired nominal earnings, consistent with the assumptions necessary for our
RKD to estimate a lower bound on the elasticity as described in the main text. This suggests that it should be possible to use
our method, implemented in this case through using lagged earnings to proxy for desired earnings, when studying extensive
margin responses to other policies applying in other age ranges. The …gure uses the SSA data we have, covering the 1918 to
1923 cohorts in calendar years from 1951 to 1984. See other notes to Figure 4.

70

50

Pr(Positive earnings), ages 63-64
55

60

Appendix Figure D.3: Probability of Positive Earnings at Ages 63 to 64, wider x-axis

-6

-3
0
3
Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($1000s)

6

Notes: See the notes to Figure 7. This …gure is identical to Figure 7, except that the range of the x-axis on this …gure runs
from -$6,000 to $6,000. Like Figure 7, this …gure also shows a clear, discontinuous change in slope at the exempt amount.

76

76.5

Pr(Claimed)
77

77.5

78

Appendix Figure D.4: Mean Probability of Claiming at Ages 63 to 64

-3

-1.5
0
1.5
Age 60 distance to exempt amount ($000s)

3

Notes: The …gure plots the mean claiming rate, i.e. the probability someone has claimed by the calendar year of reaching age

t, at

ages 63 to 64 averaged, as a function of the distance of age 60 earnings from the exempt amount. The …gure shows that
there is no clear visual change in the slope of the claiming rate, and regression evidence supports the same conclusion: a
placebo test in the spirit of Ganong and Jäger (2015) shows p=0.15 for the two-sided test of equality of the coe¢ cient with
zero. See other notes to Figure 4.

71

Appendix Table D.1: Robustness of
(1)
Baseline
Speci…cation
Linear
0.49
(0.19)***
N
95,960
Quadratic
0.66
(0.27)***
N
160,785
Cubic
0.82
(0.28)***
N
273,421

Elasticity Estimates
(2)
With
Controls
0.45
(0.18)***
104,665
0.60
(0.24)***
172,979
0.68
(0.28)***
326,782

Notes: The table presents robustness checks on the main elasticity estimates in Table 5. The “with controls” column shows
the kink in the employment probability when we control for dummies for year of birth, sex, and race. Robust standard errors,
using the procedure of Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014), are reported in parentheses. The number of individuals
included in each “reduced form” regression (18) is shown below the standard error. See other notes to Table 2.

Appendix Table D.2: RKD Elasticity Estimates using Regression-Based First Stage
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Full
NonHigh Prior Low Prior
Sample
Men
Women
White
White
Earnings
Earnings
First Stage Kink
-4.00
-3.25
-3.99
-3.88
-3.09
-3.76
-3.82
(0.01)*** (0.01)*** (0.01)*** (0.01)*** (0.01)***
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
Elasticity
0.59
0.37
0.60
0.59
0.64
0.62
0.52
(0.23)***
(0.29)
(0.26)*** (0.22)***
(0.68)
(0.35)*
(0.11)***
N
95,960
68,971
66,251
93,722
39,271
19,574
101,709
Notes: See notes to Table 5. Relative to Table 5, the elasticities di¤er here because we use a linear RKD to estimate the …rst
stage kink in the ANTR (reported in the …rst row), rather than using the analytic expression as in Table 5.

Appendix Table D.3: Elasticity Estimates Accounting for Claiming
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Full
NonHigh Prior
Sample
Men
Women
White
White
Earnings
Elasticity
0.63
0.32
0.65
0.61
0.53
0.62
(0.25)*** (0.25) (0.28)** (0.23)*** (0.56)
(0.35)*
N
95,960
68,971
66,251
93,722
39,271
19,574

(7)
Low Prior
Earnings
0.53
(0.12)***
101,709

Notes: See notes to Table 5. As explained in the main text, we calculate these elasticities by in‡ating the Table 5 elasticities
by 29.9 percent, to account for claiming behavior. Among those with age 60 earnings below the kink, but not more than
$2,797 below the kink, 74.5 percent of the sample claims by age 63, and 79.5 by age 64. We calculate 29.9 percent as
100 (1/[(0.795+0.745)/2]-1).

72

