                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   RISKY INCOME,
                              LIFE CYCLE CONSUMPTION,
                             AND PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS




                                 Jonathan Skinner




                              Working Paper No. 2336




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1987




I am grateful to Andrew Abel, Charles Engel, Eric Engen, Diane Lim, Steven Lippman,
Richard Startz, Stephen Zeldes, participants in the Macroeconomic Workshop at
the University of Virginia, and especially Maxim Engers for very helpful suggestions.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2336
                                                  August 1987




        Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption, and Precautionary Savings




                                   ABSTRACT




     This paper argues that precautionary savings against uncertain income

comprise a large fraction of aggregate savings. A closed-form approximation

for life cycle consumption subject to uncertain interest rates and earnings

is derived by taking a second-order Taylor-Series approximation of the Euler

equations. Using empirical measures of income uncertainty, I find that

precautionary savings comprises up to 56 percent of aggregate life cycle

savings. The derived expression for n-period optimal consumption is easily

implemented for econometric estimation, and accords well with the exact

numerical solution.

     Empirical comparisons of savings patterns among occupational groups

using the Consumer Expenditure Survey contradict the predictions of the life

cycle model. Riskier: occupations, such as the self-employed and

salespersons, save less than other occupations, although this finding may in

part reflect unobservable differences in risk aversion among occupations.




                                                Jonathan Skinner
                                                Department of Economics
                                                Rouss Hall
                                                University of Virginia
                                                Charlottesville, VA 22901
     I. Introduction

     Budget studies from the 1950s found substantial differences in savings

rates among occupations: Fisher (1956), for example, found the self-employed

saved 12 percentage points more than managers.1 If these dramatic

differences in savings rates were due to differences in income risk, as

suggested by Friedman (1957), then precautionary savings against all income

risk could account for a large share of aggregate capital accumulation.

     The importance of precautionary savings bears on a number of economic

issues. First, what may appear, ex post, to be bequests passed to the next

generation (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1981) could be, ex ante, a purely selfish

hedge against future income uncertainty. Second, the proliferation of

government programs such as unemployment insurance and welfare, by reducing

income risk, could have lowered precautionary savings and hence contributed

to a decline in aggregate savings.2

    Third, the dynastic model of intergenerational transfers (Barro, 1974)

implies that generation-specific income risk can be cushioned by the

appropriate adjustment of bequests, rendering life cycle precautionary

savings unnecessary. Finally, models that assume quadratic utility

functions rule out by assumption precautionary savings against earnings




 1Managers had an average income higher than that for the self-
 employed. Calculated for ages less than 65; when durables were
 included, the difference was 8.1 percent (Fisher, 1956, pp. 264,275).

 2Governm?nt programs that reduce risk can also lead to "Keynesian"
 consumption propensities (Barky, Mankiw, and Zeldes, 1986). A related
 issue, precautionary savings against uncertain time of death, has been
 examined by Kotlikoff, Spivak, and Shoven (1983), Hubbard and Judd
 (1985), and Abel (1985) in models without income uncertainty.
                                         2



    risk.3 Thus finding significant precautionary savings would cast doubt on

    the relevance of both the dynastic bequest model and quadratic utility

    functions.

         Precautionary savings arise when individuals consume less (and hence

    save more) while young to guard against possible income downturns later in

    life. Thus the analysis of precautionary saving must begin with the

    analysis of how uncertain income affects consumption. There have been many

    studies of this topic, but most have been restricted to two-period models,

    or were so intractable that precautionary savings could not be calculated.

    This paper develops a closed-form multi-period life cycle model of

    consumption with uncertain interest rates and earnings. The true (but

    intractable) optimal consumption path is approximated by solving for the

    second-order Taylor-series expansion of the Euler conditions.

         The somewhat suprising result of the theoretical model is that, given

    moderate levels of income uncertainty, precautionary savings are very small.

    The intuition is that pr-eaitionary savings depend on the proportion of

    lifetime resources at risk. Hence a given year's earnings fluctuation is a

    relatively small fraction of the present value of future income. It is only

    to the extent that annual variations in earnings signal a permanent change

    in future earnings that precautionary savings become important.

         MaCurdy (1982) and Hall and Mishkin (1982) suggest that consumers do

    face substantial uncertainty about lifetime resources; estimates from panel
•

    data imply that almost half the variation in annual earnings are a signal of



     3With quadratic utility, marginal utility is a linear function of
     consumption, which in turn implies that expected marginal utility is
     independent of the earnings variance (see Zeldes, 1986).
                                          3




 a near-permanent shift in lifetime earnings. Precautionary savings is

 therefore calculated to be substantial, accounting for up to 56 percent of

 aggregate life cycle capital accumulation.

        While the qualitative result --   that   precautionary savings are large --
 is   consistent with the models of consumption under uncertainty developed by

Zeldes (1986), and Barksy, Mankiw, and Zeldes (1986), the results presented

below differs in three ways. First, by providing an analytical expression

for consumption subject to risk, the intuition for why precautionary savings

are so large can be developed. Second, the model allows for interest rate

risk as well as earnings risk. Finally, the paper provides a quantitative

estimate of the importance of precautionary savings. Rather than measuring

precautionary savings as the difference between first-period income and

first-period consumption given an exogenous capital stock, as in Zeldes

(1986), it is measured by aggregating over savings of different age groups,

given the endogenous accumulation of precautionary and retirement savings.

      --Epirical comparisons- of savings rates among occupations with different

income uncertainty provide little support for the view that precautionary

savings are important. Data from the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure Survey

imply that the self-employed and salespersons, those typically thought to

have the most risky income, actually save less than other groups, although

this result may reflect self-selection of the least risk-averse into the

most risky occupations.

       The theoretical model of consumption subject to uncertainty is

developed in Section II, while empirical parameters are provided for the

model in Section III. A test of the Taylor-series approximation is how well
                                     4



it approximates. Section IV tests its accuracy by solving the true dynamic

programming problem using numerical methods. The analytical closed-form

approximation appears to track the true theoretical model quite closely.

Empirical comparisons of savings rates by occupation is presented in Section

V, while the paper concludes with Section VI.



     II. Uncertain Income and Optimal Consumption

     I begin by briefly reviewing some of the literature on how uncertain

interest rates, and uncertain earnings, affect consumption. Samuelson

(1969) used dynamic programming to show that the solution to the multiperiod

consumption decision when interest rates are uncertain is identical to the

much simpler perfect foresight case, except that an implicitly defined

certainty equivalent interest rate replaces the market rate. Hakansson

(1971) and Sandmo (1971) showed that the response of consumers to interest

rate uncertainty is theoretically indeterminate. When returns are

uncertain, risk averse investors may wanttrhege against unfavorable

interest rates by saving more, or reduce assets exposed to the risky return

by saving less.4

    Another group of papers has examined the effect of uncertain earnings

on consumption. Leland (1968) showed in a two-period model that earnings

uncertainty reduces first period consumption when individuals exhibit

decreasing risk aversion, a property that ensures a declining risk premium

as second period consumption increases, a result that was generalized by



 4The results presented below may be viewed as a generalization of the
 explicit solutions for consumption subject to interest rate risk
 developed by Merton (1971) and Hakansson (1971).
                                     5




Miller (1974,1976) and Sibley (1975) in a multiperiod setting. Merton

(1971) developed an expression for consumption when income follows a

Poisson, or jump, process in a continuous time model. Extending the

analysis to uncertain earnings, he found, like Nagatani (1972), that

increased risk induces consumers to capitalize future wages at a• rate higher

than the risk free interest rate. Most recently, Kimball and Mankiw (1987)

have developed a closed-form solution for consumption given that utility

exhibits constant absolute risk aversion and earnings vary according to a

Markov process.

     Numerical dynamic programming models in Zeldes (1986) and Bàrsky,

Mankiw, and Zeldes (1986) have measured the impact of uncertain earnings

(and borrowing constraints) on the marginal propensity to consume, either

from income, or from the issuing of government debt. While finding that

precautionary savings are important, and tend to increase the MPG

substantially, they do not provide an explicit measure of such savings

aggregated over all consumers.

     The strategy in this section will be to derive an explicit uncertainty

premium reflecting combined interest rate and earnings risk which can be

implemented in a life cycle model. The consumer is assumed to maximize

expected lifetime utility


     EU =                                                              (1)
            E1(   (l÷S)lU(C.))

where U(.) is the one-period utility function   ,
                                                    C1 consumption at age i, &
the time preference rate, E. the expectations operator conditional on the
                                                        6




information set I. known at age j,5 and D is the certain time of death.6

The utility maximization problem can be written as a standard dynamic

programming problem

                  J(W.,S.) = max (U(C.) + (l+6)E.[J(W.1,S.÷1)J)                (2)


where J(W.,S.) is the value function which depends on financial wealth WI at

age i and a vector of age and occupation-specific state variables S1. The

state variables reflect differences among individuals in earnings patterns

and risk that affect the functional relationship between C. and W.. Current
                                                                       1   1

wealth is

                                 WI =               C. 1)(l+r.) + Y.
                                        (W.1-                                  (3)

where Y. represents earnings and r. the net interest rate. Note that W. is
          1                                     1                                    i

the wealth available after assets have accumulated at the rate r. and after

      is realized, but before C1 is chosen. The lifetime budget constraint is7


                                           (Y.-C.)R         0                  (4)



and       =            (l+r), with R 1.
              s=,]+l
The first-order condition for (2) subject to (3) is written



  5       ..                                        .           .
      Specifically,      I., and hence E., include all information occuring
 during period j, including the current year realization of earnings
 and interest rates r..
                             3

 6Allowing for uncertain lifespan adds an additional term to the
 age-consumption path, but does not affect the derivations that follow.
 See Skinner (1985).

 7This budget constraint allows for borrowing although it turns out
 that consumers will not want to borrow against future uncertain income
 (this issue is discussed later in the section).
                                           7




                       U'(C.) -                            =              (5)
                                  E([1+ri+1]J(W.
                                       1+6
                                                   1'
 where J'(•,.) is the derivative of J with respect to W1. By noting that
            =
                J'(W.+1,s.   l' and rearranging, it is straightforward to derive

 the first-order Euler equations in Grossman and Shiller (1982), Mankiw,

Rotemberg, and Summers (1985), and Hansen and Singleton (1983). In this

model, however, the level of consumption, and not just parameters of the

utility function, can be recovered from the life cycle framework.8

     The RES of equation (5) is, in general, intractable, and most studies

have used numerical methods to solve it. In the model presented below, a

second-order Taylor-series expansion of the RHS of (5) allows a closed-form

approximation of consumption under uncertainty. Before deriving the formal

model, however, it is useful to outline the method by which equation (5) is

approximated, and to demonstrate the close analogy between the uncertainty

premium developed below and the traditional Arrow-Pratt measure of relative

risk aversion.

     Recall that one interpretation of the Arrow-Pratt measure -y     =   -J''W/J'
(where J denotes the utility of wealth W) is the degree to which uncertain

wealth is discounted. Pratt (1964) demonstrated that the certainty-
                                   A
equivalent measure of wealth, W, or that amount of certain wealth which is

equal in utility to the uncertain prospect, can be approximated by (see

appendix)



 8The other papers focus primarly on the general equilibrium
 determination of asset returns given variations in aggregate
 consumption (Mankiw, Rotemberg, and Summers (1985) also include wages
 and labor supply). This paper approaches the issue from a different
 angle; how does consumption respond to given wage and interest rate
 variation?
                                                     8




                                      W W(l -                )                       (6)
where    is the squared coefficient of variation Var(W)/W2, and 7 is the

expectation of wealth. That is, risk averse individuals discount the value

of an uncertain prospect W by one-half the Arrow-Pratt risk aversion measure

-y times the proportional variance a. Clearly, the discount will be greater

the larger is the variance, and the more risk averse is the consumer.

     Now consider a simple version of equation (5): a two period model with

uncertain earnings, but a zero (and certain) interest rate and time

preference rate (r2 =   S   =   0).    Then taking a second-order Taylor-series

expansion of (5) around the mean value of earnings in the second period Y2

(see appendix),

                   J'(W) =
                                 E1{J'(W2))              J'(2)(1 +   a2)             (7)

where Si is suppressed, and           =   -y   +   -y2   when the second-period utility

function (or equivalently, the value function) exhibits constant relative

risk aversion.9 Just as the Arrow Pratt measure -y discounts uncertain

wealth, so also does the parameter , a monotonic transformation of-y,

augment the marginal utility of future consumption, and thereby reduce

current consumption. (The premium                   is positive because the marginal

utility function is convex rather than concave; E(J'(W)) > J'(E(W)).)                          By
                                                                                           A

substituting the certainty equivalent measure of marginal utility, J'(W),

for the (intractable) expected value of marginal utility, a closed-form

approximation for consumption under uncertainty may be derived.

    Expanding the model to include interest rate uncertainty and



 9it turns out that the value function approximation will exhibit
 constant relative risk aversion even in multiperiod models. Also see
 Merton (1971), p. 391.
                                              9




multi-period consumption requires more structure and leads to greater

analytical complexity. The assumptions which follow, such as specifying a

constant coefficent of variation for earnings and interest rates, facilitate

the derivation of the closed-form solutions.

     (i) The utility function displays constant relative risk aversion

(CR1A). Letting -y denote the Arrow-Pratt measure of CRRA,                      the utility
function is


                                       1
                             TJ(C.)=
                                1      l-

                                  -=ln(C.)

     Since utility is strongly separable, l/-y is the intertemporal

elasticity of substitution.

     (ii) The interest rate is r. =          r+     .          i = 1,   .   . - ,D

where the Dxl vector     —                  and I is the identity matrix. This
                             N(O,oI),
implies that the (squared) coefficient of variation for the asset yield at

age i, (l+r.), conditional on the information set I. at time j < i is

              a2(i,j)     Var(r.II.)/[E.(r.)]2 a(l+Y2 2
which is constant for all j < i. Thus a2(i,j) is constant regardless of

age i when r. is realized, or age j when expectations are formed.

     (iii) Conditional on information at age j <               1,    the age i distribution

of earnings is log-normal; ln(Y..II.) —           N(..,c72),       where y... =       E.(ln(Y.)}   and

a2 is the constant (log) variance. The (squared) coefficient of variation

of age i earnings from the perspective of age j is
                                                          2

           a2(i,j)     Var(Y.JI.)/[E.(Y.)] =
                                                        [e     -         a           a2

for j < 1. Once again, a2, the squared coefficient of variation for age i
                                            10



earnings given information known at age j, is constant over all j <       i.
Furthermore a2 is an approximation of a2, the (constant) variance of

log-earnings.

     The assumptions about earnings are somewhat more general than those

made about interest rates. For interest rates, the unconditional

expectation of future interest rates is always r. However, expectations

about future earnings may be updated, owing to serial correlation in

earnings; the crucial assumption is that the (squared) coefficient of

variation in earnings (and in interest rates) is invariant to i or j.

     (iv) The contemporaneous correlation between the (proportional) random

asset yield and earnings is assumed to be constant:

                         a
                             ry
                                  =   Cov(r.,Y.)/{(1+r)Y.].
                                          1   1         1
     With assumptions (i)-(iv), the Taylor-series approximations of optimal
consumption can be derived. The standard solution to the D-period

consumption problem begins with the choice of consumption in the

next-to-last period. Substituting from the budget constraint (3) into the

first-order conditions in (5) and noting that J'(WD,SD)       U'(CD) =   W
(since CD = WD) yields

                     (l+5)EDl((l+rD)[(WDlCDl)(l+rD) +         D'1        (8)

     The RHS of (8) can be expressed as a second-order Taylor-series

approximation (Lippman and McCall, 1982) evaluated at the means of rD and

    denoted r, and       conditional on information known at D-l. Note that

the second-order expansion of the Euler equation involves a third-order

expansion of the utility function, a step beyond quadratic utility

approximations.
                                                        11




        It is helpful at this stage to define a few variables important to

solving life cycle models. Traditional models have emphasized that age i

consumption depends not just on current income, but on the present value of

lifetime resources at the end of period i, denoted
                                                                          L;
                                                        D
                                 L.
                                  1
                                    W.1 +
                                                       .. 1JJ
                                                       J=1+l
or the value of current financial wealth plus the expected present value of

future earnings. Next,                   E.1(L.}, the anticipated present value of

resources at age i, given information at i-i. Two additional factors useful

in deriving the uncertainty premium are the anticipated ratio of expected

earnings, and expected asset yield, to lifetime earnings10
                       =
                           E.1{Y.}/L.                                          (9)

                       =
                           E.1(W.(l+r.))/L..
        From the appendix, the general difference equation for period i optimal

consumption can now be derived:

                                     1(l+)(l÷v.)1l1 L.
                                 =
                                     [ (1+6)
                                              1
                                                             j [i] C1          (10)


where
                                           2                 2
                             1
                                 =   a
                                         liy       +   a
                                                           2ir + a 3iry
                                                                    .o

    and
                           12
                 9li 2i
                     1 *2-
                    b()
                                               *
                 92i
                                     -
                 03i



 10Note that p. and          represent the ratio of means, not the mean of
 the ratio.
                                                  12




     The variable ii.   is   the uncertainty premium, and is easier to interpret

by rearranging;
                                                   *2
                             II   = aJ           'i'r + Piaryl                        (11)


where             +
                      ()2      +
                                      2Pjary           a linear decomposition of the variance

of lifetime resources L.. The first term in (11) is the "income" effect

caused by uncertainty about lifetime resources L. in the next period. Like

equation (7) above, the "income" uncertainty premium is simply one-half

times the proportional variance of next period "full" wealth L... The second

term in (11) is the "substitution" effect, which reflects the covariance

between the error term in the asset yield, (r.-r)/(l+r), and the unexpected

change (or "error term") in the proportional realization of lifetime

resources, (L.-L.)/L.. Note that v.                    0, depending on the relative

magnitude of the income and substitution effects.11

     Equation (10) is simplified by taking the logarithm of both sides,

noting that ln(l+x)     x for x =             r,6,v,   and expressing ln[C./C. 1' as C and

ln[L./L.} as

                                  Ô   =
                                          7
                                                 -6    +   i'.]
                                                             1
                                                                +L                   (12)

    In   the standard certainty model, the consumption growth rate is simply




 11Note that [L.-L.}/L.           pi*(rir)/(r) +              p.(Y.-Y.)/Y..   The second
 term in (11) is not so much a "substitution" effect as a measure of
 the correlation between the price of next period consumption --
 (1+r.)    --   and next period's L.. When they are negatively
 correlated, as they are when individuals are net savers, then                      is
 less desirable since the price jumps up when wealth drop. See also
 Epstein (1975) and Snow and Warren (1985).
                                           13



       -
           5).    en income is uncertain, there are two additional terms. The
 first is the risk premium ii..       The second term, L, represents the

 revaluation of lifetime resources following the new realization of interest

 rates and earnings.. Since consumption is a linear function of lifetime

 resources, the percentage change in consumption is equal to the percentage

 shift in realized (and expected) lifetime resources.

       At first glance, i-'.    appears to be small. If -y were 3, the share of

next year's earnings to anticipated lifetime resources were 10 percent, and
a2 =   0, then an earnings coefficient of variation equal to 40 percent (i.e.,

a standard error of $8,000 on average earnings of $20,000) would imply that
   =   0.96      percent. The age-consumption path c5 would be affected by only 1/3

percent. However, as is shown in the next section, empirical evidence on

the strong serial correlation of earnings implies measures of          in excess
of four percent.

       Before presenting the solution for optimal consumption, it is important

to note sources of error in the Taylor-series approximation. First, the

approximation requires that the risk premium          be constant over time. That

is, the unconditional expectation of the uncertainty premium       E(u.) j <      i,
is assumed to be equal to the correct conditional expectation

This assumption may not hold for two reasons. First, as earnings and

interest rates are realized, the expectation of the asset share (pt) and the

present value of earnings share (p.) at age i can change, thereby changing

the expectation of v.. The second source of error is that p and            depend
(marginally) on the choice of Cr1, since increasing Cr1, cor example, will
                                                      14




reduce assets at age i.12 The importance of these sources of error is

tested in Section V, where the Taylor-series approximations are compared

with the exact numerical solutions.

        The general expression for consumption, derived inductively from

equation (A.9) in the appendix, is
                                                  r    D      .i-l
                                  C. =       L.            KRH
                                      1          1[..3 3]
                                                  I    E                                 (13)


                                             r (l+r) (l+v )       ]1/1
where                      K. =       II
                                  si+l'
                                             I

                                                      (1+6)

        Equation (13) is a forward-looking representation of consumption, in

which L. encompasses all information about future earnings and current

assets. It is also useful for econometric purposes to express C as the

geometric sum of consumption originally planned for age i plus the

cumulative revaluations in E.{L.) since age 1.                       That is, using logarithmic

approximations,

                     -
                                  i-l
  ln(C.) =    [(i-l)(r-6)}/-y +           v./-y + ln(C1)      +
                                                                  [ln(L.)-E1(ln(L.fl]     (14)
                                  j=l3
     This expression for consumption is similar to the X-constant models

developed by Heckman and MaCurdy (1980) and MaCurdy (1983). The choice of

C1 at age 1 summarizes all future expectations about future lifetime

earnings, and consumption at a later age i depends on the deterministic

trend of life cycle consumption (the first term on the RHS of (15)), plus

the accumulated effects of income uncertainty                        zi./-y. Finally, C. (and the


 l2 is possible to correct for this second type of error by iterating
 over the vectors C =              and v =
                      {C1,,. .,CD)
                                  .
                                           (v1,. . . VJ.) to acheive a
 fixed point solution for optimal consumption. This correction was not
 used in the calculations presented in section IV because it reduced,
 rather than increased, the accuracy of the closed-form approximations.
                                         15




marginal utility of income A) will be affected by changes in expected or

actual lifetime resources, ln(L.) -                   In a cross-section of
                                        E1(ln(L.fl.
individuals, this fin1 term will qualify as an "error" term, since its mean

is zero and, assuming rational expectations, is independent of other terms

on the RHS (Flavin, 1981).
    -
        Finally,   will the optimizing consumer ever borrow? The theoretical

model predicts that the individual will only borrow on the certain component

of future earnings. As long as current wealth is positive, he or she will

never borrow against the random element of earnings and thereby risk

consuming nothing at age D. Since marginal utility is infinite when

consumption is zero, any positive probability that     C. =   0, j > 0, would
violate the first order conditions.

        The Taylor-series approximation may predict that consumers wish to

borrow against uncertain future earnings, since the approximation does not

account for the asymptotic behavior of U'(C.) near     C 0. The actual
consumption path may therefore differfrom t-hatpred±ctehythe

Taylor-series approximation, Zeldes (1986) has found that current

consumption is affected not only by current credit constraints, but by

future constraints as well. The numerical calculations in Section V support

this view, since the divergence between the exact numerical solution and the

Taylor-series approximation is greatest in the early stages of the life

cycle when borrowing constraints are present.



Iii. .Lheoretjcal Calculations of Precautionary Savings

    Given the closed-form approximation for life cycle consumption, the
                                       16



next step is to implement plausable parameters of the utility function and

the earnings process to compare capital accumulation in a certain and

uncertain regime. Turning first to the parameters of the utility function,

although there is some variation in measures of risk aversion (for example,

see Friend and Blunie, 1975; Landskroner, 1977; Hansen and Singleton, 1983;

Grossman and Shiller, 1982; and Skinner, 1985), a central measureof -y =        3.0
appears reasonable, while the time preference rate 6 is assumed to be 1.5

percent. The degree of interest rate uncertainty is measured by the

variance of the return on Aaa bonds, adjusted by the GNP deflator, over the

period 1967-86 (Economic Report of the President, 1987). The average ex

post real interest rate was 3.17 percent, with a standard error of 2.9

percentage points. Finally, Cry was assumed to be zero.

      The structure of earnings uncertainty is a key factor in affecting

precautionary savings. I begin by adopting the first-order serially

correlated error structure estimated by Lillard and Willis (1978) using data

from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Rewriting their model, and

dropping individual subscripts,

                              y.X.+u+u.                                  (15)

and                            u.
                                  1   pu. i-l +   .
                                                  1

where y. is log earnings at age i,    X     is a vector of exogenous factors such

as experience and education, w the individual- specific effect, u. the

serially correlated error term,       an iid variable, and the year dummy

variables have been suppressed.

      Lillard and Willis found, for their simple regression model, that p =

0.406 and a2 = 0.069.   The persistence of earnings shocks over time will
                                                       17




lead to a greater degree of uncertainty about lifetime resources than that

reflected by simply measuring the variance of u1. For a given realization

of      =   u.   -
                     pu1,   the impact on the present value of expected and future

resources is
                                                   2
                                               p
                                           +
                         .{Y.
                          1 1
                              +                         -2 +          - d'   (16)
                                  (l+r)        (l+r)               (l+r)
where d is the number of years until retirement. With the simplification

that                   and that p decays sufficiently quickly so that d is small,

the variance of lifetime earnings can be approximated by

                                                               2
                                      'Jl-                                   (17)
                                          1L

       There is a basic equivalence between earnings generated by a serially

correlated process suinmarized by a2 and positive p, and a serially

uncorrelated process with (log) variance given by [l-p(1+)]a2, since they

both introduce the same degree of uncertainty about L.. Thus assuming that

earnings are serially uncorrelated, but with a "white noise" variance given

by (17), induces a degree of uncertainty comparable with the serially

correlated error structure observed empirically. Using the parameters from

Lillard and Willis implies that the standard error of lifetime resource

uncertainty is approximately 43 percent of average earnings.

       Adopting the earnings regression from Lillard and Willis for whites

with high school education (Column 1, Table A2), and assuming an annual real

growth rate in wages of 0.5 percent and continuous employment, yields an

average age-earnings profile (A) as shown in Figure 1. In this model,

period 1 corresponds to age 21, individuals retire at age 65 and die at age
                                         18




75. The age-consumption profile given perfect certainty of earnings and

interest rates is shown in path (B) of Figure 1; consumption grows at a

constant rate of (r-6)/-y.

     The uncertainty age-consumption profile is shown in path (C).      (The

astericks (D) are from the numerical calculations in Section IV.) This

profile is constructed so that exactly the same values of earnings and

interest rates are realized when income is uncertain as when income is

certain. The uncertainty premium ii.     never exceeds 0.6 percent. Aggregate

precautionary savings, calculated by summing savings over all age groups

assuming a 1.5 percent population growth rate, is estimated to be only 12

percent of aggregate life cycle savings)3

     Earnings structures estimated using moving average processes suggest a

larger degree of persistance in earnings shocks.14 Consider, for example,

the ARMA(l,2) equation of log earnings from MaCurdy (1982, p. ill):

                 u. = 0.974u.
                  1           i-l +   .1 - 0.390g.
                                                 i-l   -   O.094E.
                                                                 i-2   (18)

     The   timepath   of earnings subject to a one standard error shock in log

earnings (0.234) at period 1 is shown in Figure 2. For purposes of

comparison, the equivalent pattern for a one standard error shock in          from



        method of calculating saving may understate aggregate saving
 since consumption will likely be a concave function of actual earnings
 realizations; hence the expectation of consumption will be less than
 consumption as a function of the expectation of earnings.

 14Lillard (1981, 1982) has estimated a joint wage-hours of work model
 which allows for individual differences and serially correlated errpr
 terms in wage growth as well as wage leveL.   Even with this
 additional source of error, the total lifetime uncertainty implied by
 the model is not as large as that implied by MaCurdy, since the
 first-order serial correlated error term is estimated to decay
 relatively quickly.
                                     19




Lillard and Willis (1978) is also shown. The MaCurdy estimates imply that

in each year, new information about future lifetime earnings is substantial,

leading to measures of v. in excess of 4 percent.

     Figure 3 presents the calculated Taylor-series measure of consumption

over the life cycle using the MaCurdy earnings structure, and given that

mean realizations of earnings and interest rates occur. For purposes of

comparison, the age-consumption profile under perfect certainty, and the

average earnings profile, are also provided. The substantially higher

measures of v. lead to a considerably more steeply sloped consumption path,

with both lower consumption in early periods, and higher consumption at

later periods (this higher level of consumption reflects the "spending down"

of the precautionary assets during retirement). Precautionary savings is

calculated to be 56 percent of aggregate savings.

     This finding of substantial precautionary savings is reasonably robust

to alternative specifications, although the degree of risk aversion plays a

very important role. Increasing the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion -y

to 6.0 (b   32) increases precautionary savings to 76 percent of aggregate

savings, while reducing -y to 1.0 (5 = 2) leads to only 18 percent

precautionary savings.

     If most asset risk arises because of shifts in asset prices (Bulow and

Suniniers, 1984), then variations in the Aaa bond rate may understate the true

degree of uncertainty in asset yields. However, the impact of doubling the

standard error of r is less than a one percentage point increase in

precautionary savings. Finally, eliminating the 0.5 percent real growth

rate in earnings reduces precautionary savings to 48 percent as higher
                                    20




savings rates in early years provide a larger cushion against income

uncertainty.

     To summarize, the importance of precautionary savings depends crucially

on the structure of earnings uncertainty. The closer is the earnings

process to a random walk, the greater will be precautionary savings.



IV. Testing the Accuracy of the Taylor Series Approximation

     The accuracy of the closed form expression for consumption depends on

the cumulative mismeasurement caused by the approximation. It is therefore

useful to compare an exact numerical simulation of the dynamic programming

problem with the corresponding Taylor-series approximation. Following

Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985), the following numerical simulation method is

adopted.15 First, the Euler equation is solved at age D-l by finding a

value of CD1 that solves the Euler equation (5).     Equation (5) is

evaluated for 20 different levels, or "steps" of WD1. Optimal CD1 as a

function of WD1 between-- (aid beyond) the 20 steps were interpolated. Thus

the function CD l(WD    is defined for all WD1. Next, optimal CD2 is

determined conditional on WD2 by again solving equation (5), where the

marginal utility of CD1 is numerically integrated as a function of WD1,

which in turn depends on rDl and.YD1. The procedure continues inductively

back to period 1.

     The results for the parameter values originally presented in path (B)

of Figure 1 are numerically calculated, and show by path (D). In general,




 15Zeldes (1986) uses a slightly different method; he uses integer
 measures of the value function rather than interpolation.
                                       21



the Taylor series approximation tracks the true (numerical) solution

closely. One measure of how well the approximation approximates is the

      the proportion of the divergence between consumption subject to

uncertain income (C), and consumption subject to certain income (Ct),

explained by the Taylor series approximation (C). The R2 is written:

                                        1   1
                                1-
                                     E(C-C) 2
     The Taylor series approximation explains more than 99 percent of the

true variation caused by uncertain income in Figure 1. Turning next to

Figure 3, path (D) seems to diverge most strongly at consumption for early

ages, owing to the stricter borrowing constraints imposed by the numerical

calculation. Nevertheless, the accuracy of the Taylor series approximation

is high, with    =   .94.   The accuracy of the approximation falls as

borrowing constraints become more restrictive.



     V. New Evidence on Savings, Rates by-Occation

     If different occupations are subject to differing degrees of earnings

risk, then the model presented above would predict that average savings

rates should be higher for those in riskier occupations. To test this

hypothesis, the Consumer Expenditure Survey of 1972-73 is used to measure

savings rates for a cross-section sample of families. After deleting

families with income less than $2000 or greater than $35,000 in 1972-73

dollars, heads of households who were single, or aged less than 20 or

greater than 50 (to abstract from the problem that older consumers may spend

down precautionary savings as retirement approaches), and those with savings
                                        22




rates exceeding 1501   percent   of net income, 5685 families remained.

     Savings are defined in two ways. The first definition excludes

household durables; it simply adjusts consumption expenditures by

subtracting mortgage payments and adding the imputed value of the house

(either rental value or 6 percent of market value); the difference between

net income and consumpt-ion is defined as savings. The second measure adds

90 percent of household durables, defined as automobile and furniture

purchases, to savings, which implies that durables provide a 10 percent

return for the first year. Both pension contributions and life insurance

payments are included in savings.

     Income was measured as gross family income minus federal, state, and

local taxes. The average of the savings to net income ratio (excluding

durables), by occupation, is presented in Table 1.      It is not suprising that

laborers and service workers experience lower average savings rates, since

their current-year income is also lower. What is more surprising is the low

average savings rate for the self-employed and farmers,opposlt•e of that

found by Fisher, Friedman, and others.16 To correct for factors other than

occupational differences, savings regressions are presented which include

log(Net income), family size, age and age2 terms, as well as dummy variables

for each occupation (the dummy variable for the group with the most

observations, craftsmen, is excluded). The first equation (column 5)

excludes durables, while the second equation (column 6) includes 90 percent



       man (1957, pp. 74-75) also found some. self-employed save less
 than other occupations. He attributed this lower saving rate to the
 ability of the self-employed to endogenously determine disbursed
 income for consumption purposes. It is also possible that businessmen
 can purchase private durables (e.g., cars) through their business.
                                     23




 of durables in savings. The occupational dummy variable coefficients are

 generally small; except for the self-employed, managers, and sales workers,

 the difference in savings rates are less than 2.5 percentage points, or a

 difference of 17 percent of average savings. What is suprising is that the

 savings rates of the self employed and sales workers, those generally

 thought to receive riskier incomes, are less than the benchm-ark group of

 craftsmen.

     While these data refute the oft-cited stylized fact that the

self-employed and farmers save more than others, they do not necessary

reject the hypothesis that precautionary savings are important. A number of

other factors could explain the differences in savings rates. In

particular, there may be problems in measuring income (see footnote 1), and

in differences of attitudes towards risk among occupations. For example, if

those most accepting of risk also chose sales or self employment for their

occupation, there would be no theoretical presumption that such occupations

should save more. Alternatively, if the apparent high

employed earnings were white noise, the risk to lifetime resources might be

less than that for other occupations with apparently less earnings

variation, but greater serial correlation. Nevertheless, the results

presented here suggest that precautionary savings may be smaller than that

suggested by the life cycle model, or that self-selection into occupations

on the basis of risk is important.



V. Cunciu,ion

     Precautionary savings can have important implications for capital
                                    24



accumulation. If a primary motive for saving were to guard against future

income uncertainty, then programs designed to reduce uncertainty, such as

unemployment insurance and welfare programs, could have the unintended

effect of reducing national savings. Similarly, much of the savings passed

along to future generations could simply represent the unused precautionary

savings of families subject to uncertain lifespans. ma life cycle model

of consumption subject to uncertain earnings and interest rates,

precautionary savings are found to be substantial. The primary reason is

that most empirical measures of individual earnings uncertainty find

evidence of strong serial correlation over time. Hence in any given year,

there is a substantial degree of uncertainty about the present value of

lifetime resources. Consumers respond to such uncertainty by accumulating

more assets while young to guard against income downturns.

     By taking a second-order Taylor-series approximation of the Euler

equation, it is possible to derive a closed form analytical approximation

for consumption when income is uncertain, which in turn canbe used to

measure the extent of precautionary savings. Using empirical parameter

values, precautionary savings are estimated to be 54 percent of total life

cycle savings. Precautionary savings are larger the more risk averse

consumers are, the more immediate are borrowing constraints (Zeldes, 1986),

and the greater the degree of serial correlation in earnings.

    These theoretical findings are contradicted by a comparison of savings

rates across occupations in the Consumer Expenditure Survey of 1972-73.

Condi*ntl on age, income, and family size, most occupation-specific

savings rates are within 2.5 percent of the largest occupational group,
                                              Appendix



        To review the Pratt (1964) derivation of the risk premium, consider

 the expected utility of an uncertain wealth prospect, E{J(W)}. The
                                   A
certainty equivalent is J(W). Taking the second order expansion of

E(J(W)) yields J() +          Var(W),          while the first order expansion of J(W)

     J(1) + J'(W-W).       Substituting and dividing by J'(W),

                                              W-W72
                                                       2w                       (A.l)

where -y =   -J''W/J'      and cr2 =   Var(W)/t2.
       Contrast this simple expression for the uncertainty premium with the

uncertainty premium for marginal utility, as in equation (5) in the text.

Expanding the RI-IS of (5),

                                              J'[l +
                                                         S S S

                           E(J'(W2)) =                   2,Var(W2)]             (A.2)

where all derivatives are evaluated at W2. The assumption that -y is a

measure of constant relative risk aversion means that

                       =   -J''/J'     -
                                                       + W2(J''/J')2   = 0      (A.3)

which in turn implies (after some rearranging) that W(J'''/J')                          +
72     The RI-IS of equation A.2 can therefore be expressed as J'd2)(14a2),

where a2 =
             Var(W2)/t2.
       Turning next to the derivation of the general expression of

consumption subject to uncertainty, consider a Taylor-series

approximation for the RHS         of       equation (5) in the text, which we denote as

F(rD,YD)     (l+rD){(WDlCDl)(l+r) + YDI                     1(1+8). Then the expectation
                                    25




craftsmen. Those in traditionally riskier occupations, such as sales and

self-employed, saved significantly less than average. These results may,

however, be due to self-selection in occupation.

     In the past, researchers have attempted to distinguish between saving

for life cycle retirement purposes, and saving for bequests (e.g., Kotlikoff

and Swnmers, 1981). This paper suggests that precautionary savings occupy

at least as important a role in generating capital accumulation as does

saving for retirement. Expanding the model to include other sources of

uncertainty, such as health risk (Kotlikoff, 1986), and uncertain lifespan,

may ultimately provide a more plausable explanation for observed savings

behavior.
 order condition (A.6) around the random variable (l+rD)LD'l (since

 remaining terms are constant), the Taylor-series expansion of (A.4) is

expressed as




 CD - (l+S)[l+K              (1÷       1J [Li(l-) +       (()(l+)LDT2)Var(YDl) +
                {()(l+)WlLDT2                YwDlLDl)Var(rDl) +
            {(l+r)LDr2WDl          -

                                         Dil}C0v(rDl,YD1)]
                                                                   +   o(•,•,.)     (A.7)



where    =+           and o(.,.,.) represent third and higher order moments

of the joint distribution of Dl and rDl. All of the terms involving

        or LD2 can be transformed into LD, by introducing D-l' the

share of earnings to lifetime resources at D-l, YD1/LD1, and                         the

share of assets to total resources {WD1(l+)}/LD1, and transforming the

variances and covariance to proportional (or logarithmic) measures a2 =

Var(Y)/2,    a2 =   Var(r)/(l+)2,       and a = Cov(r,Y)/[(l÷)Y].
     The expression for VD1, described in equation (10) in the text, can

then be substituted for the second-order expansion terms, and (A.7) is

rewritten

                     =
                         (l+6){l+(1+)JL(l÷)(l+,)                                  (A.8)

     Substituting (l4i)(LD2 - CD2) for LD1, and raising both sides to

the -1/-)' power yields

                                               LD -2

                                       'D-l1
                         -
                              1 +                +         (l+r)
                                                     KD
and the denominator is simplified by noting that
of the second-order Taylor Series approximation of F is




         ED1(F(rD,YD)}      F(r,YD) + [F11Var(r) + F22Var(YD)J +

                Fl2Cov(r,Yd) + o(Var(YD) ,Var(r) ,Cov(YD,r))            (A.4)



                                                        .th       .th
where F.. is the derivative of F with respect to its i        and j

argument, i,j =   1,2, and o(.,.,) represents third and higher moments of
the joint distribution of r. and Y..
                           i      i

     Evaluating the derivatives F.., setting o(.,•,.) to zero, and

rearranging yields18

                     =
                          E ]l+WDlCDl + D1'D'                           (A.5)

and other variables are defined as in the text. Given the solution for

CD1 from the text, the next step will be to derive the solution for

consumption at age D-2, given the value function at D-l. The general

method for solving CD2 can be extended backwards to previous consumption

choices by induction.

     The marginal utility of CD2 is equated with the expected value of

marginal utility in period D-l,

          -
              (l+6YED -   2D   -
                                       1 + KD (l+r)
                                                        = 0             (A.6)


where the expression in the brackets is simply CDl conditional on

realized rDl and D1' and           =
                                        [(l+)(l+&)l(1+D)]L'.     Noting that

the assumption ED2(K1} EDl(K1) allows one to expand the first


 18The details of this derivation are provided below in the somewhat
 more complicated case of the second-to-last period consumption
 problem.
                             =
                                 K1[ (l+r)(l+vDl)]l/-Y
                                          +                      (A.lO)

     It   is straightforward to derive the expression for consumption at

earlier ages by induction.
                             References


Abel, Andrew B., "Precautionary Saving and Accidental Bequests,"
American Economic Review (September 1985): pp. 777-791.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of
Political Economy (November/December 1974): pp. 1095-1118.

Barsky, Robert B., Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen P. Zeldes,
"Ricardian Consumers with Keynesian Propensities," American Economic
Review (September 1986): pp. 676-691.

Boskin, Michael J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Public Debt and U.S.
Savings: A New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," in Karl Brunner and
Allen Meltzer, eds, The New Monetary Economics. Fiscal Issues, and
Unemployment North-Holland (1985).

Bulow, Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Taxation of Risky
Assets," Journal of Political Economy 92 (February 1984) pp. 20-39.

Epstein, L., "A Disaggregate Analysis of Consumer Choice Under
Uncertainty," Econometrica 43 (September - November 1975)
pp. 877-892.

Fisher, Malcolm R., "Explorations in Saving Behavior," Oxford
University Institute of Statistics Bulletin (August 1956): pp. 201-77.

Flavin, Marjorie A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
Expectations about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy
(October 1981): pp. 974-1009.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1957.

Friend, Irwin, and Marshall E. Blume, "The Demand for Risky Assets,"
American Economic Review (December 1975) pp. 900-22.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert J. Shiller, "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review (May
1982): pp. 222-27.

Hakansson, Nils H., "Optimal Investment and Consumption StrategIes
Under Risk for a Class of Utility Functions," Econometri eptember
1970): pp. 587-607.
 Model of Labor Supply and Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and
 Uncertainty," International Economic Review (June 1983): pp. 265-89.

 Mankiw, N. Gregory, Julio Rotemberg, and Lawrence Summers,
 "Intertemporal Substitution in Macroeconomics," Quarterly Journal of
 Economics (February 1985).

 Merton, Robert C., "Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
 Continuous Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory (1971): pp.
 373-413.

 Miller, Bruce L., "Optimal Consumption with a Stochastic Income
 Stream," Econometrica (March 1974): pp. 253-266.

 Miller, Bruce L., "The Effect on Optimal Consumption of Increased
 Uncertainty in Labor Income in the Multiperiod Case," Journal of
 Economic Theory (1976).

 Nagatani, Keizo, "Life Cycle Saving: Theory and Fact," American
 Economic Review (June 1972): pp. 344-353.

 Pratt, John W., "Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,"
 Econometrica 32 (January-April 1964): pp. 122-36.

Samuelson, Paul A., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic
Stochastic Programming," Review of Economics and Statistics (1969):
pp. 239-46.

Sandnio, A., "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions," Review of
Economic Studies (July 1970): pp. 353-60.

Sibley, David S., "Permanent and Transitory Income Effects in a Model
of Optimal Consumption with Wage Income Uncertainty," Journal of
Economic Theory 11 (1975): pp. 68-82.

Skinner, Jonathan, "Variable Lifespan and the Intertemporal Elasticity
of Consumption," Review of Economics and Statistics (November 1985).

Snow, Arthur, and Ronald S. Warren, Jr., "Substitution Effects in the
Theory of Consumption under Temporal Risks," mimeo, University of
Georgia (1985).

Welch, Finis, "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom
Babies' Financial Bust," Journal of Political Economy (October 1979):
pp. S65-S97.

Zeldes, Stephen, "Optimal Consumption with' Stochastic Income:
Deviations from Certainty Equivalence," Working Paper # 20-86, Rodney
White Center for Financial Research, The Wharton School (August 1986).
Hall, Robert, and Frederic Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,"
Econometrica (1982): pp. 461-481.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of
Political Economy (April 1983): pp. 249-65.

Beckman, James J., and Thomas E. MaCurdy, "A Life Cycle Model of
Female Labor Supply," Review of Economic Studies (January 1980,
Econometric Supplement): pp. 47-74..

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Kenneth L. Judd, "Social Security and
Individual Welfare: Precautionary Saving, Liquidity Constraints, and
the Payroll Tax," mimeo (June 1985).

Kimball, Miles, and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Precautionary Saving and the
Timing of Taxes," mimeo (February 1987).

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "Health Expenditures and Precautionary
Savings," NBER Working Paper No. 2008 (August 1986).

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Shoven, John, and Avia Spivak, "Annuity
Markets, Savings, and the Capital Stock," N.B.E.R. Working Paper #1250
(December 1983).

Leland, Hayne E., "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand
for Saving," Quarterly Journal of Economics (1968): pp.465-73.

Lillard, Lee A., "A Model of Wage Expectations in Labour Supply," in
F. A. Cowell, (ed.) Panel Data on Incomes, London School of Economics
(July 1983).

Lillard, Lee A., and Robert J. Willis, "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings
Mobility," Econojuetrica (September 1978): pp. 985-1012.

Lippman, Steven A., and John J. McCall, "The Economics of Uncertainty:
Selected Topics and Probabilistic Methods," in K.J. Arrow and M.D.
Intriligator (eds.) Handbook of Mathematical Economics, North Holland
(1982).

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a
Life-Cycle Setting," Journal of Political Economy (December 1981):
pp.1059-85.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the
Error Structure of Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analyi' " Journal
of Econometrics 18 (1982).

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal
                       Table 1: Savings Regressions and Summary
                          Statistics, by Occupation, 1972-73



                                                              Savings Rates:

    Occupation          Me an         S. E.      N     Excludes        Includes
                                                       Durable s       90% Durables

Self Employed*              .071      • 252      266   -0.069          -0.081
                                                       (4.   64)       (6.64)
Professional                • 170     •   205    987   -0.008          -0.025
                                                       (0.94)          (3 .44)
Managerial                  •   144   .212       795   -0.045          -0.052
                                                       (4.76)          (6.72)
Clerical                • 143         .217       345   -0.003          -0.014
Sales
                                                       (0.28)          (1.36)
                        .130          .221       286   -0.035          -0.056
Craftsmen
                                                       (2.62)          (5.03)
                                141   • 222     1322

Operatives                      138   .219      1072    0.019           0.021
                                                       (2.27)          (2.95)
Laborers                .093          .228       284    0.003           0.006
                                                       (0.22)          (0.54)
Service Workers         •       100   • 220     368    -0.017          -0.024
                                                       (1.36)          (2.43)
Log(Net Income)                                         0.204          0.232
                                                       (25.94)         (35.86)
Family Size                                            -0.016         -0.021
                                                       (7.36)         (12. 31)
Age                                                     0.005         -0.005
                                                       (1.51)         (1.64)
Age - squared                                          -0. 864E-4      0.323E-4
                                                       (1.85)         (0.84)
Constant                                               -1.772         -1.708
                                                       (20. 60)       (24.15)
R                                                       0.122          0.211


Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; N 5685; Craftsmen are the
excluded occupational category. Source: Consumer Expenditure Survey
1972-73.

*
 Includes   farmers.
         Figure 1:   Earnings and Consumption Profiles: AR(l) Earnings


42OOO




                                                          C)

                                                    (B)




                                                               (A) Earnings
                                                               (B) Perfect certainty
                                                                   Con sumpt ion
                                                               (C) Uncertain Consumption
                                                                   (Taylor-series)
                                                               (D) Uncertain Consumption
                                                                     (Exact)
    20          40
                          AGE
                Figure            3:   Earnings and Consumption Profiles: ARMA(l,2) Earnings

42000j




31500

                                                                                 C)


33000
                                                           lIE




285                                                                                   (B)




2400



1   950C



                             *                                                              (A) Earnings
                                                                                            (B) Perfect Certainty
                        **                                                                  (C) Uncertain Consump-
                *
                    *                                                                           tion (Taylor-seriet)
                                                                                            (D) Uncertain Consump-
            *                                                                                   tion (Exact)




           20                30             40        50         60         70
                                                     AGE
                         Figure 2: The Effect of a One
                    Standard Deviation Shock on Log Earnings

     0.28

     0.26

     0.24
     0.22
      0.2
     0.18
4
C    0.16
L
0    0.14
w
     0.12
-I
      0.1
     0.08
     0.06
     0.04
     0.02
       0
            1                                   3       4            6

                                         Year
                0    Ullord and Willis              ÷   t.4aCurc*y
