NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK OF LIFE INSURERS:
RECENT TRENDS AND TRANSMISSION MECHANISMS
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 23365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23365

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

A.M. Best Company owns the copyright to Best’s Statement File and Best’s Schedule S, which
we use with permission through their license agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis. Koijen acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (grant
338082). For comments and discussions, we thank Anders Malmstrom, Anna Paulson, Richard
Rosen, and seminar participants at the 2015 Conference on the Economics, Regulation, and
Systemic Risk of Insurance Markets at London Business School; the 2015 Banque de FranceACPR Conference on Financial Regulation—Stability versus Uniformity; the 2015 CEPR
Financial Regulation Initiative Conference; the European Systemic Risk Board; and SIFR. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk of Life Insurers: Recent Trends and Transmission Mechanisms
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 23365
April 2017
JEL No. G12,G21,G22
ABSTRACT
We summarize recent trends in risk exposure for U.S. life insurers from variable annuities,
shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives. We discuss how these sources of risk could
be amplified and transmitted to the rest of the financial sector and the real economy. More
complete and transparent financial statements are necessary to accurately assess the overall risk
mismatch in the insurance industry. We suggest ways to disclose relevant information and discuss
some implications for insurance regulation.

Ralph S.J. Koijen
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rkoijen@stern.nyu.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

1.

Introduction

The traditional sources of risk for life insurers are uncertainty in interest rates, aggregate
longevity or mortality, and policyholder behavior. Life insurers manage interest-rate risk
by investing a signiﬁcant share of their assets in long-term bonds. They manage longevity
or mortality risk by oﬀsetting annuities with life insurance. Uncertainty in policyholder
behavior may be more diﬃcult to hedge, but life insurers have decades of experience to
assess the policyholder risk of traditional annuities and life insurance. Finally, life insurers
diversify these risks through unaﬃliated (i.e., third-party) reinsurance.
Although modern life insurers are exposed to the traditional sources of risk, their risk
proﬁle has become increasingly complex and opaque over the last decade because of two
developments. First, variable annuities with minimum-return guarantees, which are more
diﬃcult to value and hedge than traditional products, have grown to be a signiﬁcant share of
liabilities. Second, life insurers are now using sophisticated capital management tools such
as shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives.1
Evidence from the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis suggests that variable annuities and securities
lending could cause signiﬁcant risk mismatch. For example, the failure of AIG was not
only due to their credit default swaps, but also due to securities lending in their insurance
subsidiaries (McDonald and Paulson 2014; Peirce 2014). Like AIG, Hartford also received
government support through the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) because of signiﬁcant losses on their variable annuity business. Other companies that were involved in
variable annuities or securities lending (e.g., Allstate, Genworth Financial, and Prudential
Financial) also applied for TARP but were ultimately rejected or withdrew their application.
These examples refute the conventional wisdom that the insurance industry is immune from
macroeconomic shocks.
Building on these examples, Section 2 of this chapter summarizes recent trends in risk
1
Shadow insurance is aﬃliated reinsurance (within the same ﬁnancial group) between an operating company (i.e., a regulated and rated company that sell policies) and a shadow reinsurer (i.e., a less regulated
and unrated oﬀ-balance-sheet entity).

2

exposure from variable annuities, shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives. Our
analysis is based on public ﬁnancial statements for U.S. life insurers from 2002 to 2013
and captives domiciled in Iowa for 2014.2 We see our analysis as a ﬁrst step in identifying
risks that are potentially important to guide the next generation of insurance regulation. A
common theme that emerges from our analysis is risk concentration. That is, the aggregate
size of a given activity (e.g., shadow insurance) is dominated by a few large players, although
the composition of these players varies somewhat across activities. Another theme is that
while it is possible to identify exposure to individual risks, it is diﬃcult to assess how they
aggregate to overall risk mismatch because of insuﬃcient data.
Shadow insurance has grown from $11 billion in 2002 to $370 billion in 2013 (Koijen
and Yogo 2016). Shadow reinsurers usually report their liabilities under more favorable
accounting standards than operating companies from which they assume reinsurance, and
moreover, they are not subject to risk-based capital regulation. Thus, shadow insurance
potentially allows life insurers to reduce risk-based capital and increase leverage, which
is an important ampliﬁcation mechanism for any risk mismatch. In general, we cannot
quantify the capital reduction that may arise from shadow insurance because the ﬁnancial
statements of captives are not publicly available. However, the Iowa Insurance Division
(2014) recently released ﬁnancial statements for captives in their domicile, and we ﬁnd that
they have signiﬁcantly negative equity when valued under the same accounting standards as
the operating companies.
Life insurers use derivatives to hedge risk mismatch between their investment assets and
insurance liabilities, including that which arises from minimum-return guarantees in variable
annuities. However, the use of derivatives could expose life insurers to basis risk because of
imperfect hedging and counterparty risk. Overall, we ﬁnd that derivatives have consistently
reduced the volatility of accounting equity over the last decade. However, additional data
are necessary to fully assess the economic eﬀectiveness of the hedging programs.
2

See Appendix A for a description of the data.

3

Section 3 discusses how risks in the insurance industry could be ampliﬁed and transmitted
to the rest of the ﬁnancial sector and the real economy. Banks are important counterparties
in shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives transactions. In addition, risks in
the insurance industry could be ampliﬁed and transmitted to other institutional investors
through the corporate bond market. Finally, insurance demand and precautionary saving
could endogenously respond to risks in the insurance industry, which has important implications for household welfare.
Section 4 suggests ways to disclose relevant information on variable annuities, interestrate risk, captive reinsurance, derivatives, and international activity. We also discuss some
implications for insurance regulation.

2.

Recent Trends in Risk Exposure

Informational frictions, agency problems, and regulatory frictions could create incentives for
life insurers to increase leverage, pay higher dividends, and take more risks. For example,
the presence of state guaranty funds could lead to a moral hazard problem (Lee, Mayers,
and Smith 1997). Shareholders may prefer dividends to retained earnings because portfolio
decisions outside the insurance industry (e.g., in mutual funds) are not subject to riskbased capital regulation. These frictions could lead to a higher cost of external ﬁnance and
introduce a role for capital management tools such as shadow insurance, securities lending,
and derivatives (Froot 2007).
2.1.

Variable Annuities

Variable annuities are long-term savings products whose underlying assets are invested in
traditional mutual funds. In exchange for additional fees, life insurers guarantee a minimum
rate of return on the mutual funds.3 Partly because of the shift from deﬁned-beneﬁt to
3

See Bauer, Kling, and Russ (2008) and Credit Suisse (2012, Appendix B) for an overview of the various
types of variable annuity guarantees.

4

deﬁned-contribution plans, there has been a growing demand for minimum-return guarantees. The total account value of U.S. variable annuities associated with guaranteed beneﬁts
grew from $875 billion in 2003 to $1.726 trillion in 2013.
The variable annuity market is highly concentrated. Table 1 reports the top ten life
insurers by variable annuity account value associated with guaranteed beneﬁts in 2007. These
life insurers accounted for $991 billion of variables annuities in 2007, which is a signiﬁcant
share of $1.460 trillion for the industry.
The long-term nature of these guarantees presents signiﬁcant challenges for both valuation
and risk management. During the ﬁnancial crisis, the variable annuity business experienced
signiﬁcant losses because of falling stock prices, high volatility, and low interest rates. The
last column of Table 1 reports the net operating gain from individual annuities in 2008 as a
share of capital and surplus (i.e., accounting equity) in 2007.4 Hartford Life and Manulife
Financial suﬀered the largest losses on the order of half of their capital and surplus. When
aggregated over the industry, life insurers with variable annuity guarantees lost 9 percent of
their capital and surplus from the individual annuity business, while those without guarantees
gained 1 percent.
To put the 2008 losses into historical perspective, Figure 1 reports the time series of net
operating gain from individual annuities, aggregated over life insurers with positive variable annuity account value associated with guaranteed beneﬁts in the previous year. We
report the net operating gain in total dollars and as a share of capital and surplus in the
previous year. The −$24 billion loss in 2008 is certainly extraordinary in historical perspective. Although the proﬁtability of individual annuities recovered after 2008, the experience
illustrates the sensitivity of variable annuity guarantees to stock prices and volatility. An
ongoing concern is whether further losses could yet occur, especially if interest rates remain
low. An additional concern is that losses are not immediately transparent because variable
annuity guarantees are not marked to market.
4

Prior to the change in reporting requirements in 2010, life insurers reported the net operating gain for
ﬁxed and variable annuities combined, rather than separately.

5

As discussed in A.M. Best Company (2015), life insurers have responded to the 2008
experience by reducing the riskiness of variable annuity guarantees in various ways. Many
companies have raised fees, reduced the generosity of guarantees (e.g., by limiting the investment options), or closed existing accounts to new investment. In particular, MetLife and
Prudential Financial have reduced sales, while Hartford and John Hancock have exited from
the market entirely.
In addition to ﬁnancial market risks, variable annuities are exposed to uncertainty in
policyholder behavior because of the various surrender and conversion options. Relative to
traditional annuities, life insurers have less experience with policyholder behavior, especially
since the product design of variable annuities has changed over the last decade. Furthermore, the risks associated with ﬁnancial markets and policyholder behavior could interact in
important ways. For example, lapse rates have fallen signiﬁcantly since the ﬁnancial crisis
in a low interest-rate environment (Credit Suisse 2012).
The risks associated with minimum-return guarantees are not limited to the United
States. For example, Equitable Life in the United Kingdom failed partly because of guarantees that were too generous (Roberts 2012). Perhaps more relevant to the current interestrate environment, many Japanese life insurers experienced signiﬁcant losses because of overly
generous guarantees in the early 2000s (Kashyap 2002). The European Systemic Risk Board
(2015) reports that guaranteed products represent a signiﬁcant share of insurance liabilities
in Austria, Germany, Netherlands, and Sweden. In these countries, the average duration of
liabilities exceed that of assets by ﬁve to ten years, which implies signiﬁcant losses if interest
rates remain unexpectedly low (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
2014b; Domanski, Shin, and Sushko 2015).
The economics of minimum-return guarantees for life insurers are similar to those of
deﬁned-beneﬁt pension guarantees, which have a longer history. Therefore, the widespread
underfunding of both public and private pensions is a cautionary lesson for life insurers
(Novy-Marx and Rauh 2011).

6

2.2.

Shadow Insurance

Regulation XXX in 2000 and AXXX in 2003 forced life insurers to hold more capital on
newly issued term life insurance and universal life insurance with secondary guarantees.
These regulations are part of National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ (NAIC)
statutory accounting principles that apply to operating companies.
In response to the new capital requirements, 26 states have now passed a version of
captive laws, starting with South Carolina in 2002 and Vermont in 2007 (Captives and Special
Purpose Vehicle Use Subgroup 2013). These laws allow life insurers to establish captives for
the exclusive purpose of assuming reinsurance from aﬃliated companies. Captives are not
subject to Regulation XXX and AXXX and may record lower reserves for term life insurance
and universal life insurance with secondary guarantees under generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP). Therefore, a life insurer could reduce accounting liabilities, and thereby
increase accounting equity, by moving liabilities from operating companies to captives.
Because captives are subject to lower capital requirements than operating companies,
the additional accounting equity that captive reinsurance generates could be paid back to
the parent company (and eventually to shareholders). Because the ﬁnancial statements of
captives are not publicly available, we cannot generally tell how much equity they have.
However, as we discuss later in this section, two case studies suggest that captives have
much less equity than operating companies.
The potential risk of aﬃliated reinsurance depends on whether the reinsurer is subject to
oversight by either state regulators or rating agencies. An authorized reinsurer is subject to
the same reporting and capital requirements as an operating company in its state of domicile,
whereas an unauthorized reinsurer is not. Even if an aﬃliated reinsurer is unauthorized,
rating agencies could request ﬁnancial statements and ensure that it has enough capital.
Therefore, aﬃliated reinsurers with the least oversight are those that are unauthorized and
unrated by A.M. Best Company, which we refer to as shadow reinsurers. Our deﬁnition
of shadow reinsurers is more restrictive than “captives” because some captives are actually
7

authorized.
Like variable annuities, shadow insurance is highly concentrated. Life insurers using
shadow insurance are on average larger and are mostly stock instead of mutual companies
(Koijen and Yogo 2016). Table 2 reports the top ten life insurers by life and annuity reinsurance ceded to shadow reinsurers in 2013. These life insurers ceded $331 billion of liabilities
in 2013, which is a signiﬁcant share of $370 billion for the industry.
To summarize the recent trends in reinsurance, Figure 2 reports the time series of reinsurance ceded to aﬃliated, shadow, and unaﬃliated reinsurers. Aﬃliated reinsurance grew
from $90 billion in 2002 to $617 billion in 2013. The part of aﬃliated reinsurance that was
ceded to shadow reinsurers grew from $11 billion to $370 billion during the same period.
The growth of shadow insurance accelerated during the ﬁnancial crisis from 2006 to 2009.
Since shadow insurance eﬀectively lowers capital requirements, this timing is consistent with
the evidence that some life insurers were ﬁnancially constrained during the ﬁnancial crisis
(Koijen and Yogo 2015).
The growth of shadow insurance has slowed since 2009, partly because of more regulatory
scrutiny in states like California and New York. Interestingly, unaﬃliated reinsurance grew
from $270 billion in 2012 to $331 billion in 2013 after a long period of essentially no growth.
Although it is premature to extrapolate these trends, there could be substitution from shadow
insurance to other types of reinsurance due to changes in the regulatory environment.
Figure 3 decomposes the time series of shadow insurance in Figure 2 into life and annuity
reinsurance. Since Regulation XXX and AXXX apply only to life insurance, the growth
of annuity reinsurance implies that shadow insurance does not exist simply to circumvent
these regulations. Curiously, annuity reinsurance grew from $134 billion in 2011 to $163
billion in 2013, while life reinsurance remained ﬂat at $208 billion during the same period.
In response, NAIC initiated a working group in 2015 to investigate why captive reinsurance
is being used on variable annuities.
The usual reasons for captive reinsurance are more favorable capital regulation and tax

8

laws. In addition, a possible reason for captive reinsurance of variable annuities in particular is the volatility of reserves under statutory accounting principles (i.e., under Actuarial
Guideline 43). Statutory accounting essentially forces life insurers to record variable annuity
guarantees based on historical tail scenarios, while GAAP allows them to record reserves
at market value. Therefore, the diﬀerence between statutory accounting and GAAP could
increase after a period of high volatility. Related to this issue, a life insurer may not get
proper credit for hedging variable annuity guarantees under statutory accounting, which
provides an additional incentive to hedge these guarantees in a captive. Of course, the lack
of transparency is a clear drawback of having variable annuity guarantees and corresponding
hedging programs in captives.
Shadow insurance is a potential source of risk for three reasons (Koijen and Yogo 2016;
Schwarcz 2015). First, a signiﬁcant share of shadow insurance is funded through letters of
credit, which have shorter maturity than the insurance liabilities. Therefore, shadow insurance exposes life insurers to liquidity risk. Second, shadow reinsurers could take more
investment risk than operating companies, which exposes the life insurer to more risk mismatch. Finally, shadow reinsurers could reduce risk-based capital and increase leverage
within the ﬁnancial group. Of course, higher leverage ampliﬁes any risk mismatch in the
overall balance sheet.
In fact, two case studies suggest that captives have much less equity than operating companies. First, Lawsky (2013) ﬁnds that captives that assume reinsurance from operating
companies in New York have less equity, especially in cases where letters of credit are conditional and are ultimately backed by the parent company instead of an unaﬃliated bank.
Moody’s Investors Service shares a similar view that “because many companies’ captives
are capitalized at lower levels compared to ﬂagship companies, the use of captives tends to
weaken capital adequacy” (Robinson and Son 2013, p. 3).
Second, the Iowa Insurance Division (2014) recently released ﬁnancial statements for
captives in their domicile for 2013 and 2014. These ﬁnancial statements report surplus (i.e.,

9

accounting equity) under both the permitted accounting practices of Iowa and statutory
accounting principles. Table 3 summarizes these statements. Six of the eight captives would
have signiﬁcantly negative surplus under statutory accounting, while two of the captives
voluntarily report under statutory accounting. When aggregated over the eight captives,
total surplus under statutory accounting would be −$2.663 billion.
2.3.

Securities Lending

The two sources of risk that we have discussed so far, variable annuities and shadow insurance, relate to the liabilities side of the balance sheet. The conventional wisdom is that risk
exposure on the asset side is well regulated by risk-based capital regulation. However, the
experience of securities lending during the ﬁnancial crisis shows that there could be important gaps in the regulation. Prior to 2010, the reporting requirements for securities lending
was suﬃciently lax that life insurers left important details about their activity unreported,
particularly regarding how the collateral was reinvested (National Association of Insurance
Commissioners 2011).
In a securities lending transaction, a life insurer lends bonds in exchange for cash collateral
with an agreement to return the collateral back for the bonds at some future date. The life
insurer could reinvest the cash collateral to earn higher returns by taking on additional
credit, interest-rate, or liquidity risk. Liquidity risk arises from the fact that the reinvested
collateral has longer duration than the maturity of the lending agreement. If borrowers are
unwilling to roll over the lending agreement in bad times, the life insurer may be forced to
liquidate the investment at ﬁre-sale prices. This is precisely what happened to AIG during
the ﬁnancial crisis, as they had reinvested their cash collateral in mortgage- and asset-backed
securities. AIG lost at least $21 billion through securities lending, which is a similar order
of magnitude to the $34 billion that they lost through credit default swaps (McDonald and
Paulson 2014).
Securities lending by life insurers grew signiﬁcantly prior to the ﬁnancial crisis. The

10

amount of admitted assets subject to securities lending agreements grew from $49 billion in
2002 to $130 billion in 2007, then suddenly collapsed to $43 billion in 2008. After important changes to the reporting requirements in 2010, securities lending further dropped to
$34 billion in 2011 and has remained low at $47 billion in 2013. Given the new reporting
requirements and the smaller scale of activity, securities lending no longer appears to be an
important source of risk. However, the experience during the ﬁnancial crisis is a cautionary
lesson that gaps in risk-based capital regulation could have signiﬁcant consequences.
Like variable annuities and shadow insurance, securities lending is highly concentrated.
Table 4 reports the top ten life insurers by the amount of admitted assets subject to securities
lending agreements in 2007. These life insurers accounted for $115 billion of securities lending
in 2007, which is a signiﬁcant share of $128 billion for the industry. AIG Life alone accounted
for $54 billion in securities lending.
The last column of Table 4 reports the total capital gain from investment activity in 2008
as a share of capital and surplus in 2007.5 The capital loss for AIG Life in 2008 was 169
percent of its capital and surplus in 2007. When aggregated over the industry, life insurers
with securities lending activity lost −39 percent of their capital and surplus, while those
without securities lending activity lost −18 percent. To put the 2008 losses into historical
perspective, Figure 4 reports the time series of capital gains, aggregated over life insurers
with securities lending agreements in the previous year. The 2008 losses are extraordinary,
both in total dollars and as a share of capital and surplus in the previous year.
An important question is whether other gaps remain in risk-based capital regulation that
governs investment risk on the asset side of the balance sheet. This question is especially
relevant in the current interest-rate environment as life insurers may reach for yield to earn
higher returns. Three examples from the literature suggest that life insurers do take additional investment risk when risk-based capital regulation is not suﬃciently sensitive to risk.
Becker and Ivashina (2015) ﬁnd that, within each of the NAIC bond classes deﬁned by rat5
Our conclusions remain the same if we add investment income (i.e., coupon and dividend payments) to
the total capital gain.

11

ings, life insurers invest in corporate bonds with higher yields and risk as measured by credit
default swap spreads. Becker and Opp (2013) ﬁnd that life insurers increased the riskiness
of their residential mortgage-back securities portfolio in response to a reduction in capital
requirements. Finally, life insurers invest in high yield assets through special purpose vehicles that are funded by funding agreement-backed securities, which are exposed to liquidity
risk that is similar to securities lending (Foley-Fisher, Narajabad, and Verani 2015).
2.4.

Derivatives

Life insurers use derivatives to hedge interest-rate risk on their investment assets and insurance liabilities, including minimum-return guarantees on variable annuities. Berends and
King (2015) report that the total notional amount of over-the-counter derivatives held by
U.S. life insurers was $1.1 trillion in 2014. Although this amount may be small relative to the
size of international derivatives markets, it is still an important share of life insurer assets,
especially given the concentration in derivatives activity.
The use of derivatives could expose life insurers to basis risk for two reasons. First,
variable annuity guarantees have much longer duration than the maturity of derivatives that
are readily available. Second, life insurers may not want to hedge economic capital because
they report and are regulated based on statutory capital. A hedging program that smoothes
market equity may actually increase the volatility of accounting equity under statutory
accounting principles or GAAP (Credit Suisse 2012). In addition to basis risk, derivatives
could expose life insurers to counterparty risk. Although collateral could reduce counterparty
risk, it potentially raises the cost of hedging programs (Berends and King 2015).
A basic question in understanding the role of derivatives is whether they indeed hedge,
rather than amplify, balance sheet ﬂuctuations. The answer is not as obvious it may seem
because Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) ﬁnd that in the case of banks, interest-rate
derivatives actually amplify ﬂuctuations in the overall balance sheet. Figure 5 reports the
growth rate of capital and surplus with and without derivatives, aggregated over life insurers

12

with non-zero derivatives exposure. The ﬁgure shows that derivatives have consistently
reduced the volatility of capital and surplus over the last decade. In 2008, capital and
surplus fell by 6 percent, which would have been 15 percent without oﬀsetting gains on
derivatives.
Our preliminary analysis suggests that derivatives reduce balance-sheet ﬂuctuations.
However, additional data are necessary to fully assess the eﬀectiveness of the hedging programs. In Schedule DB, life insurers currently report how derivatives are used to hedge
broad categories of risk (e.g., variable annuities instead of the type of guaranteed beneﬁt).
The same schedule also reports “hedge eﬀectiveness”, which is diﬃcult to interpret because
it depends on statutory accounting principles for variable annuities. In Section 4, we suggest
ways to disclose relevant information on variable annuities and derivatives.

3.

Potential Transmission Mechanisms

We now discuss how risks in the insurance industry could be ampliﬁed and transmitted to
the rest of the ﬁnancial sector and the real economy. Our discussion will be qualitative
because it is diﬃcult to assess the quantitative importance of the transmission mechanisms,
given the available data and our current state of knowledge. Based on the risks that we
outline in this section, one could make a case that life insurers are systemically important
(Acharya and Richardson 2014). However, we also acknowledge the counterargument that
the risks are still isolated and may not be suﬃciently large (Harrington 2009; Cummins and
Weiss 2014).
3.1.

Transmission to Banks

Life insurers are interconnected to banks through at least three channels. First, banks are
counterparties in securities lending and derivatives transactions. The experience of AIG suggests that counterparty risk could be signiﬁcant in bad times (McDonald and Paulson 2014;
Peirce 2014). Second, life insurers provide an important source of funding for banks through
13

the corporate bond market. Any reduction in funding could lead to liquidity problems for
banks, at least in the short run. Finally, banks fund a signiﬁcant share of captive reinsurance
through letters of credit. Therefore, a systematic shock to insurance liabilities (e.g., from
equity risk in variable annuity guarantees) could trigger drawdowns of letters of credit, so
that banks are exposed to both liquidity and counterparty risk.
3.2.

Transmission through the Corporate Bond Market

Life insurers are among the largest institutional investors in the corporate bond market.
Therefore, any shock to their balance sheets could interact with risk-based capital requirements to cause a signiﬁcant shift in demand and price impact. Falling bond prices, potentially
accompanied by a volatility spike, could cause value-at-risk constraints to bind for other institutional investors, forcing asset sales (Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2009). Thus, shocks to
the insurance industry could be transmitted to other parts of the ﬁnancial sector through
ﬁre-sale dynamics in asset markets. This ultimately matters for the real economy through
higher borrowing costs for ﬁrms.
There is substantial evidence in the literature that shifts in bond demand, when life
insurers become ﬁnancially constrained, have price impact. Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad
(2011) ﬁnd that ﬁnancially constrained life insurers sell downgraded corporate bonds to
satisfy risk-based capital requirements, temporarily depressing prices. Merrill et al. (2012)
ﬁnd similar evidence for downgraded residential mortgage-back securities during the ﬁnancial
crisis. Ellul et al. (2015) ﬁnd that ﬁnancially constrained life insurers sell corporate bonds
with the highest unrealized gains, carried at historical cost according to statutory accounting
principles, to improve their capital positions.
These examples show that poorly designed accounting standards and risk-based capital
regulation could have unintended consequences. Life insurers may have an incentive to sell
bonds in depressed markets, even though they would be the natural long-term investors
given their liability structure. Such incentives could exacerbate the transmission of shocks

14

through ﬁre-sale dynamics.
3.3.

Transmission to Households

Any shocks to life insurers could transmit to households through the insurance product
market. For example, if households become concerned about the solvency of life insurers
because of variable annuity guarantees or shadow insurance, demand could collapse because
of a debt overhang problem. Instead of purchasing insurance products, households may
self-insure idiosyncratic risk through precautionary saving. This could have a potentially
important impact on household welfare and the real economy (Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh,
and Yogo 2016).
Koijen and Yogo (2015) ﬁnd evidence for the transmission of shocks through annuity and
life insurance markets. In ordinary times, life insurers earn an average markup of 6 to 10
percent on annuities and life insurance. During the ﬁnancial crisis, life insurers reduced the
markup to −19 percent for annuities and −57 percent for life insurance, when falling interest
rates implied that they should have instead raised prices. In the cross-section of policies,
the price reductions were larger for those policies with looser capital requirements. In the
cross section of insurance companies, the price reductions were larger for those companies
that suﬀered larger balance sheet shocks. Insurance companies that reduced prices sold more
policies, consistent with a downward shift in the supply curve.
The example in Koijen and Yogo (2015) shows that poorly designed accounting standards
and risk-based capital regulation could have unintended consequences. Life insurers may have
an incentive to sell policies below actuarial value in order to boost their capital positions
in the short run, hurting their solvency in the long run. This issue appears to be relevant
to the “volatility adjustment” under Solvency II, under which regulators would adjust the
risk-free term structure of interest rates depending on macroeconomic conditions (European
Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority 2014a). Such adjustments could distort
product market outcomes and exacerbate the transmission of shocks to households.

15

4.

Implications for Financial Disclosure and Insurance Regulation

The risk proﬁle of life insurers has become increasingly complex and opaque over the last
decade because of variable annuities, shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives.
In this chapter, we have summarized recent trends in exposure to these sources of risk based
on public ﬁnancial statements. A number of potential reforms to ﬁnancial disclosure could
enhance understanding of how these sources of risk could lead to overall risk mismatch in
the insurance industry.
1. Variable annuities: Life insurers could report the type and quantity of guaranteed
beneﬁts sold and outstanding for each variable annuity product, which would be useful
for understanding potential risk mismatch that arises from equity and interest-rate risk
in variables annuity guarantees. Under the current reporting requirements, we only
know the aggregate account value associated with guaranteed beneﬁts.
2. Interest-rate risk: Life insurers could report the market value and duration of liabilities (e.g., ﬁxed annuities and life insurance), just as they already do for the asset
side of the balance sheet. Such data would be useful for assessing the overall risk
mismatch, particularly for interest-rate risk. This issue is especially important in the
current interest-rate environment, in which there is signiﬁcant uncertainty over how
long interest rates will remain low.
3. Captive reinsurance: State regulators could release the ﬁnancial statements of captives,
following the lead of the Iowa Insurance Division. Furthermore, restated ﬁnancial
statements, in which the entire liability side is reported under statutory accounting
principles, would be useful for assessing capital adequacy.
4. Derivatives: Life insurers could report their hedging programs in more detail, which
would be useful for assessing their eﬀectiveness. Under the current reporting requirements, we only know how derivatives are used to hedge broad categories of risk (e.g.,
16

variable annuities instead of the type of guaranteed beneﬁt).
5. International activity: This chapter and most of the evidence that we cite is for the
United States. The main reason is that ﬁnancial statements at the same level of detail
are not publicly available in Europe. Although transparency is expected to improve
with Solvency II, we would like to see suﬃcient detail regarding guaranteed investment
products, reinsurance, securities lending, and derivatives to be able to assess overall
risk mismatch at the international level.
Recent research summarized in this chapter shows that regulation inﬂuences all important functions of the insurance industry including product design, pricing, reinsurance, investment activity, and risk management. Therefore, regulation is not only important for
our understanding of insurance markets, but it must be properly designed to ensure both
eﬃcient function and future stability of the insurance industry. Yet, little research exists on
optimal insurance regulation.
The fact that life insurers have a diﬀerent liability structure than banks implies that their
capital requirements must also be diﬀerent. Life insurance liabilities are not prone to runs
in most countries, so short-term risk constraints designed to prevent bank runs may not be
appropriate for life insurers. In fact, short-term risk constraints can actually increase the
long-term risk of life insurers if asset prices are mean reverting (Campbell and Shiller 1988).
Therefore, long-term risk measures may provide more relevant information for life insurers
that are analogous to short-term measures for banks.
Of course, measurement of long-term risk is challenging and potentially sensitive to reasonable variation in modeling assumptions. A fundamental problem with the insurance
industry is that no one knows the market value of liabilities, and the data necessary for
doing such calculations are far from complete in the public ﬁnancial statements. We see
the recent trend toward shadow insurance as an impedient to measuring liabilities. Complete and transparent ﬁnancial statements are necessary to move forward the discussion on
optimal insurance regulation.
17

References
Acharya, V. V., and M. Richardson. 2014. Is the insurance industry systemically risky?
In J. H. Biggs and M. P. Richardson, eds., Modernizing Insurance Regualation, chap. 9,
151–79. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
A.M. Best Company. 2003–2014a. Best’s Schedule S: Life/health, United States. Oldwick,
NJ: A.M. Best Company.
———. 2003–2014b. Best’s Statement File: Life/health, United States. Oldwick, NJ: A.M.
Best Company.
———. 2015. Variable annuities: Legacy blocks still represent tail risk. A.M. Best Special
Report .
Bauer, D., A. Kling, and J. Russ. 2008. A universal pricing framework for guaranteed
minimum beneﬁts in variable annuities. ASTIN Bulletin 38:621–51.
Becker, B., and V. Ivashina. 2015. Reaching for yield in the bond market. Journal of Finance
70:1863–901.
Becker, B., and M. Opp. 2013. Regulatory reform and risk-taking: Replacing ratings. Working Paper No. 19257, NBER.
Begenau, J., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider. 2015. Banks’ risk exposures. Working Paper
No. 21334, NBER.
Berends, K., and T. B. King. 2015. Derivatives and collateral at U.S. life insurers. Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 39:21–37.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen. 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity.
Review of Financial Studies 22:2201–38.

18

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller. 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1:195–228.
Captives and Special Purpose Vehicle Use Subgroup. 2013. Captives and special purpose
vehicles. Unpublished Manuscript, National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
Credit Suisse. 2012. US variable annuities. Credit Suisse Connections Series .
Cummins, J. D., and M. A. Weiss. 2014. Systemic risk and the U.S. insurance sector. Journal
of Risk and Insurance 81:489–528.
Domanski, D., H. Shin, and V. Sushko. 2015. The hunt for yield: Not waving but drowning?
Unpublished Manuscript, Bank for International Settlements.
Ellul, A., C. Jotikasthira, and C. T. Lundblad. 2011. Regulatory pressure and ﬁre sales in
the corporate bond market. Journal of Financial Economics 101:596–620.
Ellul, A., C. Jotikasthira, C. T. Lundblad, and Y. Wang. 2015. Is historical cost accounting
a panacea? Market stress, incentive distortions, and gains trading. Journal of Finance
70:2489–538.
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority. 2014a. Consultation paper on a
technical document regarding the risk free interest rate term structure. Working Paper
14-042, EIOPA.
———. 2014b. EIOPA insurance stress test 2014. Working Paper 14-203, EIOPA.
European Systemic Risk Board. 2015. Issues note on risks and vulnerabilities in the EU
ﬁnancial system. Unpublished Manuscript, ESRB.
Foley-Fisher, N., B. Narajabad, and S. Verani. 2015. Self-fulﬁlling runs: Evidence from the
U.S. life insurance industry. Unpublished Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
19

Froot, K. A. 2007. Risk management, capital budgeting, and capital structure policy for
insurers and reinsurers. Journal of Risk and Insurance 74:273–99.
Harrington, S. E. 2009. The ﬁnancial crisis, systemic risk, and the future of insurance
regulation. Journal of Risk and Insurance 76:785–819.
Iowa Insurance Division. 2014.

Financial statements—single-state life or property.

http://www.iid.state.ia.us/single state life pc.
Kashyap, A. K. 2002. Sorting out Japan’s ﬁnancial crisis. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Economic Perspectives 26:42–55.
Koijen, R. S. J., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and M. Yogo. 2016. Health and mortality delta:
Assessing the welfare cost of household insurance choice. Journal of Finance 71:957–1010.
Koijen, R. S. J., and M. Yogo. 2015. The cost of ﬁnancial frictions for life insurers. American
Economic Review 105:445–75.
———. 2016. Shadow insurance. Econometrica 84:1265–87.
Lawsky, B. M. 2013. Shining a light on shadow insurance: A little-known loophole that puts
insurance policyholders and taxpayers at greater risk. Unpublished Manuscript, New York
State Department of Financial Services.
Lee, S.-J., D. Mayers, and C. W. Smith, Jr. 1997. Guaranty funds and risk-taking: Evidence
from the insurance industry. Journal of Financial Economics 44:3–24.
McDonald, R. L., and A. Paulson. 2014. AIG in hindsight. Journal of Economic Perspectives
29:81–106.
Merrill, C. B., T. D. Nadauld, R. M. Stulz, and S. M. Sherlund. 2012. Did capital requirements and fair value accounting spark ﬁre sales in distressed mortgage-backed securities?
Working Paper No. 18270, NBER.
20

National Association of Insurance Commissioners. 2011. Securities lending in the insurance
industry. NAIC Capital Markets Special Report .
Novy-Marx, R., and J. D. Rauh. 2011. Public pension promises: How big are they and what
are they worth? Journal of Finance 66:1211–49.
Peirce, H. 2014. Securities lending and the untold story in the collapse of AIG. Unpublished
Manuscript, George Mason University.
Roberts, R. 2012. Did anyone learn anything from the Equitable Life? Lessons and learning
from ﬁnancial crises. Unpublished Manuscript, King’s College London.
Robinson, S., and M. Son. 2013. The captive triangle: Where life insurers’ reserve and
capital requirements disappear. Report 156495, Moody’s Investors Service.
Schwarcz, D. 2015. The risks of shadow insurance. Unpublished Manuscript, University of
Minnesota.

21

Table 1: Operating gain in 2008 for top ten life insurers by variable annuity
account value

Financial group

Account
value
(billion $)

Operating gain
(share of capital
and surplus)

143
139
119
105
98
97
94
79
61
57

-0.05
-0.18
-0.52
0.00
-0.14
-0.01
-0.46
-0.28
-0.26
-0.44

1,460
0

-0.09
0.01

MetLife
AXA Financial
Hartford Life
AIG Life
ING USA Life
Lincoln Financial
Manulife Financial
Prudential of America
Aegon USA
Ameriprise Financial
Total for life insurers
with VA guarantees
without VA guarantees

A.M. Best ﬁnancial groups are ranked by variable annuity (VA) account value associated with guaranteed
beneﬁts in 2007. Net operating gain from individual annuities in 2008 is reported as a share of capital and
surplus in 2007. The last two rows report the total for the insurance industry, separately for life insurers
with and without VA guarantees in 2007.

Table 2: Top ten life insurers by shadow insurance
Reinsurance
ceded
(billion $)

Financial group
John Hancock Life Insurance
MetLife
Athene USA
Hartford Life
Aegon USA
Great-West Life
Voya Financial
AIG Life and Retirement
Global Atlantic
Lincoln Financial

118
45
40
40
30
14
13
12
11
7

A.M. Best ﬁnancial groups are ranked by life and annuity reinsurance ceded to shadow reinsurers in 2013.
Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded. Shadow
reinsurers are a subset of aﬃliated reinsurers that are unauthorized and do not have an A.M. Best rating.

22

Table 3: Surplus of Iowa captives based on Iowa versus statutory accounting
Captive

Iowa

Statutory

Cape Verity I
Cape Verity II
Cape Verity III
MNL Reinsurance
Solberg Reinsurance
Symetra Reinsurance
TLIC Riverwood Reinsurance
TLIC Oakbrook Reinsurance
Total

27
140
54
118
207
20
817
114
1,497

-432
-548
-169
118
207
-51
-1,113
-675
-2,663

Surplus of Iowa captives in 2014 are reported on the basis of permitted accounting practices of the Iowa
Insurance Division and statutory accounting principles. All amounts are in millions of dollars.

Table 4: Capital gain in 2008 for top ten life insurers by securities lending
agreements

Financial group

Amount
Capital gain
of assets (share of capital
(billion $)
and surplus)

AIG Life
MetLife
New York Life
Prudential of America
Northwestern Mutual
Hartford Life
Genworth Financial
Allstate Financial
Manulife Financial
Woodmen Life
Total for life insurers
with securities lending
without securities lending

54
38
6
5
4
2
2
2
2
1

-1.69
-0.07
-0.34
-0.28
-0.52
-0.07
0.12
-0.48
-0.07
-0.26

128
0

-0.39
-0.18

A.M. Best ﬁnancial groups are ranked by the amount of admitted assets subject to securities lending agreements in 2007. Total capital gain from investment activity in 2008 is reported as a share of capital and
surplus in 2007. The last two rows report the total for the insurance industry, separately for life insurers
with and without securities lending activity.

23

30

.1

.05
10

0

0

−10
−.05
Operating gain
(billion $)
As share of
capital & surplus

−20

−30
2002

2005

As share of capital & surplus

Operating gain (billion $)

20

−.1
2008
Year

2011

2014

Figure 1: Operating gain from annuities for life insurers with variable annuity
guarantees
Net operating gain from individual annuities is reported in total dollars and as a share
of capital and surplus in the previous year. The sample consists of A.M. Best ﬁnancial
groups with positive variable annuity account value associated with guaranteed beneﬁts in
the previous year.

24

Reinsurance ceded (billion $)

600

Affiliated
Shadow
Unaffiliated

500

400

300

200

100

0
2002

2005

2008
Year

2011

2014

Figure 2: Reinsurance ceded to aﬃliated, shadow, and unaﬃliated reinsurers
Life and annuity reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to aﬃliated, shadow, and unaﬃliated
reinsurers is reported. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed
coinsurance reserve ceded. Shadow reinsurers are a subset of aﬃliated reinsurers that are
unauthorized and do not have an A.M. Best rating.

25

Reinsurance ceded (billion $)

250

Life
Annuity

200

150

100

50

0
2002

2005

2008
Year

2011

2014

Figure 3: Life versus annuity reinsurance ceded to shadow reinsurers
Reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to shadow reinsurers is reported, separately for life
and annuity reinsurance. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed
coinsurance reserve ceded. Shadow reinsurers are a subset of aﬃliated reinsurers that are
unauthorized and do not have an A.M. Best rating.

26

.1

0

0

−20

−.1

−40

−.2

−60

−.3

Capital gain
(billion $)
As share of
capital & surplus

−80
2002

2005

As share of capital & surplus

Capital gain (billion $)

20

−.4
2008
Year

2011

2014

Figure 4: Capital gain for life insurers with securities lending agreements
Total capital gain from investment activity is reported in total dollars and as a share of
capital and surplus in the previous year. The sample consists of A.M. Best ﬁnancial groups
with a positive amount of admitted assets subject to securities lending agreements in the
previous year.

27

.3

With derivatives
Without derivatives

Growth rate

.2

.1

0

−.1

−.2
2002

2005

2008
Year

2011

2014

Figure 5: Growth rate of capital and surplus with and without derivatives
The growth rate of capital and surplus without derivatives is the growth rate of capital and
surplus minus the sum of net investment income and total capital gain from derivatives. The
sample consists of A.M. Best ﬁnancial groups with non-zero derivatives exposure.

28

Appendix A.

Data Construction

We construct our data from A.M. Best Company (2003–2014b). The relevant schedules and
variables are as follows.
1. Summary of Operations:
(a) Capital and surplus for December 31 of prior year.
(b) Capital and surplus for December 31 of current year.
2. Analysis of Operations by Lines of Business:
(a) Individual annuities: Net gain from operations before dividends and taxes.
3. Exhibits of Net Investment Income and Capital Gains (Losses):
(a) Earned during year: Derivative instruments.
(b) Realized gain (loss) on sales or maturity: Derivative instruments.
(c) Realized gain (loss) on sales or maturity: Total capital gains.
(d) Other realized adjustments: Derivative instruments.
(e) Other realized adjustments: Total capital gains.
(f) Change in unrealized capital gain (loss): Derivative instruments.
(g) Change in unrealized capital gain (loss): Total capital gains.
(h) Change in unrealized foreign exchange capital gain (loss): Derivative instruments.
(i) Change in unrealized foreign exchange capital gain (loss): Total capital gains.
(j) Unrealized increases (decreases) by adjustment: Derivative instruments.
(k) Unrealized increases (decreases) by adjustment: Total capital gains.
(l) Net gain (loss) from change in diﬀerence between basis: Derivative instruments.
29

(m) Net gain (loss) from change in diﬀerence between basis: Total capital gains.
4. General Interrogatories:
(a) Guaranteed beneﬁt: Total related account values.
5. Supplemental Investment Risks Interrogatories:
(a) Admitted assets subject to agreement at year-end: Securities lending.
In Table 1 and Figure 1, variable annuity account value associated with guaranteed
beneﬁts is 4(a). Net operating gain from individual annuities is 2(a). In Table 4 and Figure 4,
the amount of admitted assets subject to securities lending agreements is 5(a). Total capital
gain from investment activity is 3(c)+3(e)+3(g)+3(i)+3(k)+3(m). In Figure 5, the change
in capital and surplus with derivatives is 1(b)−1(a). The sum of net investment income and
total capital gain from derivatives is 3(a)+3(b)+3(d)+3(f)+3(h)+3(j)+3(l).
In Table 2 and Figures 2 and 3, our data construction exactly follows Koijen and Yogo
(2016), based on A.M. Best Company (2003–2014a).

30

